structural bioinformatics clips-4d: a classifier that distinguishes structurally and functionally important residue-positions based on sequence and 3d data motivation: the precise identification of functionally and structurally important residues of a protein is still an open problem, and state-of-the-art classifiers predict only one or at most two different categories. result: we have implemented the classifier clips-4d, which predicts in a mutually exclusively manner a role in catalysis, ligand-binding or protein stability for each residue-position of a protein. each prediction is assigned a p-value, which enables the statistical assessment and the selection of predictions with similar quality. clips-4d requires as input a multiple sequence alignment and a 3d structure of one protein in pdb format. a comparison with existing methods confirmed state-of-the-art prediction quality, even though clips-4d classifies more specifically than other methods. clips-4d was implemented as a multiclass support vector machine, which exploits seven sequence-based and two structure-based features, each of which was shown to contribute to classification quality. the classification of ligand-binding sites profited most from the 3d features, which were the assessment of the solvent accessible surface area and the identification of surface pockets. in contrast, five additionally tested 3d features did not increase the classification performance achieved with evolutionary signals deduced from the multiple sequence alignment. availability: clips-4d is available as a web-service at http://www-bioinf.uni-regensburg.de.an important goal of computational biology is the comprehensive annotation of proteins, which requires to predict a function and to identify all crucial residues. to assign function to a query sequence, blast and other, more sensitive, algorithms of sequence comparison are of utmost value. however, these methods are per se not capable to identify residues, which are critical for function or stability; thus, alternative approaches are needed. one technique is the mapping of known functional sites based on a sequence alignment , which is named homology transfer. alternatively, if the 3d structure of a query is available, algorithms can exploit structural correspondences with annotated active sites to identify functional residues . more generally applicable are methods that do not require annotated proteins for comparison but assess each individual residueposition by means of a knowledge-based scoring system. owing to the relevance of this task, a large number of such in silico approaches have been introduced, which are sequence-based or combine information from sequence and structure of a protein to predict one or two functional categories. as we were interested to classify more specifically, we have recently introduced a multiclass support vector machine (mc-svm), which we named clips-1d . in contrast to other approaches, clips-1d predicts in a mutually exclusively manner a role in catalysis, ligand-binding or protein structure by analyzing a multiple sequence alignment (msa). interestingly, not more than seven carefully selected features related to the conservation and the abundance of residues at individual sites and their local sequence neighborhood were sufficient to attain state-of-the-art performance. many of the inferred 3d features are orthogonal to the sequence-based features exploited by clips-1d, and therefore we expected an increase of classification quality for a combination of both. this is why we have systematically determined the classification performance for combinations of 1d and 3d features and selected an optimal combination for a novel classifier, which we named clips-4d. this program uses the 3d structure of a single protein chain to deduce the local environment of each residue and does not use the position of ligands. a comparison with clips-1d made clear that the prediction of ligand-binding sites profited most from the integration of 3d features. our approach compares favorably with state-of-the-art algorithms, although this mc-svm distinguishes catalytic, ligand-binding and structurally relevant residue-positions. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
