genome analysis clonality: an r package for testing clonal relatedness of two tumors from the same patient based on their genomic profiles if a cancer patient develops multiple tumors, it is sometimes impossible to determine whether these tumors are independent or clonal based solely on pathological characteristics. investigators have studied how to improve this diagnostic challenge by comparing the presence of loss of heterozygosity (loh) at selected genetic locations of tumor samples, or by comparing genomewide copy number array profiles. we have previously developed statistical methodology to compare such genomic profiles for an evidence of clonality. we assembled the software for these tests in a new r package called clonality. for loh profiles, the package contains significance tests. the analysis of copy number profiles includes a likelihood ratio statistic and reference distribution, as well as an option to produce various plots that summarize the results. availability: bioconductormultiple cancerous lesions in the same patient can be either clonal or independent. clonal tumors, for example, a primary tumor and its metastasis, originate from the same clonal cell. a second primary tumor develops completely independently from the original primary. this distinction can have important clinical implications. for example, a lung nodule in a survivor with a previous head/neck cancer is potentially curable by surgery, if it is a primary lung cancer, but not if it is a metastasis from the original primary. in such cases, the genomic profiles of tumors can provide insight into their relationship, since clonal tumors necessarily possess at least some identical somatic mutations. researchers have utilized two types of genetic data for evaluating clonality. the most common approach is to evaluate heterozygous markers at a set of candidate genetic loci for loss of heterozygosity (loh). this strategy has promise as a clinical tool, because of its simplicity, and because it can be accomplished easily with minimal quantities of dna. more recently, investigators have compared genomewide copy number arrays (cnas) (e.g. cgh arrays) to search for identical copy number gains or losses. this is a more elaborate and expensive strategy, less likely to see clinical to whom correspondence should be addressed. application in the near future, but potentially valuable for its greatly increased resolution compared with the use of candidate markers. we have previously published statistical methodology for formal statistical testing in both settings. for loh data, we have developed a concordant mutations (cm) test and a likelihood ratio (lr) test . for cgh data, we proposed a lr statistic and an algorithm for calculating its reference distribution under the independence hypothesis . we have created the r/bioconductor package called clonality that implements these methods. this enables users to summarize genetic profiles of tumors and to perform tests for clonal relatedness.  
