a counting renaissance: combining stochastic mapping and empirical bayes to quickly detect amino acid sites under positive selection motivation: statistical methods for comparing relative rates of synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions maintain a central role in detecting positive selection. to identify selection, researchers often estimate the ratio of these relative rates (d n =d s) at individual alignment sites. fitting a codon substitution model that captures het-erogeneity in d n =d s across sites provides a reliable way to perform such estimation, but it remains computationally prohibitive for massive datasets. by using crude estimates of the numbers of synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions at each site, counting approaches scale well to large datasets, but they fail to account for ancestral state reconstruction uncertainty and to provide site-specific d n =d s estimates. results: we propose a hybrid solution that borrows the computational strength of counting methods, but augments these methods with empirical bayes modeling to produce a relatively fast and reliable method capable of estimating site-specific d n =d s values in large datasets. importantly, our hybrid approach, set in a bayesian framework, integrates over the posterior distribution of phylogenies and ancestral reconstructions to quantify uncertainty about site-specific d n =d s estimates. simulations demonstrate that this method competes well with more-principled statistical procedures and, in some cases, even out-performs them. we illustrate the utility of our method using human immunodeficiency virus, feline panleukopenia and canine parvovirus evolution examples. availability: renaissance counting is implemented in the development branch of beast, freely available atquantifying selective pressures on protein-coding genes is central to the goal of characterizing darwinian processes in evolutionary biology. among comparative and summary statistic approaches, the relative rate of silent and replacement substitutions represents one of the most popular measures to detect the molecular footprint of selection. non-synonymous mutations that offer fitness advantages are expected to become fixed at a higher rate than synonymous mutations, implying that a non-synonymous/synonymous substitution rate ratio ! d n =d s greater than one provides evidence for diversifying positive selection. although estimation of ! has led to the identification of positive selection in several systems (e.g.;), there are clear boundaries to the conditions under which it can reveal an unambiguous trace of molecular adaptation. first, an excess of non-synonymous substitutions over synonymous substitutions is almost invariably restricted to a handful of amino acid sites responsible for adaptive evolution. therefore, sensible ! estimates need to take into account the variation in selection intensity across codon sites . moreover, although divergent sequences can yield considerable information to estimate nonsynonymous and synonymous substitution rates, the ratio of these rates may offer little insight when inferred from segregating polymorphisms within a single population . finally, it is also important to distinguish between different selective regimes underlying molecular adaptation. diversifying selection maintains amino-acid diversity at a given site and naturally results in elevated ! values, whereas directional selection may operate through a restricted number of amino-acid replacements, which has less impact on ! but can lead to rapid fixation of a new allele in the population. the former is ubiquitous in antagonistic systems such as pathogen-host interactions . not surprisingly, d n =d s estimation methods have been frequently applied to viral gene sequences to detect escape from host immune responses or adaptation to novel hosts. rapidly evolving viruses benefit from the ability to generate adaptive mutations de novo, whereas other organisms must rely on pre-existing to whom correspondence should be addressed. variation maintained by population structure or balancing selection . the impact of immune pressure on the genetic diversity of viruses can be highly dependent on how potent the immune responses are to different viral variants, a concept that has been put forward within the framework of phylodynamics . for this reason, methods to estimate ! have become an integral part of the phylodynamic toolbox , which generally refers to recent statistical and computational developments to simultaneously estimate epidemic and spatiotemporal dynamics from viral genes sequences . in this article, we are interested in site-specific estimation of d n =d s ratios. there are two main classes of methods designed for this task. the first class prescribes to build a model of codon evolution, with the d n =d s ratio as a model parameter that is allowed to vary across sites . although we fully endorse these approaches and use them whenever possible, codon-based models become computationally prohibitive when analyzing large datasets that include hundreds, if not thousands, of molecular sequences . because of this computational limitation, researchers often turn to a second class of methods that are based on imputing (counting) unobserved synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions . these substitution counts are then used to construct a test statistic to assess the null hypothesis of neutrality (h 0 : d n =d s 1). such counting methods enjoy computational efficiency and often work well in practice (kosakovsky), but have two important shortcomings. first, counting approaches experience difficulties in handling uncertainty about the phylogenetic tree and about other nuisance parameters that play a role in counting unobserved synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions.propose to overcome this problem by combining stochastic mapping, introduced by nielsen (2002), with traditional counting methods test statistics as discrepancy measures in a posterior predictive diagnostics framework . however, posterior predictive diagnostics, undoubtedly useful for visual exploration of model fit, are difficult to calibrate and to use in a semi-automatic fashion. the second limitation, shared by all counting methods, is their inability to provide reliable sites-specific d n =d s estimates and to quantify the relative strengths of selection across amino acid sites.we present a novel and efficient bayesian method for detecting positive diversifying selection in molecular sequences. our method combines the computational speed of counting methods and statistical efficiency of empirical bayes approaches. a further strength of the method is its simplicity of implementation, thanks to recent algorithmic advances in stochastic mapping . stochastic mapping has been used before to speed up mcmc-based bayesian estimation of codon-based models , but this and subsequent approaches still operate within the codon-based modeling framework. in contrast, our method uses stochastic mapping to quickly approximate codon-based models that account for rate variation of d n =d s over sites. our analysis of simulated and real data demonstrates that the proposed approach competes well with more computationally demanding methods in recovering site-specific d n =d s ratios and in accurately identifying sites under positive diversifying selection. the main distinction between renaissance counting and previous attempts to use stochastic mapping to detect diversifying positive selection is the ability of our renaissance method to directly estimate d n =d s ratios and to quantify uncertainty in these estimates. this advance is important because all counting methods, including stochastic mapping-based ones, can only produce site-specific p-values, resulting from testing a null hypothesis of neutrality. however, it is well known that using p-values has limitations. in particular, as p-values are always calculated by conditioning on the null hypothesis, itwould be inappropriate to use the magnitude of p-values as evidence in favor of the null . the task of comparing p-values becomes even more challenging in the method ofbecause these authors use notoriously hard-tocalibrate posterior predictive p-values . therefore, it is difficult to use previously developed counting methods to quantify relative strength of selection at amino acid sites. although our method cannot possibly resolve the long-standing statistical controversy of quantifying evidence in hypothesis testing, renaissance counting offers a straightforward estimation alternative by producing site-specific posterior distributions of d n =d s ratios. importantly, this uniquely positions renaissance counting among other positive selection detection methods as a method that also appropriately quantifies the relative strengths of selection at individual sites. when imputing/counting the unobserved synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions, we produce substitution counts on each branch of the phylogenetic tree and then sum them up for each site. if a scientifically meaningful partition of branches into groups exists, we can easily sum the substitutions within each group separately and apply our empirical bayes procedure to the site-specific counts in each group. for applications to within-host hiv evolution for example, we can consider synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions only on internal branches of the phylogeny. this partition of branch lengths is motivated by a widely accepted hypothesis that many terminal branches of intrahost hiv phylogenies represent lineages that are weeded out by selection . therefore, it is reasonable, if not advisable, to avoid the mutational load on these branches and their impact on substitution rates by excluding them when identifying positive diversifying selection. concerning the identification site-specific selection patterns, the development of renaissance counting was clearly not to replace, but to complement existing methodology. even after a comprehensive evaluation of several counting-based and maximum likelihood methods, kosakovsky pond and frost (2005) found it difficult to make definitive recommendations on which methods to use in particular cases. in fact, they concluded that a consensus of several methods, but each accepting relatively high nominal levels, would be a reasonable approach to rule out spurious results. in many ways, renaissance counting presents an interesting candidate method to include in such a consensus approach. embedded in a bayesian inference framework, renaissance counting accounts for phylogenetic error when estimating d n =d s ratios. perhaps more importantly, our approach uses a test statistic that is very different from both previous counting methods and maximum likelihood methods. for small or less divergent datasets, for example the test used in previous counting methods is notoriously conservative (kosakovsky), which is also confirmed by our comparison of the ebin test to the ci coverage test. empirical bayesian analysis of random-effects models on the other hand can suffer from large type i error rates owing to excessive errors in the parameter estimates used (kosakovsky). renaissance counting avoids the estimation of codon model parameters, and estimation uncertainty will be taken into account by the ci coverage test approach. the nucleotide-model approximation also offers a significant speed-up compared with fitting a codon model, but considerable computation time may still need to be invested in integrating over the posterior distribution of phylogenies. in this respect, we emphasize that renaissance counting is implemented in a bayesian inference framework] that provides access to an array of flexible models for estimating genealogical history, divergence times, flexible semi-parametric demographic and phylogeographic histories . although site-specific selection patterns may not be of prime interest when engaging in such analyses, renaissance counting readily delivers d n =d s ratios for any coding sequence alignment, which may offer a starting point for in-depth characterization of selection pressures involving different methods.  
