clustering-based model of cysteine co-evolution improves disulfide bond connectivity prediction and reduces homologous sequence requirements motivation: cysteine residues have particular structural and functional relevance in proteins because of their ability to form covalent disulfide bonds. bioinformatics tools that can accurately predict cysteine bonding states are already available, whereas it remains challenging to infer the disulfide connectivity pattern of unknown protein sequences. improving accuracy in this area is highly relevant for the structural and functional annotation of proteins. results: we predict the intra-chain disulfide bond connectivity patterns starting from known cysteine bonding states with an evolutionary-based unsupervised approach called sephiroth that relies on high-quality alignments obtained with hhblits and is based on a coarse-grained cluster-based mode-lization of tandem cysteine mutations within a protein family. we compared our method with state-of-the-art unsupervised predictors and achieve a performance improvement of 2527 while requiring an order of magnitude less of aligned homologous sequences ($10 3 instead of $10 4). availability and implementation: the software described in this article and the datasets used are available at http://ibsquare.be/sephiroth.cysteine amino acids are extremely relevant for proteins from both structural and functional perspectives. their side chain ends in a thiol group that, in an oxidative environment, may covalently bond with other cysteines to form disulfide bonds within the protein or to other proteins. these non-local interactions pose structural constraints that reduce the conformational freedom of proteins, thus affecting their stability, maturation and folding rate, inducing conformational changes and ultimately influencing their function . next-generation sequencing technology is producing a flood of new and unannotated protein sequences. there are commonly two prediction steps that can be taken to annotate cysteines in these sequences. the first one is to predict whether their thiol group is in a bound (oxidized) or free (reduced) state, which can help in the functional and structural characterization of proteins . the second one is to reconstruct the most probable disulfide bonding pattern, which represents the connectivity of the covalent bonds formed between the oxidized cysteines within one sequence (intra-chain). this prediction step is important, asknowledge of these connectivities provides clues to the protein fold and structural similarity to other proteins , and in ab-initio structure prediction, it adds long-range constraints and reduces the conformational space to be searched . most of the state-of-the-art prediction tools follow this division in two steps; depending on the case, they can deal with the oxidation states alone , the connectivity prediction alone (and thus assuming perfect knowledge of the), which is the ultimate goal of this field. rubinstein and fiser (2008) already observed that methods for the prediction of cysteine oxidation states have a long history of high performances: more than 10 years ago, 88 of accuracy was already reached , and recently, 93 of cysteines were correctly classified, with 86 of proteins predicted correctly . these approaches are distinct from the prediction of disulfide bond connectivity, where typically accuracies of up to 5060 are reached starting from known oxidation states. the machine learning (ml) methods commonly used to predict connectivity can be improved by coupling them with statistical approaches based on the analysis of correlated mutations between cysteine positions in multiple sequence alignments (msas). as shown in, the information produced by these statistical approaches is to a certain extent orthogonal and thus complementary to ml methods, which can natively integrate these predictions as new dimensions in the feature vectors. in particular,show that correlated cysteine mutation analysis can provide a 10 improvement over ml performances. the principle underlying methods based on the statistical analysis of msas is that, generally, residues that experience spatial proximity in the three-dimensional protein structure tend to coevolve during the evolution of protein families, so preserving the propensity of their interaction . bonded cysteines are no exception to this behavior: their structural and functional relevance leaves a co-evolutionary trace among the cysteine-harboring positions in an msa of homologous sequences in the form of tandem (compensatory) mutations between contacting pairs . evolution thus provides msas with clues of the protein three-dimensional structure, but this coevolutionary signal is confounded by the entanglement of spurious (transitive network-mediated) correlations and entropic/phylogenetic biases, mostly due to the sampling of the sequences during alignment . different algorithms have been developed to extract the valuable co-evolutionary signal from its noisy background and are routinely used in contact prediction (cp). compared with the more general cp problem, the disulfide connectivity prediction presents a problem of lesser difficulty because (i) only a few positions in the msa have to be analyzed and (ii) cysteines are expected to have a structural or functional impact and thus a strong correlation trace through evolution. disulfide connectivities have been predicted from msas this way using correlated mutation analysis methods and using a mutual information (mi) approach combined with a sparse inverse covariance estimation method derived from the cp tool psicov , so improving the performances of their full annotation predictor . although these approaches are effective, they do not take into account, for example, the evolutionary distances between the sequences or any biological reasoning except for the compensatory mutation process. here, we address this problem through sephiroth, an unsupervised predictor that infers the most likely intra-chain disulfide bond connectivity patterns starting from known or predicted cysteine bonding states. sephiroth (i) relies on high-quality msas obtained with the fast and accurate hidden markov model alignment method hhblits and (ii) is based on a novel coarse-grained cluster-based modelization of tandem cysteines mutations within a protein family. we compared our method with state-of-the-art unsupervised predictors on the same dataset and achieve a performance improvement of 2527, while requiring an order of magnitude fewer aligned homologous sequences (in the order of 10 3 instead of 10 4 ), thus extending the applicability of these tools in terms of increased range of predictable sequences at a lower computational cost. sephiroth can be combined with ml methods and in this case provides a 15 improvement compared with other state-of-the-art supervised prediction methods.in this article, we present a novel unsupervised method for the prediction of disulfide bond connectivity patterns from known or predicted cysteine bonding states. it is based on assumptions similar to other statistical methods (cysteine conservation and co-evolution) but approaches the problem from a different angle, directly encoding the cysteine tandem mutations assumption in the structure underlying the problem, thus providing constraints for the search of the optimal solutions. the availability of homologous sequences is crucial for these predictors and we adopted a fast and accurate hmm-based iterative search tool, hhblits to obtain small but highly informative msas. compared with existing predictors, we obtain a significant improvement of the performances, while requiring one order of magnitude fewer aligned homologs. we also show that sephiroth can provide a relevant improvement over stateof-the-art ml methods if used as extra feature in svr pipelines for solving the disulfide connectivity prediction task. the enhanced reliability of the connectivity predictions coupled with lower requirements in terms of msa sizes (and thus time required by database search) can improve the dependability of bioinformatics methods for the structural and functional annotation of unknown sequences.  
