cmsearch: simultaneous exploration of protein sequence space and structure space improves not only protein homology detection but also protein structure prediction motivation: protein homology detection, a fundamental problem in computational biology, is an indispensable step toward predicting protein structures and understanding protein functions. despite the advances in recent decades on sequence alignment, threading and alignment-free methods, protein homology detection remains a challenging open problem. recently, network methods that try to find transitive paths in the protein structure space demonstrate the importance of incorporating network information of the structure space. yet, current methods merge the sequence space and the structure space into a single space, and thus introduce inconsistency in combining different sources of information. method: we present a novel network-based protein homology detection method, cmsearch, based on cross-modal learning. instead of exploring a single network built from the mixture of sequence and structure space information, cmsearch builds two separate networks to represent the sequence space and the structure space. it then learns sequencestructure correlation by simultaneously taking sequence information, structure information, sequence space information and structure space information into consideration. results: we tested cmsearch on two challenging tasks, protein homology detection and protein structure prediction, by querying all 8332 pdb40 proteins. our results demonstrate that cmsearch is insensitive to the similarity metrics used to define the sequence and the structure spaces. by using hmmhmm alignment as the sequence similarity metric, cmsearch clearly outperforms state-of-the-art homology detection methods and the casp-winning template-based protein structure prediction methods. availability and implementation: our program is freely available for download from http://sfb. kaust.edu.sa/pages/software.aspx. contact: xin.gao@kaust.edu.sa supplementary information: supplementary data are available at bioinformatics online.protein homology detection, that aims to identify protein homologs that share a common ancestry during the course of evolution, is one of the fundamental open problems in computational biology. for close homologs, sequence similarity search tends to be sufficient . however, instead of sharing similar sequences, remote homologs might only share similar tertiary (3d) structures or similar functions. this is because protein structures and functions are more conserved than sequences due to the evolutionary pressure . because of the high cost and experimental barriers to determine protein structures and functions, biologists frequently stuck in the situation that only the sequence is available for the protein of interest. thus, computationally detecting remote homologs from a database of proteins with known sequences and/or structures becomes a challenging and essential problem (ben). generally, existing methods for protein homology detection can be divided into three categories: alignment-free methods, alignment methods and network methods. the alignment-free methods refer to the approaches that represent a protein as a feature vector and then search for homologs in the protein database by comparing feature vectors. early methods, such as, conduct direct comparisons of feature vectors. later discriminative methods, such aswhich is based on support vector machines, have been developed to improve the sensitivity. however, a recent study indicates that the alignment-free methods are usually faster but less sensitive compared to alignment methods . the alignment methods refer to the approaches that search the query protein against proteins in the database through alignments. these methods can either rely on sequences only or employ structure features as well, where the latter is also called threading . the most successful methods that rely on sequences only include the ones that enrich protein sequence information by position-specific scoring matrices (pssms) , hidden markov models (hmms) or markov random fields (mrfs) . for threading methods, in addition to the enriched sequence information, the structure featuressuch as secondary structures , solvent accessibility and residue-residue contacts predicted from the query protein sequence, are compared to the structure features extracted from the 3d structures in the database. neither alignment-free nor alignment methods exploit the network topologies of the protein space because they predict homologs in a pairwise comparison manner (i.e. either one-to-one or one-tofamily) . this motivates network methods to connect remote homologs through a transitive path in the continuous protein space . early network methods utilize sequence similarities to construct the protein network, but they show minor improvement over the sequence alignment methods . recently, ents (enrichment of network topological similarity) was proposed which constructs a structure similarity network for proteins in the protein data bank (pdb) and then links the query protein sequence to the known structures through sequence similarities. although ents has demonstrated its outstanding performance, it should be considered as a structure similarity-based network method except for the query protein. specifically, when building the protein network, only structure similarities are used for the proteins in the database, and the sequence similarity is only used to approximate the structure similarity for the query protein. thus, ents used sequence and structure similarities in a mixed manner, but it is known that there is no standard way to combine different similarity metrics in a unified fashion. as demonstrated later in section 3.1, this might introduce inconsistency issues. in this article, we propose a cross-modal method, cmsearch, for protein homology detection. as shown in, cmsearch employs not only structure similarities but also sequence similarities. it then explores the structure and the sequence spaces (networks) simultaneously by learning sequencestructure correlations (crossmodal links) between the structure and the sequence spaces. to our knowledge, cmsearch is the first method that is able to incorporate sequence information, structure information, sequence space information and structure space information simultaneously. specifically, as shown in, cmsearch has several advantages over existing methods: (i) instead of exploring a single space built from the mixture of sequence and structure similarities as ents , cmsearch builds two separate spaces and explores the two spaces simultaneously. (ii) cmsearch is completely different from threading methods because it uses not only sequence and structure information, but also sequence and structure space information. (iii) cmsearch is a generic framework such that any sequence similarity metric and any structure similarity metric can be adopted. we test the performance of cmsearch on two very challenging tasks, protein homology detection and protein structure prediction, by querying all 8332 proteins in the pdb40 dataset. our results demonstrate that cmsearch is insensitive to the similarity metric. it can significantly improve the homology detection performance to the similar levels no matter which sequence similarity metric is used to define the sequence space. by using hmmhmm alignment as the sequence similarity metric, cmsearch clearly outperforms stateof-the-art homology detection methods, including hhsearch (s ding, 2005), raptorx and ents . when cmsearch is applied to structure prediction of pdb40, it outperforms casp-winning template-based structure prediction methods. for hundreds of cases, it can predict highly accurate models (tm-score above 0.6) while the existing methods cannot.in this article, we proposed a cross-modal search method, cmsearch, for protein homology detection. cmsearch is capable of significantly improving the accuracy of state-of-the-art homology detection methods, including hmmer , hhsearch (s ding, 2005), mrfalign , raptorx and ents . this demonstrates that combining sequence space information and structure space information can significantly boost the accuracy of protein homology detection and improve the accuracy of template-based protein structure prediction. the success of our method is mainly credited to the cross-modal propagation that simultaneously explores the protein sequence space and the protein structure space. the only cost of applying our method is approximately 10 min of computational time on an average computer. furthermore, our framework is generic and can be straightforward extended to multiple modals. it thus can be a highly valuable framework for many computational biology tasks. for example, we are currently extending our method to predict protein functions by simultaneously incorporating protein sequence space information, structure space information and gene ontology space information. it would also be interesting to investigate the possibility to use the. superpositions of the best template model (cyan) to the native model (magenta): the best template model is found by hhsearch, raptorx, ents or cmsearch for query protein: (ad) 2odaa, (eg) 3vcxa or (hi) 2q73a (note that the same template model might be found by different methods); and the models are superimposed by tm-align and the superimposed models are visualized by pymol. illustration of why cmsearch is able to detect better homologs and rank them at the top for the three cases in: each triangle represents a sequence; each pentagon represents the corresponding structure; each solid line represents a strong link; each dashed line represents a (relatively) weak link; the top three homologs predicted by hhsearch (in blue) have strong query-sequence links; the top three homologs predicted by cmsearch (in red) have weak query-sequence links but strong links among the sequences and structures of them three; and this demonstrates that cmsearch is capable of compensating weak links to true homologs that are consistent (i.e. the true homologs tend to be similar to each other) cmsearch: exploring protein sequence and structure space by cross-modal learning i339 network topologies in the sequence and the structure spaces to detect the number of homologs, or if there exists a homolog in the database or not. this information could be useful for protein structure prediction with multiple templates.  
