acquire: an open-source comprehensive cancer biobanking system motivation: the probability of effective treatment of cancer with a targeted therapeutic can be improved for patients with defined genotypes containing actionable mutations. to this end, many human cancer biobanks are integrating more tightly with genomic sequencing facilities and with those creating and maintaining patient-derived xenografts (pdx) and cell lines to provide renewable resources for translational research. results: to support the complex data management needs and workflows of several such biobanks, we developed acquire. it is a robust, secure, web-based, database-backed open-source system that supports all major needs of a modern cancer biobank. its modules allow for i) up-to-the-minute scoreboard and graphical reporting of collections; ii) end user roles and permissions; iii) specimen inventory through catissue suite; iv) shipping forms for distribution of specimens to pathology, genomic analysis and pdx/cell line creation facilities; v) robust ad hoc querying; vi) molecular and cellular quality control metrics to track specimens progress and quality; vii) public researcher request ; viii) resource allocation committee distribution request review and oversight and ix) linkage to available derivatives of specimen. availability and implementation: acquire implements standard controlled vocabularies, ontolo-gies and objects from the nci, cdisc and others. here we describe the functionality of the system, its technological stack and the processes it supports.access to high quality human cancer and matched normal tissues for omics experimentation is critical for developing a better understanding of these diseases to design improved diagnostics and therapeutics. human tissue biorepositories, or biobanks, can provide tissues and associated participant, pathology and specimen data to the researchers who collected them and/or the scientific public . biobanking standards provide guidance and best practices on how to collect, store and manage tissues to better assure high-quality dna, rna, protein or other derivatives such as cell lines and patient-derived xenografts (pdx) for research (e.g. international society for biological and environmental biorepositories2012 best practices, http://bit.ly/1znxueu). as such many commercial and some open-source software solutions exist to manage daily v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.though banking protocols and processes differ slightly among institutions, all must have processes for identifying potential subjects and obtaining consent, collecting specimens and capturing data.acquire supports the full biobanking lifecycle for specimen and data collection including: within acceptable parameters are tallied as potentially meeting tcga-like criteria.  
