cnogpro: detection and quantification of cnvs in prokaryotic whole-genome sequencing data motivation: the explosion of whole-genome sequencing (wgs) as a tool in the mapping and understanding of genomes has been accompanied by an equally massive report of tools and pipelines for the analysis of dna copy number variation (cnv). most currently available tools are designed specifically for human genomes, with comparatively little literature devoted to cnvs in pro-karyotic organisms. however, there are several idiosyncrasies in prokaryotic wgs data. this work proposes a step-by-step approach for detection and quantification of copy number variants specifically aimed at prokaryotes. results: after aligning wgs reads to a reference genome, we count the individual reads in a sliding window and normalize these counts for bias introduced by differences in gc content. we then investigate the coverage in two fundamentally different ways: (i) employing a hidden markov model and (ii) by repeated sampling with replacement (bootstrapping) on each individual gene. the latter bypasses the complex problem of breakpoint determination. to demonstrate our method, we apply it to real and simulated wgs data and benchmark it against two popular methods for cnv detection. the proposed methodology will in some cases represent a significant jump in accuracy from other current methods. availability and implementation:copy number variation (cnv) is a type of structural variation that refers to any abnormality in the frequency at which a dna sequence occurs in a genome. it is a critical component of the genetic variability of organisms . cnvs can include duplications (sometimes referred to as amplifications) or deletions of a particular stretch of sequence. considerable research has been carried out on the relatively easy problem of determining whether a strain contains a gene or not, but less work has been devoted to the more complex problem of measuring non-zero variation in the gene copy number.the phenotypical implications of cnv are also less clear than those resulting from a functional deletion, although cnvs are known to be a source of important genetic variation in both humans and bacteria . research in humans has typically focused on the role of cnvs in cancer and inherited disease , and there is also evidence of adaptive duplications . less work has been devoted to exploring the role of cnvs in prokaryotes. however, bacteria display substantial variation in gene copy numbers, and the extra cost of maintaining a redundant gene comes with the payoff of a selectiveadvantage under certain environmental conditions . the most common way of testing the hypothesis of no cnv is by examining the read counts (rcs) along the chromosome after alignment of the sequenced reads to a reference genome or de novo assembly. the argument is that the rc in any non-overlapping, equally sized bin can be considered as a stochastic variable with a particular probability distribution and that there is an inherent proportionality between the expected value (mean) of this variable and the underlying copy number , analogous to principles of cnv estimation in array comparative genome hybridization technology. however, rcs are affected by biases that must be corrected for before any valid conclusions can be made. there are currently at least 48 available tools for the discovery of cnvs from next-generation sequencing data (for a detailed runthrough, see). of these, few attempt to quantify the number of copies of any particular chromosomal segment . furthermore, most of these tools are designed with a diploid, human setting in mind. this presents a number of problems when applying these tools to prokaryotes. prokaryotes are organisms of indefinite ploidy, and there are some additional allowances on the valid copy number outcomes when compared with diploid genomes. although for human genomes a copy number of 1.5 would mean that the segment in question had two copies on one chromosome but one on the other, in bacteria the interpretation would vary from species to species depending on the number of sets of chromosomes, both complete and incomplete, it maintains. complicating matters even further, the copy number result may vary due to bacterial growth mechanics. in fact, any nonnegative decimal copy number could make sense for bacteria, because bacteria growing under exponential growth conditions are able to replicate their chromosomes faster than they can divide . this is reflected in dna sequencing data, with copy numbers representing a mixture of the discrete number of chromosomes that the bacterium maintains at the stationary, nondividing phase and a fractional number that stems from the fact that cells are in different phases of binary fission cycle. this article presents a tool for the discovery of cnvs from prokaryote-origin whole-genome sequencing (wgs) data. we have developed an r package called cnogpro, which is an acronym for copy numbers of genes in prokaryotes. the main purpose of the tool is to quickly estimate the number of copies of any gene or intergenic segment in a resequencing experiment. cnogpro supports rapid calling of copy number using a hidden markov model and additionally allows for the construction of confidence intervals around copy number estimates by bootstrapping. although several publicly available cnv analysis tools designed for work on humanorigin data can, with varying amounts of tinkering, also accept prokaryote data, to our knowledge no existing tool for cnv analysis focuses specifically on prokaryote data.we have presented a simple, quick and effective tool for detecting and quantifying cnvs in wgs data of prokaryotic organisms. when comparing similar prokaryotic genomes where details about the genomic layout in the reference are available, it represents a considerable jump in accuracy over other methods. it additionally has functions for creating high-quality informative plots and figures, an example of which can be seen in. our method starts with wgs data in the sam format. data are easily accessible through the sequence read archive (sra) (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/traces/sra), from. comparison of the present algorithm, cnv-seq and cn.mops in detecting and quantifying cnvs in simulated data with artificially introduced cnvs. red color indicates that the algorithm correctly detected a cnv region, but that it was either not quantified (as in cnv-seq) or it was quantified incorrectly. segments that were quantified correctly are highlighted in blue. the x-axes correspond to genomic position where one can also download the sra toolkit and create sam-format files from sequencing experiments. there are probably datasets from thousands of sequencing experiments freely available in the different sequence banks, just waiting for someone to analyze the clues that have been hidden in the frequencies with which each sequence occurs. cnogpro is written entirely in the r programming language and is freely available under the gnu public license gpl-2. we believe it will be a valuable addition to the toolbox of every researcher conducting resequencing experiments to study copy number variance.  
