cnvruler: a copy number variation-based case–control association analysis tool the method for genome-wide association study (gwas) based on copy number variation (cnv) is not as well established as that for single nucleotide polymorphism (snp)gwas. although there are several tools for cnv association studies, most of them do not provide appropriate definitions of cnv regions (cnvrs), which are essential for cnv-association studies. here we present a user-friendly program called cnvruler for cnv-association studies. outputs from the 10 most common cnv defining algorithms can be directly used as input files for determining the three different definitions of cnvrs. once cnvrs are defined, cnvruler supports four kinds of statistical association tests and options for population stratification. cnvruler is based on the open-source programs r and java from sun microsystems. availability: cnvruler software is available with an online manual at the website, www.ircgp.com/cnvruler/index.html contact: yejun@catholic.ac.kr.copy number variation (cnv) is thought to contribute to interindividual differences in phenotypes including disease susceptibility . single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) genotypes are always represented as categorical values, while copy number variations (cnvs) are often represented as regions consisting of continuous values for consecutive probes. for this reason, the following three steps are required to perform a cnv-based genome-wide association study (gwas): (i) calling cnvs, (ii) merging cnvs into common cnv regions (cnvrs), and (iii) statistical analysis of the associations. despite the importance and popularity of cnv phenotype association studies, there are not many algorithms that provide all three key steps mentioned above. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors to whom correspondence should be addressed.a number of tools supporting cnvdisease association analysis have been developed (supplementary). however, most of these tools do not offer methods for defining the cnvrs and require additional manual processes for converting the input cnv calls into files suitable for statistical analysis. in order to support the steps from merging cnvs into cnvrs to cnvr-based association analysis in a single software program, we developed a user-friendly tool for cnvgwas, called cnvruler.cnvruler is a user-friendly program with multiple functions that support all procedures of cnvphenotype association analysis in a single system without requiring any additional manual processes.1008.  
