data and text mining a croc stronger than roc: measuring, visualizing and optimizing early retrieval motivation: the performance of classifiers is often assessed using receiver operating characteristic roc [or (ac) accumulation curve or enrichment curve] curves and the corresponding areas under the curves (aucs). however, in many fundamental problems ranging from information retrieval to drug discovery, only the very top of the ranked list of predictions is of any interest and rocs and aucs are not very useful. new metrics, visualizations and optimization tools are needed to address this early retrieval problem. results: to address the early retrieval problem, we develop the general concentrated roc (croc) framework. in this framework, any relevant portion of the roc (or ac) curve is magnified smoothly by an appropriate continuous transformation of the coordinates with a corresponding magnification factor. appropriate families of magnification functions confined to the unit square are derived and their properties are analyzed together with the resulting croc curves. the area under the croc curve (auc[croc]) can be used to assess early retrieval. the general framework is demonstrated on a drug discovery problem and used to discriminate more accurately the early retrieval performance of five different predictors. from this framework, we propose a novel metric and visualizationthe croc(exp), an exponential transform of the roc curveas an alternative to other methods. the croc(exp) provides a principled, flexible and effective way for measuring and visualizing early retrieval performance with excellent statistical power. corresponding methods for optimizing early retrieval are also described in the appendix. availability: datasets are publicly available. python code and command-line utilities implementing croc curves and metrics are available atone of the most widely used tools to assess the performance of a classification or ranking algorithm in statistics and machine learning is the receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve, plotting true to whom correspondence should be addressed. versus false positive rate, together with the corresponding area under the roc curve (auc) metric. however, in many applications, ranging from information retrieval to drug discovery, the roc curve and the area under the curve (auc) metric are not very useful. this is because the total number of objects to be classified or ranked, such as web pages or chemical molecules, tends to be very large relative to the number of objects toward the top of the list that are practically useful or testable due to, for instance, financial constraints. specifically, consider a typical drug discovery situation where one is interested in discovering molecules that may be active among a library of 1 000 000 molecules by computational virtual screening methods, such as docking or similarity search. depending on the financial conditions and the details of the corresponding experimental setup, experimentalists may be able to test in the laboratory, for instance, only the top 1000 hits on the list. in such conditions, the majority of the roc curve is without much relevance and the auc is useless. only the early portion of the roc curve is relevant. furthermore, the precise ranking of the molecules, particularly for the bottom 999 000 molecules, is also of very minor interest. similar observations can be made in many other areas, ranging from fraud detection to web page retrieval. what one is really interested in across all these cases is the notion of early enrichment/recognition/retrieval, having as many true positives as possible within the list of top hits. to further drive this point, consider the following three cases from truchon and bayly (2007) corresponding to an algorithm that either: (1) ranks half the positive candidates at the top of the list and half at the bottom; (2) distributes the positive candidates uniformly throughout the list; or (3) ranks all the positive candidates exactly in the middle of the list. all three cases yield an auc of 0.5 although, if only the top few hits can be experimentally tested, case 1 is clearly better than case 2 which, in turn, is better than case 3. good early recognition metrics and visualization tools ought to easily discriminate between these cases and rank them appropriately. several metrics have been suggested in the literature to address the early retrieval problem, but none seems entirely satisfactory. some metrics lack smoothness and require setting arbitrary thresholds, including looking at the derivative of the smoothed roc curve at or near the origin, or looking at the roc curve and its area over the intervalfor some threshold t (e.g. t = 0.05). however, as we shall see, methods with hard threshold cutoffs tend to be less statistically powerful than methods without threshold cutoffs, because they discard meaningful differences in the performance ofpage: 1349 13481356  
