cocacola: binning metagenomic contigs using sequence composition, read coverage, co-alignment and paired-end read linkage motivation: the advent of next-generation sequencing technologies enables researchers to sequence complex microbial communities directly from the environment. because assembly typically produces only genome fragments, also known as contigs, instead of an entire genome, it is crucial to group them into operational taxonomic units (otus) for further taxonomic profiling and down-streaming functional analysis. otu clustering is also referred to as binning. we present cocacola, a general framework automatically bin contigs into otus based on sequence composition and coverage across multiple samples. results: the effectiveness of cocacola is demonstrated in both simulated and real datasets in comparison with state-of-art binning approaches such as concoct, groopm, maxbin and metabat. the superior performance of cocacola relies on two aspects. one is using l 1 distance instead of euclidean distance for better taxonomic identification during initialization. more importantly, cocacola takes advantage of both hard clustering and soft clustering by sparsity regularization. in addition, the cocacola framework seamlessly embraces customized knowledge to facilitate binning accuracy. in our study, we have investigated two types of additional knowledge, the co-alignment to reference genomes and linkage of contigs provided by paired-end reads, as well as the ensemble of both. we find that both co-alignment and linkage information further improve binning in the majority of cases. cocacola is scalable and faster than concoct, groopm, maxbin and metabat.metagenomic studies aim to understand microbial communities directly from environmental samples without cultivating member species . the next-generation sequencing technologies allow biologists to extract genomic data with unprecedented high resolution and sufficient sequence depth, offering insights into complex microbial communities even including species with low abundance . to further investigate the taxonomic structure of microbial samples, assembled sequence fragments, also known as contigs, need be grouped into operational taxonomic units (otus) that ultimately represent genomes or significant parts of genomes. otu clustering is also called binning (or genomic binning), serving as the key step toward taxonomic profiling and downstream functional analysis. therefore, accurate binning of the contigs is an essential problem in metagenomic studies. despite extensive studies, accurate binning of contigs remains challenging for several major reasons, including chimeric assemblies owing to repetitive sequence regions within or across genomes, sequencing errors or artifacts, strain-level variation within the same species, etc. the currently available binning methods can be broadly categorized into classification and clustering approaches. classification approaches are taxonomy dependent, that is, reference databases are needed for the assignment from contigs or reads to meaningful taxons. the classification is either based on homology owing to sequence identity, or genomic signatures such as oligonucleotide composition patterns and taxonomic clades. homology-based methods include megan , which assigns reads to the lowest common taxonomic ancestor. examples of genomic signature-based methods include phylopythia and kraken , which are composition-based classifiers and naive bayesian classifier , a clade-specific approach. in addition, hybrid methods are available to take both alignment and composition-based strategy into consideration, such as phymmbl and sphinx . in comparison, clustering approaches are taxonomy independent, that is, no additional reference databases or taxonomic information is needed. these approaches require similarity measurements from gc content, tetra-mer composition or interpolated markov models , to contig coverage profile . recently, several methods have been developed to bin contigs using the coverage profiles of the contigs across multiple metagenomic samples . here the coverage of a contig is defined as the fraction of reads mapped to the contig in a sample. the idea is that if two contigs are from the same genome, their coverage profiles across multiple samples should be highly correlated. these methods can be further improved by integrating coverage profiles with the sequence tetra-mer composition of the contigs . among these methods, groopm is advantageous in its visualized and interactive pipeline. on one hand, it is flexible, allowing users to merge and split bins under expert intervention. on the other hand, in the absence of expert intervention, the automatic binning results of groopm is not as satisfactory as concoct . concoct makes use of the gaussian mixture model (gmm) to cluster contigs into bins. also, concoct provides a mechanism to automatically determine the optimal otu number by variational bayesian model selection . metabat calculates integrated distance for pairwise contigs and then clusters contigs iteratively by modified k-medoids algorithm. and maxbin compares the distributions of distances between and within the same genomes. in this article we present cocacola, a general framework for contig binning incorporating sequence composition, coverage, co-alignment and paired-end reads linkage across multiple samples. by default, cocacola uses sequence composition and coverage across multiple samples for binning. compared with recent approaches such as concoct, groopm, maxbin and metabat, cocacola performs better in three aspects. first, cocacola reveals superiority with respect to precision, recall and adjusted rand index (ari). second, cocacola shows better robustness in the case of varying number of samples. cocacola is scalable and faster than concoct, groopm, maxbin and metabat. in addition, the cocacola framework seamlessly embraces customized knowledge to facilitate binning accuracy. in our study, we have investigated two types of knowledge, in particular, the coalignment to reference genomes and linkage between contigs provided by paired-end reads. we find that both co-alignment and linkage information facilitate better binning performance in the majority of the cases.given the same input, i.e. sequence composition and coverage across multiple samples, we show the effectiveness of cocacola on simulated species and strain datasets, in comparison with three state-of-art, methodologically distinct methods for contigs binning: concoct , groopm , maxbin and metabat . the comparison excludes canopy that is based on binning co-abundant gene groups instead of binning contigs. furthermore, we investigate the performance improvement of cocacola after incorporating two additional knowledge, co-alignment to reference genomes and linkage between contigs provided by paired-end reads, as well as the ensemble of both. results reveal both information facilitating better performance in the majority of cases. finally, we report the performance of cocacola on two real datasets.in this article, we develop a general framework to bin metagenomic contigs using sequence composition and coverage across multiple samples. our approach, cocacola, outperforms state-of-art binning approaches concoct , groopm , maxbin and metabat on both simulated and real datasets. the superior performance of cocacola relies on several aspects. first, initialization plays an important role in binning accuracy. second, cocacola uses l 1 distance instead of euclidean distance for better taxonomic identification. third, cocacola takes advantage of both hard clustering and soft clustering. specifically, soft clustering (such as the gmm used by concoct) allows a contig to be assigned probabilistically to multiple otus, hence gains more robust results in general in comparison with hard clustering (such as the hough partitioning used by groopm). however, in complex environmental samples with strain-level variations, the corresponding otus are closely intertwined. whereas soft clustering in turn further mixes the otus up and thus deteriorates clustering performance. cocacola obtains better trade-off between hard clustering and soft clustering by exploiting sparsity. however, we notice that binning metagenomic contigs remains challenging when the number of samples is small, regardless of using cocacola, concoct, groopm, maxbin or metabat. with small number of metagenomic samples, the relationship between the contigs cannot be accurately inferred based on the relationship between the abundance profiles. therefore, future research needs to study how to re-weight the contributions of abundance profiles and composition profiles in unsupervised or semisupervised scenario. moreover, recent studies suggest that euclidean or l 1 distance between l-mer frequencies do not perform as well as alternative dissimilarity measurements such as d 2 and d shepp 2 in comparing genome sequence. however, the use of such measurements is computationally challenging, which needs further exploration. the cocacola framework seamlessly embraces customized knowledge to facilitate binning accuracy. in our study, we have investigated two types of knowledge, in particular, the co-alignment to reference genomes and linkage of contigs provided by paired-endthough the contributions from additional knowledge diminish when there are sufficient number of samples, they play an important role in binning results when the number of samples is small. in future studies, we intend to explore better customized prior knowledge. one option is exploiting phylogenetic information in taxonomic annotation . another option relies on identifying functional annotation of contigs, including open reading frames that are likely to encode proteins , or co-abundance gene groups , etc. we have also investigated the ensemble of both co-alignment and linkage knowledge, and it shows more stable performance than individual information. in future studies, we aim to find optimal weights instead of equal weights.  
