cod: inferring immune-cell quantities related to disease states motivation: the immune system comprises a complex network of genes, cells and tissues, coordinated through signaling pathways and cellcell communications. however, the orchestrated role of the multiple immunological components in disease is still poorly understood. classifications based on gene-expression data have revealed immune-related signaling pathways in various diseases , but how such pathways describe the immune cellular physiology remains largely unknown. results: we identify alterations in cell quantities discriminating between disease states using cell type of disease (cod), a classification-based approach that relies on computational immune-cell decomposition in gene-expression datasets. cod attains significantly higher accuracy than alternative state-of-the-art methods. our approach is shown to recapitulate and extend previous knowledge acquired with experimental cell-quantification technologies. conclusions: the results suggest that cod can reveal disease-relevant cell types in an unbiased manner, potentially heralding improved diagnostics and treatment.immune-cell heterogeneity is central to systems-level functions in health and disease. it has therefore been the focus of a substantial research effort to identify immune-cell types that are relevant to a disease of interest. the main approach has been to quantify each individual immune-cell type using cell-measurement tools such as immunohistochemical staining or facs analysis, and then utilize the resulting measurements to identify particular cell types that are relevant to patient prognosis (e.g.). however, as hundreds of immune-cell subsets work in coordination, manual measurement of relatively small numbers of subsets poses significant obstacles to successful identification of disease-relevant immune cells. one such impediment, attributable to the strict requirement for the use of antibodies of high quality, is the strong bias toward immune-cell types that are well studied. another major hurdle has been the large amounts of material required for quantification, as well as the high costs and time-consuming nature of the process. as a result, most studies have been focused on preselected subpopulations of cells and have rarely investigated a broad range of immune-cell types. one possible solution to these obstacles would be to combine disease classification based on transcription profiles with predefined groups of gene markers that relate to specific immune-cell types. inferring the activity of relevant gene groups as a clue to disease classification is already an area of active research but it has not, to our knowledge, been applied in the case of immune-cell types. typically, these methods take as their starting point a list of signaling pathway-related gene groups from, for example, the molecular signatures database . the first phase is to v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com determine the activity of each gene group in the transcription profiles of the various samples, and the second phase is to classify the samples based on the inferred activity levels of the pathways. a key question, however, is whether these group activity-based methods can be used to automatically infer the quantities of specific immunecell subpopulations that are relevant to a disease state. to understand the challenges involved in this task, it is first necessary to realize that most genes are assigned a quantitative level in every cell type. this is fundamentally unlike the case of molecular pathways, in which the genes either participate in the pathway or do not. several computational approaches have been developed for identifying quantitative changes in particular immune-cell types within a complex tissue under study (e.g.). these methods integrate transcriptional profiling of a given complex tissue with prior genomic knowledge about immune cells into a mathematical framework enabling a robust decomposition of tissues into immune-cell quantities. for example, the dcq algorithm has been shown to identify over 200 immune-cell subpopulations simultaneously, opening the way to a global view of immune physiology through computational modeling. therefore, computational immune-cell decomposition methods can be used to aid identification of immunecell types related to specific diseases. here, we developed cell type of disease (cod), a methodology for identifying all disease-relevant immune-cell types. cod was designed to reveal the entire set of relevant cell types, including redundant cell types that are completely obscured by other cell types, thus providing a comprehensive understanding of disease mechanisms. to that end, cod utilizes computational immune-cell decomposition on gene-expression data to predict cell type quantities , and then exploits the cell quantities as features in a random forest classification scheme . finally, permutation tests are utilized to select the entire set of relevant features (rather than a minimal-optimal set of non-redundant features). our synthetic data analysis showed that cod achieves better accuracy in predicting immune-cell types of relevance for disease classification than existing feature selection and activity-based classification methods. we tested our approach by applying it in the case of whole-body ionizing radiation as well as in both the primary tumor and distal organs in mouse models of breast cancer . the results indicated the ability of cod to successfully recapitulate many of the known immune-cell changes in these systems, and showed that the predictions can provide novel leads even when the immune-cell composition has already been measured experimentally.in this article, we present cod, a novel framework for the identification of immune-cell subsets whose quantities discriminate between different types of disease. based on a computation decomposition algorithm, cod generates cell-type-based features and exploits the random forest classification method to extract the cell types that discriminate between disease states . a key advantage of cod is its ability, unlike existing group activity-based approaches, to integrate prior quantitative information about each of the relevant immune-cell types. in simulations cod shows high accuracy, outperforming existing state-of-the-art group activity-based classification methods (and b) as well as all-relevant feature selection methods , predicting disease-relevant cell subsets more accurately. this relatively high accuracy can be improved even further by focusing only on those cases in which the generalization error is low (and supplementary). thus, although all classification methods (ours as well as others) are under-constrained and prone to overfitting ($200 cell types and 50 individuals in each sample class), the cod algorithm seems more accurate. in the tumor-bearing dataset, for example, although our analysis was restricted to 50 individuals, a large number of candidates were identified as relevant cell types . given larger datasets, the cod algorithm can potentially capture additional relevant cell types. our results in mice point to the utility of the cod pipeline for real data analysis. first, whereas standard gene-level analyses cannot attain interpretable immunophysiological results, cod successfully identifies many of the previously reported alterations in cell types, albeit with a higher generalization error (supplementaryand supplementary). second, the identification of all-relevant features, including redundant features (cod stage 3), is crucial for identifying the entire set of disease-related cell types. in agreement, many of the identified cell types are tightly correlated with each other, while others may be quite distinct (supplementary). this study presents two alternative all-relevant methods (cod stageplots (y-axis, log-scaled) of known factors typically secreted from a pre-metastatic niche in both human and mouse (x-axis) for all samples isolated from tumor-bearing (gray) and healthy control (white) mice. observed significant alterations in secreted pre-metastatic factors are consistent with the pre-metastatic composition of immune-cell types in (e). (g) a model for mammary cancer in primary breast tissue (left), circulation and spleen (middle) and the suggested premetastatic niche in the liver (right). shown are predicted changes in cell quantities and pre-metastatic factors that are in agreement with literature reports (increasing/decreasing changes are marked by upward/downward arrows)  
