systems biology cogaps: an r/c++ package to identify patterns and biological process activity in transcriptomic data coordinated gene activity in pattern sets (cogaps) provides an integrated package for isolating gene expression driven by a biological process, enhancing inference of biological processes from transcriptomic data. cogaps improves on other enrichment measurement methods by combining a markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) matrix factorization algorithm (gaps) with a threshold-independent statistic inferring activity on gene sets. the software is provided as open source c++ code built on top of jags software with an r interface. availability: the r package cogaps and the c++ package gaps-jags are provided open source under the gnu lesser public license (glpl) with a users manual containing installation and operating instructions. cogaps is available through bioconductor and depends on the rjags package available through cran to interface cogaps with gaps-jags.many biological processes (bps) and phenotypes result from coordinated activity among sets of genes, so that inference from transcriptional measurements using gene sets is more powerful for inferring bps than inference based on isolated genes. however, gene reuse in bps is common, so genes are typically multiply regulated. thus, inference on sets of genes should ideally begin by identifying the portion of each genes behavior related to its use in a bp. we have developed coordinated gene activity in pattern sets (cogaps), which infers biological activity by identifying overlapping, coregulated sets of genes and applying z-score based statistics. cogaps can presently be used to isolate transcription factor (tf) or bp activity in datasets of thousands of genes and tens to thousands of samples. to whom correspondence should be addressed. several methods exist to infer activity of gene sets (gss). hypergeometric tests have been used to determine if genes in sets are differentially expressed across samples . these statistics have been extended to rank membership (e.g.). however, these methods do not account for multiple regulation of genes. matrix factorization techniques have been applied to infer overlapping patterns of coregulation in gene expression, including non-negative matrix factorization (nmf;), bayesian decomposition (bd;) and bayesian factor regression modeling (bfrm;). comparison of matrix factorization techniques on saccharomyces cerevisiae transcriptomic data suggested that mcmc techniques more accurately find patterns that relate to bps and phenotypes , inspiring our use of the gaps mcmc matrix factorization in cogaps. moreover, cogaps infers activity in specific gene sets related to the inferred bps by applying the z-score based statistic fromto patterns identified with gaps. cogaps is based on jags and includes an r interface. cogaps has been applied in the deside algorithm to identify transcriptional responses to signaling through estimation of the activity of tfs . cogaps inferred expected decreased activity in the kit pathway and unexpected activity in p53 and stat3 pathways from microarrays generated from treated gastrointestinal stromal tumor cell lines and tumor sample data. we provide the data with cogaps and an r/sweave document for this analysis in the supplementary material.  
