collaborative analysis of multi-gigapixel imaging data using cytomine motivation: collaborative analysis of massive imaging datasets is essential to enable scientific discoveries. results: we developed cytomine to foster active and distributed collaboration of multidisciplinary teams for large-scale image-based studies. it uses web development methodologies and machine learning in order to readily organize, explore, share and analyze (semantically and quantitatively) multi-gigapixel imaging data over the internet. we illustrate how it has been used in several bio-medical applications. availability and implementation: cytominein various scientific domains (incl. biology, biomedicine, astronomy, botany, geology, paleobiology, marine research, aerobiology, climatology), projects leading to terabytes of multi-gigapixel images become increasingly common (the data deluge, 2012) e.g. biomedical research studies often rely on whole-slide virtual microscopy or automated volume electron microscopy. in these fields, significant advances could be made by multidisciplinary collaboration involving distributed groups of life scientists and computer scientists exploiting large-scale image networks , or eventually by enlisting the help of members of the general public in large imaging surveys through interactive games (e.g. eyewire (http://eyewire.org/) and brainflight (http:// brainflight.org/) projects). for example, researchers in experimental histology are willing to precisely annotate images and need to consult distant experts in pathology or molecular biology. developers of image processing algorithms are willing to collaborate with machine learning specialists to build complementary image analysis workflows. furthermore, all these individuals need to actively collaborate to gain new insights, e.g. computer scientists require realistic ground truth and proofreadings (ground-truth data cannot do it alone, 2011) provided by life scientists to design and refine their analysis methods. vice versa, life scientists increasingly rely on algorithms or crowdsourced outputs in combination with proofreading tools to enable efficient analysis of very large image sets. bioimage informatics aims at developing software to ease the analysis of large-scale biomaging data . in recent years, several software have been developed including cellprofiler , catmaid , bisque , ilastik , icy , fiji , omero and bigdataviewer .the proposed software and its algorithms have already been applied to a wide variety of image types to accelerate discovery and to enable collaborative analysis. these results encourage its exploitation in many domains. however, in practical applications, obtaining satisfactory recognition performance using automatic algorithms depends on many factors including image variations (e.g. due to image acquisition and sample preparation protocols), and the quality and quantity of annotations provided for training (see e.g. empirical evaluations in supplementary note 4.2). although the combination of our algorithms and proof-editing tools enabled to derive relevant quantification results in various applications, it is important to note that further adaptation of algorithms or developing novel recognition algorithms might be needed for specific types of images or varying acquisition conditions. a key advantage of our platform is therefore its extensibility. indeed, our architecture enables computer scientists to add their novel software, register them to the cytominecore and launch them from cytomine-webui or from the command line. also, annotation objects created by each instance of a software are stored in the database and are available through web services. these can then be subsequently proofread, or retrieved through the api by other software for further analysis and creation of novel more precise annotation objects. this allows to create complex image analysis pipelines based on distributed software. it has to be noted that although the software allows visualization of 5d image planes (x,y,z,c,t), current applications cited in section 3 have involved independent analysis of 2d image planes only (e.g. fluorescent image planes in and tissue slices in . using our api based on web services, one is able to extend the software by designing analysis algorithms that integrate 5d information if needed, or to interoperate with existing software.cytomine is a versatile software for collaborative analysis of multigigapixel images as already demonstrated by its various applications. with our design choices, we also believe our platform will facilitate accessibility, curation and dissemination of imagingrelated data. in the future, it might be extended and tailored to support: (i) the setup of large-scale, multi-centric image repositories or the emergence of an imaging data bazaar to enable new research questions or validate results on larger cohorts, (ii) the organization of image analysis challenges on unprecedented benchmarks to foster image machine learning research, (iii) the crowdsourcing of image annotation tasks to tackle intractable datasets, (iv) the dissemination of multi-gigapixel imaging data and associated quantification results to support scientific claims of research papers and (v) increase the reproducibility of scientific results by providing a platform where published results are available along the algorithms and the image data. we have also started to derive the software for teaching purposes (see supplementary note 4.1.2).  
