combenefit: an interactive platform for the analysis and visualization of drug combinations motivation: many drug combinations are routinely assessed to identify synergistic interactions in the attempt to develop novel treatment strategies. appropriate software is required to analyze the results of these studies. results: we present combenefit, new free software tool that enables the visualization, analysis and quantification of drug combination effects in terms of synergy and/or antagonism. data from combinations assays can be processed using classical synergy models (loewe, bliss, hsa), as single experiments or in batch for high throughput screens. this user-friendly tool provides laboratory scientists with an easy and systematic way to analyze their data. the companion package provides bioinformaticians with critical implementations of routines enabling the processing of combination data. availability and implementation: combenefit is provided as a matlab package but also as stand-alone software for windows (http://sourceforge.net/projects/combenefit/).the combination of drugs is an important strategy to treat various diseases. the goal is to increase efficacy and, through the avoidance of overlapping toxicity, improve the therapeutic index of treatment . at the discovery stage, research often focuses on the identification of synergistic target effects using in vitro systems . large scale combination screens testing multiple pairwise combinations of drugs across different concentration ranges and cell lines are being performed with increasing frequency . typically, the doseresponse data generated during these experiments are then analyzed in terms of synergistic or antagonistic effects. free software were developed in the past but these are limited in terms of data handling and available options, particularly given high throughput screens (hts) requirements (http://www.combosyn.com/;). two recent commercial software packages offer advanced features such as automated analyses, choice from a variety of models, quality curve-fitting, variety of graphical displays and metrics quantification (chalice http://cwr.horizondiscovery.com; genedata https://www.genedata.com). there is a lack of free, advanced, scalable, software for the analysis of drug combinations. as part of the growing effort in the search of effective combinations, we present here combenefit (combinations benefit), a new software tool that enables the visualization, analysis and quantification of drug combination effects, in terms of synergy and/or antagonism, for single combination experiments but also hts as per commercial packages .  
