combined prediction of tat and sec signal peptides with hidden markov models motivation: computational prediction of signal peptides is of great importance in computational biology. in addition to the general secretory pathway (sec), bacteria, archaea and chloroplasts possess another major pathway that utilizes the twin-arginine translocase (tat), which recognizes longer and less hydrophobic signal peptides carrying a distinctive pattern of two consecutive arginines (rr) in the n-region. a major functional differentiation between the sec and tat export pathways lies in the fact that the former translocates secreted proteins unfolded through a protein-conducting channel, whereas the latter translocates completely folded proteins using an unknown mechanism. the purpose of this work is to develop a novel method for predicting and discriminating sec from tat signal peptides at better accuracy. results: we report the development of a novel method, pred-tat, which is capable of discriminating sec from tat signal peptides and predicting their cleavage sites. the method is based on hidden markov models and possesses a modular architecture suitable for both sec and tat signal peptides. on an independent test set of experimentally verified tat signal peptides, pred-tat clearly outperforms the previously proposed methods tatp and tatfind, whereas, when evaluated as a sec signal peptide predictor compares favorably to top-scoring predictors such as signalp and phobius. the method is freely available for academic users at http://www.compgen.org/tools/pred-tat/.in all domains of life (bacteria, eukarya and archaea), the majority of secreted proteins are synthesized as precursors that carry a cleavable n-terminal signal sequence. the signal peptide possesses a modular architecture with a positively charged region at the n-terminus (n-region), a hydrophobic region (h-region) that spans the membrane and a c-region of mostly small and uncharged residues ending at the characteristic cleavage site . the signal peptide is necessary for targeting the protein to to whom correspondence should be addressed. the membrane-embedded export machinery in bacteria , eukaryotes and archaea . upon translocation across the membrane, the signal peptide is cleaved from the precursor via a membrane-bound signal peptidase . in eukaryotes, proteins targeted to the organelles of bacterial origin (mitochondria and chloroplasts) also contain cleavable n-terminal targeting sequences, although they are in general different from those found in the eukaryotic or bacterial secreted proteins . in addition to the general export pathway (sec), bacteria, archaea and chloroplasts possess another major pathway that utilizes the twin-arginine translocase (tat). tat recognizes longer and less hydrophobic signal peptides carrying a distinctive pattern of two consecutive arginines (rr) in the n-region . a major functional differentiation between sec and tat export pathways lies in the fact that the former translocates secreted proteins unfolded through a protein-conducting channel, whereas the latter translocates completely folded proteins using an unknown mechanism . interestingly, in halophilic archaea, the components of the tat pathway are essential for viability and there is evidence that tat-dependent translocation is widely used as part of a mechanism for adaptation to extreme saline environments . computational prediction of signal peptides was performed initially using weight matrices . however, neural networks (nns) as well as hidden markov models (hmms;) introduced by the signalp method have been proven to be the most successful methods currently available . recently, signalp was retrained and, mainly due to better annotation and selection of the training set, yielded an even better accuracy . the phobius and philius methods followed a different approach in which a graphical model (hmm and bayesian network, respectively) was used to predict at the same time the presence of a secretory signal peptide and transmembrane (tm) topology of a given protein minimizing thus the number of signal peptides predicted as tm segments and vice versa. other methods such as lipop and pred-lipo were developed during the last years for predicting lipoprotein signal peptides, which possess a distinctive cleavage site with an indispensable cysteine responsible for anchoring to the membrane (;page: 2812 28112817) and discriminate them from secretory signal peptides. although most of the methods mentioned so far are capable, up to a certain degree, of predicting the tat signal peptides, only a few attempts were made toward predicting specifically this class of proteins. tatfind was presented initially combining regular expression patterns and hydrophobicity analysis , whereas few years later, tatp was presented using a combination of regular expression patterns and nns . tatp has been shown to be more reliable, whereas tatfind is not capable of predicting the cleavage site but only recognizes the existence of the n-and h-region. another problem is that these methods are not trained to discriminate at the same time tat from sec signal peptides and thus, there is a need for combining these predictors with a generic signal peptide predictor such as signalp. in this work, we present a novel method, pred-tat, based on hmms, which is capable of predicting and discriminating tat and sec signal peptides. we show that this new method is more accurate than the previously developed methods and additionally, compares favorably to the top-scoring methods for the prediction of sec signal peptides. the prediction method is available for non-commercial users at http://www.compgen.org/tools/pred-tat/ and we expect it to be useful to both experimentalists and bioinformaticians.the detailed results obtained from the hmm method (pred-tat) on the 30-fold cross-validation procedure are presented in the form of a confusion matrix in supplementary table 1a, whereas those concerning the independent test set in supplementary table 1b. in the cross-validation, the model performs very well correctly classifying the 148 out of the 150 tat signal peptides (98.67) and predicts falsely only 9 tat substrates (1.25, all are actually sec signal peptides), yielding this way an mcc equal to 0.96 . pred-tat in the cross-validation clearly outperforms the other available methods (tatp, tatfind and the profile hmms), being equally specific but far more sensitive even though the results obtained for these methods are not cross-validated (i.e. some of the proteins tested were previously used for training these methods). tatfind seems to perform better compared to tatp, a fact mainly caused by tatps lower specificity in excluding sec signal peptides. interestingly, the profile hmm that we created using hmmer (pred-tat hmmer ) outperforms both the other profile hmms as well as tatfind and tatp, being almost equally good to the custom hmm (pred-tat). concerning the sec signal peptides, pred-tat also produces satisfactory results predicting correctly the presence of a signal peptide in 315 out of the 328 proteins (96.04) and excludes non-signal peptides with a rate of 92.29, giving an overall mcc of 0.88 . these results compare favorably to those obtained by the other methods trained specifically page: 2814 28112817  
