data and text mining combining multiple approaches for gene microarray classification motivation: the microarray report measures the expressions of tens of thousands of genes, producing a feature vector that is high in dimensionality and that contains much irrelevant information. this dimensionality degrades classification performance. moreover, datasets typically contain few samples for training, leading to the curse of dimensionality problem. it is essential, therefore, to find good methods for reducing the size of the feature set. results: in this article, we propose a method for gene microarray classification that combines different feature reduction approaches for improving classification performance. using a support vector machine (svm) as our classifier, we examine an svm trained using a set of selected genes; an svm trained using the feature set obtained by neighborhood preserving embedding feature transform; a set of svms trained using a set of orthogonal wavelet coefficients of different wavelet mothers; a set of svms trained using texture descriptors extracted from the microarray, considering it as an image; and an ensemble that combines the best feature extraction methods listed above. the positive results reported offer confirmation that combining different features extraction methods greatly enhances system performance. the experiments were performed using several different datasets, and our results [expressed as both accuracy and area under the receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve] show the goodness of the proposed approach with respect to the state of the art. availability: the mathlab code of the proposed approach is publicly available at bias.dna microarray technology has proven to be an important breakthrough in molecular biology. this rapidly maturing technology is providing scientists with a means of monitoring the expression of genes on a genomic scale . one important application area is disease prognostication . benefits include the potential for identifying individual genes responsible for disease and for providing scientists with a more accurate means of diagnosis to whom correspondence should be addressed. and prognosis . largescale profiling of gene expression can reveal, for example, normal versus malignant cells and the genetic and cellular changes in the progression of tumor metastasis . the benefits offered by simultaneously monitoring tens of thousands of genes, however, depend on developing tools capable of handling not only the sheer size of this data but also the small number of samples usually available for analysis. machine learning systems are well suited for this problem, but they must be designed to handle high levels of noise, as only a small minority of genes is typically relevant for any given problem. the small sample size compared to the large number of features means that these systems must also contend with the dreaded curse of dimensionality . it would be very beneficial, therefore, if good methods for identifying these small sets of relevant genes could be developed. in the literature, gene selection methods have been organized into three categories: filter, wrapper and embedded methods . filter methods reveal dependencies without using classifiers and are based on statistical methods of ranking genes, e.g. t-statistics , class separability and fishers criterion . wrapper and embedded methods consider the mutual information among genes as well as its relevance . example classifiers used in wrapper methods include bayesian classifier , k-nearest neighbor and support vector machines (svms) . wrapper methods are much slower than filter methods because they search for optimal combinations of features/genes, but filter methods may not select the most optimal set of features. examples of embedded methods include one-norm svm , logistic regression , sparse logistic regression and methods based on regularization . an interesting embedded method is that developed by. they devised a genetic algorithm with fishers linear discriminant analysis (lda) as the fitness function that performed well across a number of databases using a small number of selected genes. most of these filter, wrapper and embedded methods are comparable in accuracy . several recent advances include reducing the sample set , using classifier ensembles , rather than single classifiers and using hybrid or multiple sets of different type ofthe goal of this study was to develop a robust ensemble of svm classifiers based on feature perturbation for microarray classification. the reported results of our experiments, expressed as both accuracy and auc, show that our approach performs very well across several datasets. our study examined an svm trained using a set of selected genes by fisher criterion, an svm trained using the feature set obtained by npe, a set of svms trained using a set of orthogonal wavelet coefficients of different wavelet mothers and a set of svms trained using texture descriptors extracted from the microarray, considering it as an image. the positive results we obtain compare well with those reported in the literature and provide further confirmation that ensembles of classifiers obtain more reliable results.in future studies, we plan on testing our approach using more datasets. we will also study combining additional methods in ensemble construction (e.g. combining our feature perturbation approaches with a pattern perturbation approach).  
