genome analysis comparative assembly hubs: web-accessible browsers for comparative genomics motivation: researchers now have access to large volumes of genome sequences for comparative analysis, some generated by the plethora of public sequencing projects and, increasingly, from individual efforts. it is not possible, or necessarily desirable, that the public genome browsers attempt to curate all these data. instead, a wealth of powerful tools is emerging to empower users to create their own visualizations and browsers. results: we introduce a pipeline to easily generate collections of web-accessible ucsc genome browsers interrelated by an alignment. it is intended to democratize our comparative genomic browser resources, serving the broad and growing community of evolutionary genomicists and facilitating easy public sharing via the internet. using the alignment, all annotations and the alignment itself can be efficiently viewed with reference to any genome in the collection, symmetrically. a new, intelligently scaled alignment display makes it simple to view all changes between the genomes at all levels of resolution, from substitutions to complex structural rearrangements, including duplications. to demonstrate this work, we create a comparative assembly hub containing 57 escherichia coli and 9 shigella genomes and show examples that highlight their unique biology. availability and implementation: the source code is available as open source at: https://github.com/glennhickey/progressivecactus the e.coli and shigella genome hub is now a public hub listed on the ucsc browser public hubs web page.visualization is key to understanding functional and comparative genomic information. genome browsers are therefore critical to the study of biology, providing accessible resources for displaying annotations and alignments. the ucsc genome browser is one of the most popular, but creating a reference genome browser for a new genome within it previously required significant resources, as it was necessary to create a mirror site to host the new reference browser separately, or to work with the staff of the genome browser to create a new reference browser within their main site. assembly hubs , which build on the successful track hub model , make it easy to generate an individual ucsc browser simply by hosting the data in the form of flat files on any publicly addressable url. this avoids users having to install and configure the substantial browser code base on their machines and, by using user hosting, makes updating straightforward. however, with access to low-cost sequencing technology and the wealth of genomes already available, users increasingly want to be able to create not only a single custom browser, but also sets of genome browsers. this work is intended to meet that growing need; it extends assembly hubs to allow users to quickly create comparative assembly hubs, a framework of multiple genome browsers and annotations interrelated by an alignment. as part of this development, we introduce a series of novel features intended to improve visualization, exploration and community sharing of novel comparative genomics data. displaying multiple genome alignments is extremely challenging owing to both the high dimensionality and volume of the underlying data. there are currently three main ways to visualize multiple genome alignments: dot plots [e.g. dagchainer , vistadot (, circle plots [e.g. circos , genomering (and linear, row-oriented representations [e.g. vista , jalview , igv (. each of these visualization methods has benefits and weaknesses. dots plots, having two dimensions, provide equivalently powerful representations of two genomes in one graphic; however, they are pairwise and therefore unsuitable for the display of multiple genome alignments. circular genome plots are typically less visually cluttered than linear representations for viewing genomic rearrangements, but are less useful for the display of global multiple sequence alignments, as might be shown at the gene or base level. linear representations have the advantage that they fit neatly with the genome browser displays and tracks, and are flexible, in that they work reasonably at multiple levels of resolution. here we introduce a new linear displaythe snake track that, to our knowledge, is the first linear representation to to whom correspondence should be addressed.we first describe the software pipeline for building comparative assembly hubs, before describing them by example using an alignment of e.coli and shigella genomes.  
