gene expression comparative study of rna-seq-and microarray-derived coexpression networks in arabidopsis thaliana motivation: coexpression networks are data-derived representations of genes behaving in a similar way across tissues and experimental conditions. they have been used for hypothesis generation and guilt-by-association approaches for inferring functions of previously unknown genes. so far, the main platform for expression data has been dna microarrays; however, the recent development of rna-seq allows for higher accuracy and coverage of transcript populations. it is therefore important to assess the potential for biological investigation of coexpression networks derived from this novel technique in a condition-independent dataset. results: we collected 65 publicly available illumina rna-seq high quality arabidopsis thaliana samples and generated pearson correlation coexpression networks. these networks were then compared with those derived from analogous microarray data. we show how variance-stabilizing transformed (vst) rna-seq data samples are the most similar to microarray ones, with respect to inter-sample variation, correlation coefficient distribution and network topological architecture. microarray networks show a slightly higher score in biology derived quality assessments such as overlap with the known proteinprotein interaction network and edge ontological agreement. different coexpression network centralities are investigated; in particular , we show how betweenness centrality is generally a positive marker for essential genes in a.thaliana, regardless of the platform originating the data. in the end, we focus on a specific gene network case, showing that although microarray data seem more suited for gene network reverse engineering, rna-seq offers the great advantage of extending coexpression analyses to the entire transcriptome.the comprehensive understanding of the functional molecular mechanisms in the cell is a major challenge of modern biology . network representations have been successfully used to capture various cellular relationships, ranging from proteinprotein interactions to gene regulations and metabolic conversions . in these networks, biological entities (e.g. genes, proteins and metabolites) are represented as nodes, and their interactions are represented as edges. biological networks can be assembled either by gathering all existing experimental knowledge over relationships between these entities , or alternatively, when this kind of data is missing, they can be reconstructed by educated inferences based on data profiles . the latter approach, often dubbed biological network reverse engineering has great cost and time advantages over, for instance, classical forward genetics approaches, as it allows to reduce the experimental investigation to a subset of candidates potentially involved in a particular biological process . in the specific case of reverse-engineered gene networks, the last decade has witnessed an avalanche in the availability of transcript expression data, provided mainly by microarray data , which has in turn fueled the generation of coexpression networks . coexpression networks are undirected graph representations of transcriptional co-behaviour between genes within an organism. in such graphs, genes are connected by edges representing the similarity in their expression pattern across several experiments in which both genes are quantified. these similarities are usually calculated by simple methods like pearson correlation (d) or by more sophisticated approaches such as mutual information or linear modelling . a significance value is usually associated to each edge to estimate the amount of coexpression between any gene pair; in the case of pearson correlation, this value is the pearson correlation coefficient (pcc), which ranges from 1 (perfect negative linear coexpression) to 1 (perfect positive linear coexpression), whereas 0 (no correlation) signifies the overall lack of linear relationships between the transcript quantities of the two genes . coexpression networks have been widely generated and exploited in studies aimed at the identification of novel gene functions via the guilt-by-association paradigm , which assumes that similar expression patterns correspond to similar functions, times of activation or cellular compartments . noteworthy successes of this approach have been obtained, for example, in identifying novel genes involved in plant cell wall synthesis , starch metabolism and in the human b-cell leukaemia signal transduction . at the same time, several standalone coexpression tools have been developed (to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com together with freely accessible online databases . coexpression networks have also been studied topologically, generally showing a modular structure and a scale-free distribution of their connectivity (barabasi), meaning that most genes have a small number of coexpressors, while a few genes behave as coexpression hubs. however, the vast majority of these studies have neglected the growing availability of rna-seq datasets, which provide several potential advantages over microarrays . first of all, rna-seq does not require prior knowledge of the studied organism, extending its usage even to poorly characterized organisms , both for standard purposes (transcriptome definition and differential gene expression) and for any derived application (such as sample clustering or coexpression analysis). furthermore, rna-seq allows for the identification of all transcripts, whereas microarrays usually cover only a subset of the transcriptome. for example, in arabidopsis thaliana, the most used microarray for quantitative transcriptomics , the affymetrix ath1, covers reliably and unambiguously only 21 377 genes [based on the most recent customcdf annotation (, which is only a subset of the entire genome [27 416 genes in the tair10 annotation release (. finally, rna-seq has the potential to detect novel transcribed loci on annotated genomes , splicing variants and allele-specific events , massively increasing the investigative capability over these molecular phenomena. in the present study, we try to determine whether rna-seq data can be efficiently used for coexpression analysis. to do so, we derive coexpression networks from a set of 65 high quality illumina-based rna-seq a.thaliana experiments, and compare them with those extracted from biologically analogous and equally sized microarray data. we determine the nature of these networks, both biologically and topologically, with an overview on different network centralities and their association with gene essentiality in arabidopsis. finally, we focus on two specific gene cases, showing how the increased detection range of rna-seq can indeed cover missing areas of the coexpression networks.our results describe the first large scale (65 samples) attempt to use rna-seq data collected from multiple tissues and experimental conditions for gene network reverse engineering. we show that coexpression networks generated from this novel technology are indeed realistic and accurate, with accuracy increasing together with network stringency, validating the assumption that rna-seq-based coexpression is a better-thanrandom selector of real biological relationships (supplementary file s6). however, our results show that microarray-based coexpression networks based on simple correlation achieve a higher similarity to biological networks, and at the same time show a low overlap with rna-seq-based representations . unexpectedly, although arabidopsis coexpression networks are generally positive predictors of proteinprotein interactions, the overlap is quite small and associated to weak mccs in all cases . all rna-seq networks show a scale-free topology as previously noted on a smaller dataset , but no rna-seq dataset allowed to reach microarray-like network qualities, neither as raw counts nor after two popular normalization procedures (rpkm and vst) (and 3 and). vst-normalized data possess microarray-like behaviour with regards to correlation coefficient distribution and topological network properties (size and degree distribution,and e). amongst rna-seq data, vst networks also possess the highest proximity to microarray networks detected by hierarchical clustering (supplementary file s4) and edge intersection (supplementary file s10). rpkm and raw count networks, perhaps owing to the heteroscedasticity of these types of data , differ more markedly from microarray networks than vst networks. we also find that coexpression network betweenness centrality can be calculated from rna-seq data and used as a positive marker for a.thaliana essential genes . the task of identifying essential genes has been called the most important task of genomics-based target validation , as these genes are extremely important not only to understand the minimal requirements for life , but also because they are excellent drug targets . another important application of coexpression analysis is in the identification of novel genes and novel gene functions. to this respect, we show how rna-seq data can be complementary to microarray data in describing the functional neighbourhood of a pectin metabolism gene or to confirm the connection with jasmonate of a poorly characterized putative transcription factor (supplementary file s11). there are at least 6953 a.thaliana genes annotated on the tair10 genome but not represented by any probeset on the affymetrix ath1 microarray platform; 3578 of these genes have no functional annotation neither experimentally inferred, nor predicted in silico which gives rna-seq the unique possibility to functionally investigate a previously uncovered portion of the transcriptome. this potential can indeed be transposed to other organisms as well, given the fair conservation of coexpression across species, at least in the plant kingdom . all data investigated in this article are preloaded and can be freely analysed by the corto coexpression tool. despite its obvious advantages, the unexpected relative underperformance of rna-seq versus microarrays in network reconstruction raises an important caveat on its direct usability for coexpression analysis, at least by the simple pearson correlation criteria used in this work. the creation of novel approaches to properly normalize and interpret gene count correlations generated by next-generation sequencing will pose a future fundamental challenge for coexpression investigators.  
