genome analysis act: aggregation and correlation toolbox for analyses of genome tracks we have implemented aggregation and correlation toolbox (act), an efficient, multifaceted toolbox for analyzing continuous signal and discrete region tracks from high-throughput genomic experiments, such as rna-seq or chip-chip signal profiles from the encode and modencode projects, or lists of single nucleotide polymorphisms from the 1000 genomes project. it is able to generate aggregate profiles of a given track around a set of specified anchor points, such as transcription start sites. it is also able to correlate related tracks and analyze them for saturationi.e. how much of a certain feature is covered with each new succeeding experiment. the act site contains downloadable code in a variety of formats, interactive web servers (for use on small quantities of data), example datasets, documentation and a gallery of outputs. here, we explain the components of the toolbox in more detail and apply them in various contexts.there is now an abundance of genome-sized data from highthroughput genomic experiments. for instance, there are chip-chip, chip-seq and rna-seq experiments from the encode (encode project) and modencode (modencode consortium, 2009) projects. there are also genome sequence data that can be used to generate tracks measuring sequence content, such as the densities of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) from dbsnp and the 1000 genomes project. in most cases, the representations of these data take the form of either signal tracks that describe a genomic landscape or distinct region tracks that tag portions of the genome as active. the aggregation and correlation toolbox (act) provides a powerful set of programs that to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint first authors. can be applied to any experiments producing data in these formats. the ability to analyze multiple genomic datasets is important, as demonstrated by tools like galaxy . act provides a unique set of functionality that complements existing methods of analysis.there are number of additional analyses that can be done to finetune the output of act. for instance, it is possible to use the online genomic signal aggregator (gsa), which assigns each genomic position to the nearest anchor in order to reduce the artifacts caused page: 1154 11521154  
