comparing genome-wide chromatin profiles using chip-chip or chip-seq motivation: chip-chip and chip-seq technologies provide genome-wide measurements of various types of chromatin marks at an unprecedented resolution. with chip samples collected from different tissue types and/or individuals, we can now begin to characterize stochastic or systematic changes in epigenetic patterns during development (intra-individual) or at the population level (inter-individual). this requires statistical methods that permit a simultaneous comparison of multiple chip samples on a global as well as locus-specific scale. current analytical approaches are mainly geared toward single sample investigations, and therefore have limited applicability in this comparative setting. this shortcoming presents a bottleneck in biological interpretations of multiple sample data. results: to address this limitation, we introduce a parametric classification approach for the simultaneous analysis of two (or more) chip samples. we consider several competing models that reflect alternative biological assumptions about the global distribution of the data. inferences about locus-specific and genome-wide chromatin differences are reached through the estimation of multivariate mixtures. parameter estimates are obtained using an incremental version of the expectationmaximization algorithm (iem). we demonstrate efficient scalability and application to three very diverse chip-chip and chip-seq experiments. the proposed approach is evaluated against several published chip-chip and chip-seq software packages. we recommend its use as a first-pass algorithm to identify candidate regions in the epigenome, possibly followed by some type of second-pass algorithm to fine-tune detected peaks in accordance with biological or technological criteria. availability: r source code is available at http://gbic.biol.rug.nl/ supplementary/2009epigenetic modifications such as methylation of dna or histones are associated with the transcriptional output of genes. hence, they occupy a central role in genome function. the use of chromatin immunoprecipitation techniques coupled with tiling-arrays (chip-chip) or deep sequencing (chip-seq) now permit a detailed characterization of various types of chromatin marks on a genome-wide scale. global surveys of this type have been mainly conducted in the context of a single genome analyses . however, to begin to understand the epigenetic basis of biological variation, detailed comparisons of chromatin profiles between different tissues and/or individuals are becoming increasingly important. such comparative studies can be broadly divided into those that are concerned with intra-individual variation and those concerned with inter-individual variation. the goal of intra-individual analysis is the detection of key chromatin modifications that are associated with, or possibly drive, normative processes such as tissue development., for instance, recently compared mammalian cells across several stages of differentiation in order to map the genome-wide changes in dna methylation and several histone marks that reflect this progression. the focus of inter-individual comparisons, in contrast, rests on the analysis of chromatin differences between individuals for a given tissue . this is accomplished by either treating each individual as a separate unit of analysis, or by comparing pooled tissue from individuals that belong to a priori well-defined groups. a clear example for this latter type of application comes from oncology studies where cancerous tissues from patients are directly evaluated against normal tissue from healthy individuals . apart from clinically relevant inter-individual differences, attention has recently shifted to naturally occurring chromatin variation . a recent survey of several arabidopsis ecotypes, for instances, has revealed substantial variation in genomewide dna methylation patterns, part of which has been shown to be stably transmitted across generations .this latter observation suggests that many of the experimental populations that are derived from these ecotypes and used for genetic mapping experiments, such as f 2-intercrosses or recombinant inbred lines (rils), could segregate a source of epigenetic variation that impacts many commonly studied complex traits, independent of dna sequence polymorphisms . in light of this possibility, we have argued for a genome-wide characterization of available parental lines to identify those that are most divergent on the level of chromatin . such lines can be used to obtain epigenetically informative line crosses, which could become the basis for the dissection of the epigenetic architecture underlying continuous trait variation. the above intra-and inter-individual applications share a common problem: they require a methodological approach that permits a meaningful partition of the epigenome into regions with differentially enrichment (rde), regions with shared enrichment (rse) and regions with shared non-enrichment (rsne) for a chromatin mark of interest (and supplementary). in many practical situations, researchers are interested in comparing a small number of chip samples, possibly as low as two, each sample being presented by one tiling array or sequencing experiment. small numbers of samples are common because of financial constraints, or because they represent pilot studies. most available software packages for the analysis of chip-chip or chip-seq data have been designed for single genome (i.e. single chip sample) investigations and therefore have limited application in this setting (supplementary tables s1 and s2). in an attempt to overcome these limitations, we introduce a parametric classification method based on multivariate mixture models. the approach permits a direct comparison of two (or more) chip samples . its unique feature lies in the characterization of the global distribution of the data in accordance with several plausible biological models. at the same time, it provides probabilistic estimates of locus-specific chromatin states. to ease computational demands, we implement an incremental version of the expectationmaximization (iem) algorithm. we illustrate our approach in the context of two published chip-chip experiments and one unpublished chip-seq experiment. we highlight the utility of our approach in terms of the biology of each example dataset. we also evaluate our approach against several published chip-chip and chip-seq software packages.we presented a parametric classification method for genome-wide comparisons of chromatin profiles between multiple chip samples. for simplicity, we focused our discussion on the special case of a two-sample comparison. extensions to additional dimensions are possible. the number of components that have to be considered to capture the rde structure between additional conditions increases at a rate 2 d , where d denotes the number of conditions involved in the comparison. while the interpretation of the classification results becomes increasingly complex, the actual modeling benefits greatly from the imposed parameter constraints so that the number of parameters to be estimated increases at a much slower rate.  
