comparison of approaches for parameter identifiability analysis of biological systems motivation: modeling of dynamical systems using ordinary differential equations is a popular approach in the field of systems biology. the amount of experimental data that are used to build and calibrate these models is often limited. in this setting, the model parameters may not be uniquely determinable. structural or a priori identifiability is a property of the system equations that indicates whether, in principle, the unknown model parameters can be determined from the available data. results: we performed a case study using three current approaches for structural identifiability analysis for an application from cell biology. the approaches are conceptually different and are developed independently. the results of the three approaches are in agreement. we discuss strength and weaknesses of each of them and illustrate how they can be applied to real world problems. availability and implementation: for application of the approaches to further applications, code representations (daisy, mathematica and matlab) for benchmark model and data are provided on the authors webpage.the dynamics of cellular processes such as signal transduction pathways can be described by models consisting of ordinary differential equations (odes). we used a model of il13-induced jak/stat signaling to present a comprehensive comparison of three approaches for structural identifiability analysis. mathematically, such dynamical models can be characterized by the ode _ xt fxt, ut, h with x0 x 0 gh 1 in this case, the vector of state variables xt describes the dynamics of 15 molecular components involved in the jak/stat signaling pathway (for details see equation (3)). the function ut represents possibly time-dependent experimental treatments; in this case it represents a constant treatment with the cytokine il13. the vector h contains all parameters of the dynamical model, such as the reaction rate constants. for a specific cell type or biological context, the parameters h are often not available from literature and have to be estimated from experimental data. the initial concentrations x 0 can be known or unknown; in the latter case they have to be estimated from experimental data as well. each possible measurement is mathematically represented by a functional mapping yt hxt, ut, h 2 that might include additional parameters and thus increase the dimension of h, such as scaling parameter for relative data obtained by immunoblotting in our case. the inference problem of concern is the determination of the model parameters h from the measurements y and inputs u described by equation (2). in general, this may not be possible. structural or a priori identifiability (bellman and a stromstrom, 1970) is a property of the systems (1) and (2) that guarantees that the unknown model parameters can, in principle, be determined from generic input and output functions of the model, provided they satisfy certain minimal conditions called persistence of excitation [for a broad introduction and classical approaches. structural identifiability is a prerequisite and necessary condition for any estimation procedure to render the recovery of h from inputoutput measurements as a well-posed problem and to return meaningful results about h. well-known approaches to structural identifiability analysis often have problems with the realistically sized models , but there are approaches that can handle them. let us consider a simple model for the illustration of structural identifiability. the model describes a transition between two componentswe assume that x 1 0 2 and x 2 0 0, and only the measurement y 1 t 3 x 2 t, are available. in this case, we can solve for to whom correspondence should be addressed.shows that 3 and 2 are structurally non-identifiable. 1 and only the product of 3 and 2 are structurally identifiable. such redundant parameterization can be detected directly for very simple examples. for analysis of realistic models, one has to resort to more sophisticated approaches. we compared three current conceptually different approaches for identifiability analysis using the model and data of raia et al.we present results on the identifiability for the benchmark model using the three approaches described in the section 2: thethe results of all three approaches are in good agreement for the benchmark application considered here. five of 23 parameters are consistently classified as structurally non-identifiable. the procedure to reproduce and interpret the results obtained by each of the three approaches was presented and can serve as reference for further application. the strength of the daisy approach is to check for global identifiability, i.e. it checks the uniqueness of the parameter solution. thus, it is able to distinguish between global and local identifiability. being based on differential algebra methods, daisy can directly deal only with polynomial or rational functions f and h. however, the method can be generalized to deal with some non-polynomial functions, e.g. exponential functions. although the program is usually very fast, in the order of few seconds, for complex models the algorithm may not successfullyterminate because of a lack of memory of the system. in most cases, however, it is possible to simplify the calculations required by the algorithm by eliminating redundant model equations by hand. this was done for the benchmark application considered here. the main advantage of the ear approach is that it is fast and can handle large and complex systems. the system analyzed in this article is considered small and simple for this approach. systems on the scale of 100 states and 100 parameters can be handled. one limitation of the ear approach is that it requires the vector valued functions f, g and h to be rational functions of their arguments. this limitation is not as restrictive as it may first sound, however, as it can be shown that any function, which in itself is the solution to an equation such as (1), can be handled through an extended state space approach . even if-statements can be closely approximated using rational functions. the strength of the pl approach is that it does not pose any restrictions on the algebraic form of the model equations. even non-algebraic constructs such as if-statements or constraints on the parameters or model dynamics can be handled. it also allows for statements on practical identifiability and confidence intervals. besides the structurally non-identifiable parameters, six parameters are practically non-identifiable considering the data available from. however, owing to the underlying parameter estimation problem, issues such as local minima have to be handled with care. in such case, it might be necessary to repeat profile calculations for multiple minima detected in the objective function to enhance robustness of the results .. likelihood profiles for all 23 model parameters. the parameters are allowed to vary between 5 and 3 on a log 10-scale. the mle point is indicated by asterisks. the red dashed line corresponds to a threshold that indicates a 95 confidence level. the points of pass-over of profile and threshold determine likelihood-based confidence intervals. perfectly flat profiles reveal five structural non-identifiable parameters: cd274mrna_production, socs3_accumulation, socs3mrna_production, scale_cd274mrna_obs and scale_socs3mrna_obs. in addition, profiles that have a unique minimum but do not cross the confidence threshold reveal six practically non-identifiable parameters: decoyr_binding, socs3_degradation, socs3_translation, prec_degradation, prec_intern and scale_pil4ra_obs. the remaining parameters are both structurally and practically identifiable and have finite confidence intervalsthe presented approaches allow for comparable and reliable conclusions about structural identifiability and can readily be used in systems biology applications. software implementation of all approaches is freely available. it is important and good practice to double check results with different, but comparable, approaches. here, we provide a case study that can serve as reference and hand-on guide to apply and interpret the results of three current approaches to structural identifiability analysis. the results of identifiability analysis can be helpful to provide guidelines on how to simplify the model structure or design additional experiments that enhance the predictive power of a mathematical model. all three approaches examined in this paper are useful for real application examples. in many cases, all three approaches work equally well, but in some cases one of the three is preferred. if the system is very large and/or if the analysis must be fast, then ear is the preferred approach. if it is of importance to get truly global identifiability, daisy is the preferred approach. if practical identifiability is important, or if the equations include nonrational expressions like if-statements, then pl should be used. using combinations of approaches can sometimes give the strengths of all approaches to the analysis.  
