bioinformatics discovery note systems biology comparison of the mammalian insulin signalling pathway to invertebrates in the context of foxo-mediated ageing motivation: a large number of experimental studies on ageing focus on the effects of genetic perturbations of the insulin/insulin-like growth factor signalling pathway (iis) on lifespan. short-lived invertebrate laboratory model organisms are extensively used to quickly identify ageing-related genes and pathways. it is important to extrapolate this knowledge to longer lived mammalian organisms, such as mouse and eventually human, where such analyses are difficult or impossible to perform. computational tools are needed to integrate and manipulate pathway knowledge in different species. results: we performed a literature review and curation of the iis and target of rapamycin signalling pathways in mus musculus. we compare this pathway model to the equivalent models in drosophila mel-anogaster and caenorhabtitis elegans. although generally well-conserved, they exhibit important differences. in general, the worm and mouse pathways include a larger number of feedback loops and interactions than the fly. we identify functional orthologues that share similar molecular interactions, but have moderate sequence similarity. finally, we incorporate the mouse model into the web-service neteffects and perform in silico gene perturbations of iis components and analyses of experimental results. we identify sub-paths that, given a mutation in an iis component, could potentially antagonize the primary effects on ageing via foxo in mouse and via skn-1 in worm. finally, we explore the effects of foxo knockouts in three different mouse tissues. availability and implementation: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/ software/neteffectsthe insulin/insulin-like growth factor signalling pathway (iis) and the target of rapamycin (tor) signalling pathway have been shown to be important regulators of ageing across species via the transcription factor foxo . the mechanisms by which foxo increased activity leads to lifespan extension are still unclear. however, it is thought that lifespan extension is achieved through cell-cycle arrest by foxo in the absence of insulin signalling (van der). in addition, identification of foxo transcriptional targets has revealed a second tier of transcription factors regulating a variety of downstream responses . ageing via the iis pathway has been intensively studied at the level of invertebrate model laboratory organisms. with their short lifespans, well-described genomes and a variety of mutants already available, drosophila melanogaster and caenorhabtitis elegans provide excellent frameworks for fast identification of genetic determinants of ageing. relating results from fly and worm to a longer lived mammalian model, such as mus musculus , is critical for the understanding of the ageing processes in human, but it is often difficult owing to the large evolutionary distance between invertebrates and mammals. the general flow of the pathway is as follows. the insulin and insulin growth factor receptors can be activated by two different insulin molecules or two insulin-like growth factor molecules. on activation, the two receptors can activate the insulin receptor substrates (irs1-4) by tyrosine phosphorylation. the role of irs1 especially has been well examined and found to propagate the signal further downstream, via the pi3k complex. the phospholipid products of pi3k [phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate (pip3)], once produced, can activate phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (pdk1) that leads to the activation of akt/protein kinase b-like proteins (akt1-3, with akt1 being well studied) and serum and glucocorticoid-inducible kinases (sgk1-3). akt1 and the sgk1-3 kinases inhibit the activity of the forkhead transcription factors foxo by retaining them in the cytoplasm. the iis pathway is generally well conserved, with the main building blocks (insr, pi3k, pdk1, akt, foxo) present in both mammals and invertebrates. the tor pathway is also well conserved with its main building blocks present (tor complexes 1 and 2, rheb, s6 kinase). important differences also exist. there are seven known insulin molecules in the fly, as opposed to 40 in the worm. in the mouse, there are two insulin and two insulin-like growth factors. flies and worms possess a single insulin receptor each, whereas mice possess two insulin-like growth factor receptors in addition to the insulin receptor. in mice, we to whom correspondence should be addressed.the molecular basis of nutrient signalling is largely comparable across a large evolutionary space, despite striking differences in the presence or number of copies of certain components between species. the pathways, in all organisms except worm focus only on foxo-mediated lifespan, thereby ignoring any effects through different transcription factors. however, using the mouse pathway, we can identify neighbouring signalling pathways with the potential to influence the signal transduction of the iis through the identified cross-talk points. comparison of the pathways in a systematic and qualitative way has the potential to explain differences in effects on lifespan across species and help design experiments that will evaluate the pathway flux. the richness and detail of the mammalian model can inform the interpretation of results in invertebrates, where molecular interactions have not been so extensively studied. being able to compare the pathways side by side, we recorded all differences and identified functional orthologues. by use of neteffects, we were able to suggest possible paths affecting foxo-mediated. shortest paths to foxo-mediated longevity, derived from neteffects, where daf-16 is the foxo orthologue in c.elegans 3002 lifespan given a single mutation and how these differ across species, thus generating hypotheses for further investigation.  
