genome analysis compasss (complex pattern of sequence search software), a simple and effective tool for mining complex motifs in whole genomes motivation: the complete sequencing of the human genome shows that only 1 of the entire genome encodes for proteins. the major part of the genome is made up of non-coding dna, regulatory elements and junk dna. transcriptional regulation plays a central role in a multitude of critical cellular processes and responses, and it is a central force in the development and differentiation of multicellular organisms. identifying regulatory elements is one of the major tasks in this challenge. to accomplish this task, we developed a solid and simple suite that allows direct access to genomic database and immediate result check. we introduce compasss (complex pattern of sequence search software), a simple and effective tool for motif search in entire genomes. motifs can be partially degenerated and interrupted by spacers of variable length. results: we demonstrate through real biological data mining the simplicity and robustness of this tool. the test was performed on two well-known protein domains and a highly variable cis-acting element. compasss successfully identifies both protein domains and cis-acting semi-conserved elements.understanding the significance of unannotated dna sequences from genome projects is one of the major challenges, nowadays. interpretation of the genetic code allowed to discover over 30 000 protein-coding genes in the human genome (international human). however, the major part of the genomes is not made up of genes encoding for proteins . the genetic code can be transcribed in non-coding rna or it can be constituted of cis-acting regulatory sequences such as promoters, enhancers and other elements that affect gene expression and alternative splicing . moreover, most of the genomes are constituted by intergenic sequences that may have a regulatory role, but are defined as junk dna because we are unable to understand its function, yet. nowadays, the availability of a wide range of genome sequences has greatly accelerated research to decipher the genomic regulatory code. to clarify the cryptic nature of the human genome, the encode (the encyclopedia of dna elements) research consortium has been launched. functional elements in the human genome will be shared in a public database . the pilot phase of the project tested and compared existing methods to analyze a small portion of the human genome sequence (1). now the project has been scaled to the entire human genome. in silico motif search within dna sequences is one of the most challenging problems in molecular biology and computer science and there is a large body of work done in developing search algorithms. however, each of these approaches has its own strengths and weaknesses, while the quality of the detected motifs may vary from case to case . in this work, we propose a simple and effective tool named compasss (complex pattern of sequence search software) that allows mining whole genomes for the presence of complex elements. the tool is user-friendly, flexible, not resource intensive and capable of browse whole genomes in minutes. compasss applies the well-known wu-manber multiple pattern matching algorithm to exhaustively search for motifs in the entire sequence. input elements can be simple conserved sequences (as in blast engine), partially or highly degenerated sequences, or even multiple degenerated sequences, joined by poorly conserved variable length spacers. we successfully tested compasss against three experimentally validated complex patterns, providing evidences that the tool successfully identifies both protein domains as well as cis-acting semi-conserved elements.to evaluate the effectiveness of the algorithm, tests were performed on actual biological data. in particular, we focused our attention on two semi-conserved protein domains and a cis-acting element: the human globin gene family, the mammalian pou-domain transcription factors, and the tp53 responsive elements. in order to define the signature of each input motif, clustalw algorithm was run and a multiple alignment of known target regions was obtained. thus, conserved and degenerated bases were identified and input motif was defined. the human globin gene family input motif was composed of three degenerated sequences, separated by two conserved spacers (ctgcacks13,2gtggaycc12,0ggtg) and designed to recognize the second exon of the alpha and beta locus. the software successfully identifies both the alpha and beta globin genes. the pou domain motif consists of a bipartite motif on the c-terminal region of the pouh domain . the two degenerated sequences of the pou motif are separated by a spacer of a fixed length of 5 bp. the input motif was mgngtbtggttytgyaa5,1gvcarr. a search against the entire homo sapiens genome results in a complete list of all known members of the pou domain family, plus two genes with high affinity and homology with the pou domain family. the tetrameric p53 protein binds to two repeats of a consensus dna sequence composed by two conserved pairs each arranged as inverted complement elements separated by a variable spacer region . with the compasss suite, we searched for all p53 regulatory motives throughout the entire human genome using the input data rrrcwwgyyy7,7nrrcwwgyyn. the software identified most of the experimentally validated p53 responsive elements. detailed results can be found in supplementary material.  
