gene expression compcoder—an r package for benchmarking differential expression methods for rna-seq data compcoder is an r package for benchmarking of differential expression analysis methods, in particular, methods developed for analyzing rna-seq data. the package provides functionality for simulating realistic rna-seq count datasets, an interface to several of the most commonly used differential expression analysis methods and extensive functionality for evaluating and comparing different approaches on real and simulated data. availability and implementation: compcoder is available fromtranscriptome profiling studies using rna-seq with the goal of finding genes that are differentially expressed (de) between conditions are abundant in the current scientific literature and can be expected to become even more so, as next-generation sequencing technology becomes cheaper and more accessible. rna-seq experiments generate millions of short reads, which are aligned to a reference sequence to yield a quantitative measure of the expression levels of a collection of genes or other features. typically, the processed data are represented as a count matrix, which constitutes the input for many differential expression methods. in the past few years, many novel differential expression methods applicable to count matrices obtained from rna-seq experiments have been presented (for example,). at this point, both users and developers of such methods would thus greatly benefit from objective and standardized benchmarking and characterization of new and existing approaches. a few comparison studies have been published (e.g.). however, the fast pace at which new and updated methods are being presented and the varying objectives of the users create a need for a tool that makes it easy to evaluate and compare a collection of methods from many different aspects in a standardized way. in this applications note, we present such a tool. compcoder (comparison of count-based differential expression analysis methods with r) is a benchmarking r package that, in a few steps, lets the user evaluate and compare differential expression methods using an approach similar to the one used by soneson and delorenzi (2013). accompanying the package is a large collection of simulated and real-world benchmarking datasets, together with differential expression results obtained by 420 different approaches (available from http://bcf.isb-sib.ch/data/compcoder). the exact r code used to run each differential expression analysis is included and can be rerun to reproduce the results. taken together, the package provides users with a pedagogical interface to understand and compare differential expression methods, and gives developers an accessible tool for standardized benchmarking of newly developed approaches.  
