genome analysis completemotifs: dna motif discovery platform for transcription factor binding experiments completemotifs (cmotifs) is an integrated web tool developed to facilitate systematic discovery of overrepresented transcription factor binding motifs from high-throughput chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments. comprehensive annotations and boolean logic operations on multiple peak locations enable users to focus on genomic regions of interest for de novo motif discovery using tools such as meme, weeder and chipmunk. the pipeline incorporates a scanning tool for known motifs from transfac and jaspar databases, and performs an enrichment test using local or precalculated background models that significantly improve the motif scanning result. furthermore, using the cmotifs pipeline, we demonstrated that multiple transcription factors could cooperatively bind to the upstream of important stem cell differentiation regulators. availability:gene expression is a complex process that is coordinately regulated by interactions of multiple transcription factors (tfs) and other proteins that form promoter and enhancer complexes. the recent development of next-generation sequencing technologies has made it possible to determine in vivo and in vitro bindings of diverse tfs on a genomic scale (i.e. chip-seq). one immediate question is whether the peak regions are functionally associated with the transcriptional regulation of target genes. an indication of such functional associations is the presence of loci occupied by multiple tfs or highly conserved sequences across species . hence, an important step towards understanding functional binding events is to study the presence of dna sequence motifs in the context of nearby tfs, genomic features and epigenetic modifications. to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors.there are several challenges in finding motifs in peak regions identified from tf binding experiments. in the case where only a subset of chip-seq peaks has common motifs, de novo discovery tools might not be optimal. scanning for known motifs is faster and capable of detecting motifs that appear less frequently; however, the relatively short (425 bp) nature of protein-binding motifs can produce non-significant results. many tools such as gimmemotifs (van), tmod and moan have been deployed to identify sequence motifs, while rsat and galaxy provide more comprehensive means to analyse regulatory sequences in general. each method has its own strength in identifying potential transcription factor binding site (tfbs); however, it is crucial to combine results from complementary tools and provide an intuitive interface that streamlines peak annotation, filtering, motif discovery and summary. completemotifs (cmotifs) was developed to provide biologists an easy to use yet comprehensive web tool for chip-seq data analysis. first, peak regions are annotated with comprehensive genomic information such as known genes, conservation scores and repeating sequence elements. second, boolean logic operations such as intersection and union can combine multiple datasets from different tf bindings or histone modification states. using the annotation and boolean operations, users can filter and combine peak lists from one or multiple experiments, facilitating the study of cooperative tf binding events . third, combining the top 10 ranked motifs from three de novo methods and known motif scanning using background models helps to identify novel or known tfbs of interest as well as possible co-factor binding sites.  
