complex heatmaps reveal patterns and correlations in multidimensional genomic data parallel heatmaps with carefully designed annotation graphics are powerful for efficient visualization of patterns and relationships among high dimensional genomic data. here we present the complexheatmap package that provides rich functionalities for customizing heatmaps, arranging multiple parallel heatmaps and including user-defined annotation graphics. we demonstrate the power of complexheatmap to easily reveal patterns and correlations among multiple sources of information with four real-world datasets. availability and implementation: the complexheatmap package and documentation are freely available from the bioconductor projectheatmaps are a fundamental visualization method that is broadly used to unravel patterns hidden in genomic data. they are especially popular for gene expression analysis and methylation profiling . with the increasing availability of genomic datasets, visualization methods that effectively show relations within multidimensional data are urgently needed. in this paper, we demonstrate how heatmaps with carefully designed annotation graphics can give great enhancement for revealing underlying data structure and how utilization of parallel heatmaps which focus on different sources of information gives a quick and comprehensive overview of the data. in the r programming environment, traditional tools for drawing heatmaps, like the basic heatmap function or add-on packages such as pheatmap or heatmapplus, only provide limited functionality to display annotation graphics and do not support plotting of multiple parallel heatmaps. the complexheatmap package has been designed to overcome these limitations. it provides a general solution to juxtapose different sources of information in multiple parallel heatmaps. each heatmap can be enhanced by multiple annotation graphics to complete the portrayal of the dataset. both column and row annotation graphics supported in complexheatmap can either be predefined graphics, e.g. points, bar plots or boxplots or more general user-defined graphics. other features of complexheatmap include: (i) flexible support for clustering. for example, rendered dendrograms or a user-defined distance function that accepts two paired vectors are supported; (ii) separating of heatmap rows into slices to support visualization of subgroups, where splitting on rows can be done either by a partitioning method, e.g. k-means clustering or a data frame that contains classifications; (iii) user-customization of the heatmap grids for more advanced visualization of complex information, e.g. the enhanced oncoprint in; (iv) interactive selection on heatmaps to obtain subset of rows and columns if heatmaps are drawn on an interactive device (e.g. x11) and (v) the ability to add more customized graphics after heatmaps are generated. complexheatmap has a modular design with a user-friendly application programming interface (api). the flexibility and extensibility of the package enables fast and easy generation of novel views of multidimensional datasets and greatly facilitates discoveries from genomic and other omics data.  
