sequence analysis compmap: a reference-based compression program to speed up read mapping to related reference sequences exhaustive mapping of next-generation sequencing data to a set of relevant reference sequences becomes an important task in pathogen discovery and metagenomic classification. however, the runtime and memory usage increase as the number of reference sequences and the repeat content among these sequences increase. in many applications, read mapping time dominates the entire application. we developed compmap, a reference-based compression program, to speed up this process. compmap enables the generation of a non-redundant representative sequence for the input sequences. we have demonstrated that reads can be mapped to this representative sequence with a much reduced time and memory usage, and the mapping to the original reference sequences can be recovered with high accuracy. availability and implementation: compmap is implemented in c and freely available atin pathogen discovery or metagenomic classification applications , curating databases that correspond to a certain taxonomic rank (e.g. species or genus) and assign next-generation sequencing (ngs) reads to these taxa are fundamental tasks. the number of redundant reference sequences (strains or contigs) corresponding to different taxa varies largely as the result of different a priori research interests. for example, there are 439 000 sequences corresponding to the species of salmonella enterica that causes salmonellosis whereas only one reference genome is available for bradyrhizobium sp. ors 278. generating a non-redundant representation of each taxon would alleviate this bias and by aligning reads to this non-redundant sequence, memory usage and runtime could be largely reduced. in particular, in applications where exhaustive read placements to highly similar strains or species are required and the multi-mapped reads could reach 499 of the overall input , read mapping time dominates the entire application. genomemapper was an early attempt to reduce redundant read mapping to multiple homogenous sequences relying on the existing knowledge of polymorphism information. without the external information and the assumption of homogeneity, we developed a program compmap that relies on compression. although compression techniques have been widely used on ngs data transmission and storage , there is a lake of bioinformatic programs like compmap that can directly use the compressed data and recover the original results if necessary. compmap is a reference-based compression program designed to reduce redundancies in a given set of related reference sequences, either heterologous or homogenous, by identifying, recording and eliminating repetitive subsequences. a reduced sequence was obtained to serve as a non-redundant representation of the original input. ngs reads are then mapped to this reduced sequence, and if needed, the original mapping results can be recovered. compmap shows good performance in the experiment of ngs read mapping to 45000 bacterial genomes.the case studies show that compmap allows researchers to speed up ngs short read mapping while maintaining comparable accuracy. the saving of time and space is in proportion to the size of ngs files and the similarity among reference sequences. compmap is simple yet efficient. it can be readily used along with other tools for ngs data analysis with no or few modifications.  
