active site prediction using evolutionary and structural information motivation: the identification of catalytic residues is a key step in understanding the function of enzymes. while a variety of computational methods have been developed for this task, accuracies have remained fairly low. the best existing method exploits information from sequence and structure to achieve a precision (the fraction of predicted catalytic residues that are catalytic) of 18.5 at a corresponding recall (the fraction of catalytic residues identified) of 57 on a standard benchmark. here we present a new method, discern, which provides a significant improvement over the state-of-the-art through the use of statistical techniques to derive a model with a small set of features that are jointly predictive of enzyme active sites. results: in cross-validation experiments on two benchmark datasets from the catalytic site atlas and catres resources containing a total of 437 manually curated enzymes spanning 487 scop families, discern increases catalytic site recall between 12 and 20 over methods that combine information from both sequence and structure, and by 50 over methods that make use of sequence conservation signal only. controlled experiments show that discerns improvement in catalytic residue prediction is derived from the combination of three ingredients: the use of the intrepid phylogenomic method to extract conservation information; the use of 3d structure data, including features computed for residues that are proximal in the structure; and a statistical regularization procedure to prevent overfitting.the prediction of protein function from limited data is an important challenge in the post-genomic era. bioinformatics methods that provide clues to the roles of individual residues in a protein are used by biologists to prioritize site-directed mutagenesis experiments and to provide a more specific prediction of function than simple homology-based approaches . in this work, to whom correspondence should be addressed. we focus on the task of predicting catalytic residues in enzymes using information from sequence and structure. the earliest methods for catalytic residue prediction relied on detecting conservation patterns across a family , followed by increasingly powerful sequence-based scoring functions . methods relying exclusively on information from solved 3d structures have been developed, analyzing features such as the geometric arrangements of residues , surface geometry , electrostatics , energetics and chemical properties . other methods combine features derived from sequence and structure , or use sequence data in combination with predicted structure features to improve accuracy . in this article, we present a new method for predicting catalytic residues, which we have named discern. discern is a statistical predictor that achieves a significant improvement in performance over other catalytic residue prediction methods. previously, the best recall (the fraction of true catalytic residues that are predicted to be catalytic) reported on homology-reduced datasets is 57 at a precision (the fraction of predicted catalytic residues that are indeed catalytic) of 18.5 . in comparison, at the same precision, discern yields a recall of at least 69, representing an improvement of 12 in recall over the best current methods for this task.in this section, we report results of large-scale experiments on manually curated enzymes from the csa andpage: 620 617624in this article, we have described a new approach to the prediction of active sites in proteins. our results on benchmark datasets of manually curated enzymes from the csa and catres resources show that discern provides a significant improvement over the best methods that make use of information from sequence and/or structure to predict catalytic sites. discern is a statistical predictor that brings together three important ideas, the combination of which are needed in order to obtain the striking improvements in accuracy shown here. first, discern uses an evolutionary modeling approach (specifically, the intrepid phylogenomic method) to infer the degree to which residues are under selective pressure. second, we incorporate page: 623 617624  
