data and text mining compounds in literature (cil): screening for compounds and relatives in pubmed searching for certain compounds in literature can be an elaborate task, with many compounds having several different synonyms. often, only the structure is known but not its name. furthermore, rarely investigated compounds may not be described in the available literature at all. in such cases, preceding searches for described similar compounds facilitate literature mining. highlighted names of proteins in selected texts may further accelerate the time-consuming process of literary research. compounds in literature (cil) provides a web interface to automatically find names, structures, and similar structures in over 28 million compounds of pubchem and more than 18 million citations provided by the pubmed service. cils pre-calculated database contains more than 56 million parent compoundabstract relations. found compounds, relatives and abstracts are related to proteins in a concise heat map-like overview. compounds and proteins are highlighted in their respective abstracts, and are provided with links to pubchem and uniprot. availability: an easy-to-use web interface with detailed descriptions, help and statistics is available fromthe search for certain compounds in pubmed (http://www.ncbi .nlm.nih.gov/pubmed) as the largest repository of biomedical citations is an elaborate task for several reasons: (i) the vast and rapidly growing number of citations leads to time-consuming searches, particularly if researchers do not want to solely rely on mesh (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh) indexing and author-given keywords. furthermore, information on compounds may be hidden in the context because the authors did not mention them exclusively as key words. (ii) compounds can have a variety of different synonyms (more than 4 in 6.5 of all pubchem compounds), and each synonym should be searched to achieve a comprehensive result. (iii) if researchers do not know the exact name, a structure search has to be conducted first. (iv) a compound is newly-discovered or developed and therefore not or only rarely described in literature. thus, preceding similarity searches can find compounds giving hints on potential biological actions. (v) to assess the biological context of the compound (i.e. interacting proteins), large parts of the texts have to be read. (vi) considering such points, the problem of search duration arises but the result is desired instantly. several published approaches exist for text mining and information retrieval for compounds , proteins and combinations . the publicly available compound resource pubchem (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) contains options for 2d similarity searches. some of the existing tools cannot be seamlessly integrated in the desired workflow, while others lack a concise and comprehensive result overview. thus, compounds in literature (cil) was developed, a webserver that combines the related tasks of compound and literature screening. an extended computer infrastructure, specialized algorithms and data structures were used to provide a user-friendly tool for compoundrelated research. cil-results provide a heat map-like overview, comprising compounds, similar compounds, proteins and citations with highlighted found entities. using this kind of structured and comprehensible information, cil allows for analyses of obvious and hidden potential biological functions of compounds.  
