computational approaches to define a human milk metaglycome motivation: the goal of deciphering the human glycome has been hindered by the lack of high-throughput sequencing methods for glycans. although mass spectrometry (ms) is a key technology in glycan sequencing, ms alone provides limited information about the identification of monosaccharide constituents, their anomericity and their linkages. these features of individual, purified glycans can be partly identified using well-defined glycan-binding proteins, such as lectins and antibodies that recognize specific determinants within glycan structures. results: we present a novel computational approach to automate the sequencing of glycans using metadata-assisted glycan sequencing, which combines ms analyses with glycan structural information from glycan microarray technology. success in this approach was aided by the generation of a virtual glycome to represent all potential glycan structures that might exist within a metagly-comes based on a set of biosynthetic assumptions using known structural information. we exploited this approach to deduce the structures of soluble glycans within the human milk glycome by matching predicted structures based on experimental data against the virtual glycome. this represents the first meta-glycome to be defined using this method and we provide a publically available web-based application to aid in sequencing milk glycans. availability and implementation: http://glycomeseq.glycans play integral roles in many essential biological functions including cell signaling, molecular recognition, immunity and inflammation generally via their specific interactions with proteins . unlike the template driven process for synthesizing linear nucleic acids and proteins, glycans are enzymatically synthesized and are thus products of many genes forming linear and branched sequences of stereospecific monosaccharides that provide unique surfaces for protein interactions . understanding the specificity of glycan-binding proteins (gbps) provides clues to their functions, and defining specificity is accomplished by comparing the structures of glycans bound by a gbp with related structures that are unbound . this requires that the glycan ligands be completely defined, which is not a trivial task. in addition, while the human glycome is estimated to be at least 10 times larger than the proteome ; to date, no glycome or meta-glycome (partial or sub-glycome) related to a tissue, organ or cell type has been defined. furthermore no method is currently available with the requisite precision or speed to be incorporated into an automated sequencing platform. historically, methods for glycan sequencing were developed to address different aspects of glycan structure and included purification of glycans and application of a variety of chemistries to deduce structure . the predominant mass spectrometric (ms)approaches to glycan structure are limited in their ability to fully identify glycan structure that includes sequence, linkage, and anomericity; however, a large amount of information is generated from mixtures of glycans. one example of high-throughput automated annotation of ms peaks was described in the cartoonist algorithm . the algorithm initially selects annotations from a list of biologically plausible glycans based on a set of archetype cartoons manually derived from a priori knowledge of the biosynthetic pathways known to express certain n-glycans. it then assigns a confidence score to the set of glycan annotations for the most abundant signals. the annotations represent the composition and topology of the structure though portions of the structure contain specific monosaccharides and glycosidic bonds based on constraints imposed by the biosynthetic pathway. a de novo approach, termed stat , predicts glycan structures by generating all possible topologies of a glycan structure based on the precursor ion mass, charge carrier and product ion mass from the ms n data. a review (von der) of automated interpretation of ms spectra for glycan structures provides an overview of various approaches; however, all of the existing approaches fall short of fully characterizing glycan structures including the linkage and anomericity. in spite of its limitations, ms techniques, especially those that include more laborious multistage ms have proven extremely useful in doing the deep sequencing required to fully define a glycan structure. however, a method for high throughput, deep sequencing of glycan structure will likely require a combination of techniques. defined glycan microarrays provide a highthroughput approach for identifying epitopes on individual glycans when interrogated with gbps that bind known glycan determinants. although the determinant or epitope alone cannot provide the information needed to fully characterize the glycan structure, it does provide metadata that can be applied to reveal the structure. we developed metadata-assisted glycan sequencing or mags as a structural approach that combines ms data with glycan microarray data , and recently demonstrated its utility in defining over 20 novel structures among the human milk glycans (hmgs) . the glycan microarray data used in this approach is acquired from libraries of relatively pure glycans, analogous to a shotgun glycan microarray (sgm) where glycans, representing a selected glycome, are fluorescently derivatized, and separated by multidimensional chromatography to resolve isomeric structures and obtain relatively pure components in a tagged glycan library. the separated glycans are then printed as a sgm comprising the selected glycome. we reasoned that mags could be used as a general approach to define any glycome that could be presented as a sgm; however, manual analysis of the data generated from hundreds of glycans in a microarray would be a tedious process. we therefore developed a software package, termed glycomeseq, to sequence hmgs through automated meta-analysis of experimental data based on our mags approach. we reasoned that a key to more automatable sequencing is to create a virtual glycome comprising all theoretical structures, and then test the predicted structures from the obtained metadata against this virtual glycome; we also used a novel algorithm to filter candidate glycan structures through this knowledge base to arrive at a single structure consistent with all available information. for this study, we selected the free glycans of human milk, since the glycans are easily accessible and a large literature is available about them. in addition to the nutritional disaccharide lactose (1015 g/l), human milk contains a complex mixture of larger, free oligosaccharides or glycans (510 g/l) that are not efficiently metabolized in the stomach of the neonate and reach the intestines where they are thought to have probiotic activity , as well as to provide protection against pathogens by interfering with adhesion of pathogens to intestinal epithelial cells as decoy receptors . milk glycans have also been implicated in having beneficial innate immune and immunomodulatory effects , decreasing colon contractility and promoting gut epithelial cell maturation . recent studies on the biological functions of human milk have indicated that breast fed infants have soluble milk glycans circulating in blood at detectable levels suggesting potential systemic effects of such glycans . the structures and quantities of the free glycans in human milk vary widely among individual mothers based on their genetics, which controls the expression of the human lewis blood groups and time of lactation . a variety of factors influence the repertoire of the human glycome, including genetics, environment, and time (or conditions of synthesis); and like the human genome, the glycome of the human milk free glycans is an average set of structures that represents all of the possible structures that could exist at any one time or in any one individual. thus, there is great interest in defining the human milk metaglycome and its components, since they may differ in many ways between different sources and the overall repertoire of glycans in a milk sample is subject to many variables. the computational approach developed here was successful in identifying glycan structures within the human milk metaglycome and the approach should be applicable to other cellular and tissue metaglycomes.we use our virtual glycome generator to store the virtual human milk soluble glycan glycome into a database.shows the theoretical number of glycans that can exist for each composition basedcomputational approaches to define a human milk metaglycomeon the biosynthetic rules of hmgs (supplementary material a) up to a dodecaose core structure (h7n5). although core structures (without fucose or sialic acid) as large as h10n8 have been reported, the amounts of glycans with core structures greater than h5n3 are vanishingly small. nevertheless, the virtual glycome of human milk soluble glycans is certainly 50 000 different possible structures. the web-based software tool, glycomeseq, provides the number of isomers within each composition and will display the structures of all isomers within each composition (https://glycomeseq.emory.edu/). in an effort to further our understanding of the functional and structural roles of hmgs we registered accession numbers in glytoucan for the predicted structures that were verified by independent structural methods. we also shared our virtual hmg database with unicarbkb , which can be found at http://unicarbkb.org/milk. the unicarbkb platform is a knowledgebase that allows public access to a curated database of glycan structures and associated metadata including publications and glycan structural classification by taxonomy, tissue, protein etc. in addition to sharing the glycan structures, glycomeseq also provides link outs to the unicarbkb website for each of the predicted structures where the user can view any associated metadata for the glycan structure.we describe herein an approach to define a virtual meta-glycome and use it as a knowledge base to predict fully characterized glycan structures using data from ms and glycan microarray-binding experiments. this approach to computational sequencing of the unknown glycans requires (i) determination of the glycan composition using maldi-tof analysis, (ii) interrogation of the glycans with lectins and antibodies that bind known determinants, (iii) determination of the set of predicted structures based on automated metaanalysis of the experimental data from the virtual glycome database given the constraints of the rules for the biosynthetic pathway of the glycans. although several methods have been aimed at glycan annotation of mass spectrometric analysis, to our knowledge no other method has been developed that attempts to solve the glycan structure to the level of glycomeseq. this approach has the potential to be a significant breakthrough in glycomics analysis that has thus far been hindered by the complexity and ambiguity of ms analysis. we seek to make improvements and have planned future work for our approach including (i) automate the analysis of the ms spectra to identify the ms reporter ion determinants, (ii) develop a library of xpath queries for the determinants so the user does not have to manually specify them in the spreadsheet, (iii) include exo-and endoglycosidases to yield finer specificity and (iv) apply this method on hmgs with sialic acid to further validate this approach before moving onto a much larger meta-glycome.  
