computational clustering for viral reference proteomes motivation: the enormous number of redundant sequenced genomes has hindered efforts to analyze and functionally annotate proteins. as the taxonomy of viruses is not uniformly defined, viral proteomes pose special challenges in this regard. grouping viruses based on the similarity of their proteins at proteome scale can normalize against potential taxonomic nomenclature anomalies. results: we present viral reference proteomes (viral rps), which are computed from complete virus proteomes within uniprotkb. viral rps based on 95, 75, 55, 35 and 15 co-membership in proteome similarity based clusters are provided. comparison of our computational viral rps with uniprots curator-selected reference proteomes indicates that the two sets are consistent and complementary. furthermore, each viral rp represents a cluster of virus proteomes that was consistent with virus or host taxonomy. we provide blastp search and ftp download of viral rp protein sequences, and a browser to facilitate the visualization of viral rps. availability and implementation: http://proteininformationresource.org/rps/viruses/there are existing methods for reducing protein sequence space. ncbi-nr (ncbi resource) clusters identical proteins, while unirefs provide clustered protein sequences at multiple similarity levels. ncbi-refseq and uniprots reference proteomes provide users with the ability to perform analyses or create protein families using a limited set of complete proteomes selected by curators. however, such approaches are difficult to scale up and do not show the relationships between organisms. previously, we created representative proteomes (rps) by clustering archaea, bacteria and eukaryota proteomes into related groups and selecting a representative organism from each group. compared to unirefs clustering, which is based on the similarity of individual proteins, rps clustering is based on the similarity of whole proteomes. these computationally determined rps are now included in the uniprot reference proteome set . however, viral proteomes posed special challenges, as the taxonomy for viruses is not uniformly defined; potentially there are taxonomic nomenclature variations resulting from naming more distantly related viruses as if they were the same genus or by naming closely related viruses as if they were in different taxonomic clades. to address those challenges we clustered virus proteomes based on the similarity of their overall protein sequences in a proteome scale using algorithms that can reliably and quickly calculate a hierarchical set of viral reference proteomes (viral rps) at different co-membership cut-offs. specifically, the clustering of the virus proteomes starts at very high similarity level in order to identify the proteomes that are very similar to other proteomes or proteomes that are an identical subset of other proteomes (sub-proteomes). in addition, we incorporate the uniprotkb annotation score (http://www.uniprot.org/help/annotation_score) into our proteome priority score (pps) .  
