computational discovery and in vivo validation of hnf4 as a regulatory gene in planarian regeneration motivation: automated computational methods can infer dynamic regulatory network models directly from temporal and spatial experimental data, such as genetic perturbations and their resultant morphologies. recently, a computational method was able to reverse-engineer the first mech-anistic model of planarian regeneration that can recapitulate the main anteriorposterior patterning experiments published in the literature. validating this comprehensive regulatory model via novel experiments that had not yet been performed would add in our understanding of the remarkable regeneration capacity of planarian worms and demonstrate the power of this automated methodology. results: using the michigan molecular interactions and string databases and the mocha software tool, we characterized as hnf4 an unknown regulatory gene predicted to exist by the reverse-engineered dynamic model of planarian regeneration. then, we used the dynamic model to predict the morphological outcomes under different single and multiple knock-downs (rna interference) of hnf4 and its predicted gene pathway interactors b-catenin and hh. interestingly, the model predicted that rnai of hnf4 would rescue the abnormal regenerated phenotype (tailless) of rnai of hh in amputated trunk fragments. finally, we validated these predictions in vivo by performing the same surgical and genetic experiments with planarian worms, obtaining the same phenotypic outcomes predicted by the reverse-engineered model. conclusion: these results suggest that hnf4 is a regulatory gene in planarian regeneration, validate the computational predictions of the reverse-engineered dynamic model, and demonstrate the automated methodology for the discovery of novel genes, pathways and experimental phenotypes.planarian worms, despite their complex morphology, have the extraordinary ability to regenerate a complete body after almost any kind of amputation . with the goal to unravel the mechanisms responsible for this outstanding regenerative capacity, a large dataset of experiments, including surgical amputations, genetic perturbations and pharmacological interventions, and their resultant phenotypes have been reported in the literature and curated in the planform centralized database . however, due to the complex feed-back loops and non-linear interactions typical of biological regulatory networks, understanding how the wormhere, we presented the computational discovery and in vivo validation of hnf4 as a regulatory gene in planarian regeneration. starting from the prediction of an unknown necessary gene from a reverse-engineered dynamic model, we characterized it with the use of the mimi and string databases and the mocha tool. then, we used the reverse-engineered dynamic model to produce exact predictions of the regenerated morphologies when perturbing hnf4 and their regulatory interacting genes in the predicted pathway. this in silico study revealed the ability of rnai of hnf4 to rescue the abnormal regenerated phenotype (tailless) due to the rnai of hh. we then used an in vivo approach to validate at the bench all the predictions of the model. using rnai to knock-down single and double genes involved in the pathway, we performed similar surgical amputations and genetic knock downs (rnai) in planarian worms. the results confirmed that rnai of hnf4 produced the wild-type morphology when applied alone, but when combined with rnai of hh, it rescued the tailless phenotype caused by rnai of hh alone. a statistical analysis further confirmed the significance of these results. in summary, these results show how the reverse-engineered model remarkably predicted a non-trivial regulatory role of hnf4 in planarian regeneration. the dynamic nature of the presented model explains in a mechanistic way the morphologies resulting from the different perturbations. when both hh and hnf4 are knock-down, the level of tail signal is naturally higher than the trunk signal; that is, the default outcome is tail. when only hnf4 is knock-down, the tail signal is even higher (since hh enhances tail) and the trunk signal stays the same than in the double knock-down, so the wild type morphology is still regenerated. however, when only hh is knock-down, hnf4 is higher expressed (since hh represses hnf4), which results in a higher signal of trunk (since hnf4 enhances trunk) and higher than tail (which is also lower than the wild type, since hh enhances tail), producing the no-tail morphology. finally, with no knock-downs, the presence of hh produces higher signal of tail and reduces the signal of trunk (since hh enhances tail and represses hnf4, which enhances trunk), resulting in the wild type morphology.computational approaches are indispensable for the construction of predictive models of complex biological phenomena and the understanding of their regulatory networks. these methods can automatically formulate mathematical models that can recapitulate the observed phenotypes. crucially, these reverse-engineered models can formulate testable predictions, including the prediction of novel regulatory elements and experimental phenotypes. here, we validated the novel predictions of a comprehensive dynamic model of planarian regeneration, including the discovery of a novel regulatory gene (hnf4) and its capacity to rescue an abnormal phenotype. the model accounts for the minimum set of interactors needed to explain the resultant head versus tail morphology from a comprehensive set of perturbation experiments. in a future work, we will validate the second unknown regulatory gene predicted by the model, which was preliminary characterized as the frizzled family of receptors . further regulatory elements are indeed needed to control other aspects of tail regeneration, such as the specific round shape, determination of tissue types (epithelium, muscle, nerves, etc.) in the correct locations, and the dorsalventral axis regulation. adding perturbation experiments involving these elements to the input dataset will allow for the discovery of more detailed models by the reverse-engineering system, extending the pathways presented here. this work serves as a proof of principle for a pipeline for converting models discovered by machine learning into predictive hypotheses that can be tested at the bench to uncover novel biological interactions. interaction databases such as mimi or string enable the characterization of unknown elements predicted by these models. importantly, the interaction confidence scores included in these databases summarize the quality of the available evidence and can be used to rank candidate interactions, being the ones with higher score the best candidate interactions to test at the bench. this approach demonstrates the strength of automated reverseengineering methods for the discovery of predicted mechanistic models of developmental and regenerative biology.  
