computational discovery of pathway-level genetic vulnerabilities in non-small-cell lung cancer motivation: novel approaches are needed for discovery of targeted therapies for non-small-cell lung cancer (nsclc) that are specific to certain patients. whole genome rnai screening of lung cancer cell lines provides an ideal source for determining candidate drug targets. results: unsupervised learning algorithms uncovered patterns of differential vulnerability across lung cancer cell lines to loss of functionally related genes. such genetic vulnerabilities represent candidate targets for therapy and are found to be involved in splicing, translation and protein folding. in particular, many nsclc cell lines were especially sensitive to the loss of components of the lsm2-8 protein complex or the cct/tric chaperonin. different vulnerabilities were also found for different cell line subgroups. furthermore, the predicted vulnerability of a single adenocarcinoma cell line to loss of the wnt pathway was experimentally validated with screening of small-molecule wnt inhibitors against an extensive cell line panel. availability and implementation: the clustering algorithm is implemented in python and is freely available at https://bitbucket.org/youngjh/nsclc_paper. contact:non-small-cell lung cancer (nsclc) remains a significant healthcare burden despite recent progress in drug discovery and development. recent fda-approved targeted therapies are only intended for appropriate subpopulations of patients. the drug xalkori (crizotinib) is highly effective, but only for $4 of lung cancer patients . similarly, iressa (gefitinib) and other egfr inhibitors target mutations found only in a portion of patients while the majority have the wild-type version . compared with cytotoxic chemotherapy, targeted therapy has the advantage of greater specificity. however, discovery and development of such agents requires the identification of druggable targets. inhibitors of certain characteristic mutations, such as kras g12c and g12d, are still under extensive development for clinical use . the heterogeneity of nsclc is another barrier confronting drug discovery. a number of v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.from a whole genome rnai screen of nsclc cell lines, we identified candidate drug targets in the form of genetic vulnerabilities specific to cell line subgroups. a couple of factors were considered when determining genetic vulnerabilities. first, given the heterogeneity of nsclc, gene deletions that are almost universally toxic across the cell line panel would likely be toxic to other normal human cells as well. in addition, it is desirable to specifically target lung cancer cells but not normal cells, yet only one cell line in the panel was from a non-cancerous normal lineage. this suggests that in the interest of specificity, the number of cell lines constituting a genetic vulnerability should not be too large. on the other hand, a vulnerability consisting of a single cell line may be less likely to generalize to an appreciable number of patients. therefore, the challenge stems from identifying groups of genes to which some, but not all, nsclc cell lines are especially dependent. ideally, these cell lines would represent a particular patient subpopulation. another challenge was to avoid a combinatorially intractable problem of having to examine all possible combinations of cell lines against all possible combinations of genes. novel applications of unsupervised learning algorithms were developed to overcome these challenges to prioritize potential nsclc targets from rnai sensitivities. the general workflow of this study is outlined in. from the whole genome rnai screen on 12 nsclc cell lines and one normal epithelial line, we extracted knockdown sensitivity profiles for selected gene sets. each gene set was clustered, scored and computational discovery of pathway-level genetic vulnerabilities in nsclcranked by statistical significance. the clustering score measures the degree to which the cell lines segregate into sensitive and resistant groups upon knockdown of genes in the set. gene sets with a clear segregation of sensitive and resistant lines are termed bimodal. it is imperative that our scoring scheme prioritizes such bimodal sets over other patterns of rnai sensitivity that would be less desirable as a candidate drug target. for example, gene sets that are all toxic or half-toxic are undesirable due to predicted toxicity beyond those in our cell line panel. in addition, gene sets that are largely resistant or having a random pattern of sensitivity clearly would not be desired as well.collectively, the protein complexes we discovered to be nsclc genetic vulnerabilities span various cellular processes including splicing, translation and protein folding. it is natural to ask how they fit in with currently established cancer therapies and whether known drugs could be repurposed for these complexes. clearly, they contrast with hormonal therapy or the usual mitotic targets of cytotoxic chemotherapy. it turns out that some of the strongest genetic vulnerabilities are known targets of small-molecules. arsenic trioxide (as 2 o 3 ) targets the tric/cct complex and has been used to treat acute promyelocytic leukemia in patients who did not respond well to other types of chemotherapy . as 2 o 3 can perhaps be repurposed for nsclc, particularly for patients whose tumors bear similarity to the sensitive cell line subgroups identified from the 2-means clustering analysis. several studies have evaluated the effect of as 2 o 3 in human lung primary fibroblasts and in the lung cancer cell lines a549 and h460 . collectively, they suggest that h460 is markedly more sensitive to as 2 o 3 than lung fibroblasts, consistent with the cct complex vulnerability we observed. we also identified the proteasome as a candidate nsclc drug target and recently, proteasome inhibitors have been investigated as anti-cancer agents. one such inhibitor is velcade (bortezomib), which has been fda-approved for multiple myeloma . bortezomib has shown to be effective in combination with other chemotherapy agents for nsclc and has been evaluated in clinical trials for nsclc as well . this also suggests that newer and more specific proteasome inhibitors, such as kyprolis (carfilzomib) could be efficacious for patients with nsclc. in addition, translation and splicing emerged as strong genetic vulnerabilities from the 2-means analysis. previously, translation has been proposed as a potential target in cancer . moreover, eif3 is known to be overexpressed in lung cancers , and ectopic expression of five eif3 subunits has been shown to transform immortalized fibroblasts into malignant cells . notably, in our study we found that knockdown of four of those five subunits strongly sensitizes six of the 12 nsclc cell lines in our panel, while an immortalized epithelial line is comparatively unaffected . the splicing apparatus has been suggested as a cancer target as well . of the splicing-associated protein complexes discovered from the 2-means analysis , the sf3b component of u2 snrnp is known to be targeted by a number of small-molecule compounds. both the pladienolides and meayamycin target sf3b, and the latter has been shown to be more deleterious in human lung cancer cells than normal lung fibroblasts . some of the nsclc genetic vulnerabilities that were found by our computational analysis include protein complexes that may appear to be entirely essential. it is perhaps surprising that certain cell lines are largely resistant to knockdown of many of these genes. one explanation may simply be a result of the strict thresholding of the rnai data to produce binary readings of cell line viability, which could be affected by the 100 sensitivity of the assay. another explanation may be provided by essential gene moonlighting and flipping of protein complex essentiality between distantly related species . it was shown that certain protein complexes almost completely flip essentiality between saccharomyces cerevisiae and schizosaccharomyces pombe. a similar phenomenon may be occurring among our nsclc cell line panel. although the cell lines are not necessarily distantly related, they likely differ sufficiently due to different mutational compositions. different yeast species flip protein complex essentiality as a result of adaptations to differing needs and environments, a phenomenon likely common to cancer cells as well. moreover, particular nsclc cell lines are largely resistant to loss of most, but not all, members of certain protein complexes. those genes that are mostly essential in both sensitive and insensitive cell line subgroups could exhibit moonlighting behavior by having multiple functions in both essential and nonessential processes. the nsclc genetic vulnerabilities uncovered by the computational analysis described here extends an earlier study in uncovering additional potential targets for therapy that were not previously reported. while our study shares the general aim of identifying genetic vulnerabilities, we exclusively focus on identification of biological systems, such as protein complexes, that certain lung cancers are especially dependent upon. our results also present a complementary viewpoint to the project achilles effort in analyzing whole genome rnai knockdown of cancer cells. one goal from project achilles was to discover genes that simultaneously had partial copy number loss and were essential to cancer cells . interestingly, the results from that analysis found single gene vulnerabilities in splicing, translation and the proteasome as well. one such vulnerability was lsm4, which is a part of the lsm2-8 complex. a key difference is that the nsclc vulnerabilities presented here are from the viewpoint of looking not only at single genes but biological systems such as protein complexes. in contrast with previous analyses, we obtain cell line subgroups that may represent particular patient populations along with candidate targets for each of those subgroups.  
