computational discovery of specificity-conferring sites in non-ribosomal peptide synthetases motivation: by using a class of large modular enzymes known as non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (nrps), bacteria and fungi are capable of synthesizing a large variety of secondary metabolites, many of which are bioactive and have potential, pharmaceutical applications as e.g. antibiotics. there is thus an interest in predicting the compound synthesized by an nrps from its primary structure (amino acid sequence) alone, as this would enable an in silico search of whole genomes for nrps enzymes capable of synthesizing potentially useful compounds. results: nrps synthesis happens in a conveyor belt-like fashion where each individual nrps module is responsible for incorporating a specific substrate (typically an amino acid) into the final product. here, we present a new method for predicting substrate specificities of individual nrps modules based on occurrences of motifs in their primary structures. we compare our classifier with existing methods and discuss possible biological explanations of how the motifs might relate to substrate specificity. availability and implementation: seql-nrps is available as a web service implemented in python with flask at http://services.birc.au.dk/seql-nrps and source code available at https://bitbucket.org/ dansondergaard/seql-nrps/.non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (nrps) are large proteins found mainly in bacteria and fungi where they are responsible for synthesis of a variety of peptides, many of which are bioactive and have significant pharmaceutical value . while the most famous example is the penicillin precursor tripeptide (synthesized by fungi in the penicillium genus) many other compounds that are active as antibiotics or e.g. immunosuppressants are known. in a time where antibiotic resistance is becoming increasingly problematic, investigating the possibilities for synthesis of novel therapeutical compounds from nrpss is therefore of great interest. nrpss are modular enzymes with each module comprising at least three domains: an adenylation (a) domain, a thiolation (t) domain and a condensation (c) domain . of these, the a domain recruits a specific substrate and activates it by transfer of an adenylate moiety. the activated substrate is then picked up by a prosthetic phosphopantetheine arm coupled to thet domain and physically moved to the c domain where the peptide bond is formed to an activated substrate from the next module in line. this process continues up until the last c domain (which in bacteria this usually is a thioesterase domain) where a hydrolysis reaction causes the chain of substrates to detach from the nrps, often by circularization of the final product. one module is thus responsible for incorporating one substrate into the final peptide product. more than 500 individual substrates have been observed in peptides synthesized by nrpss, including both the 20 proteinogenic lamino acids as well as their d-isomers, non-proteinogenic amino acids (such as ornithine) and fatty acids . determining the substrate specificity of a given a domain biochemically by isolating it and trying all possible candidates is a cumbersome process and often fruitless effort. hence, there is a desire to predict the specificity from the amino acid sequences of a domains alone, and state-of-the-art prediction methods such as nrpssp and nrpspredictor2 (r ttig et al., 2011) are able to achieve that with relatively high accuracy using profile hidden markov models (phmm) and support vector machines, respectively. the first successful attempt to predict a domain substrate specificity was devised by examining the crystal structure of the a domain phea from grsa in bacillus brevis in complex with its cognate substrate phenylalanine (phe) . the analysis revealed 10 residues critically involved in substrate binding and recognition. due to high sequence similarity between a domains in general, it was speculated that sequence alignment of phea with other a domains would reveal the residues important for substrate recognition. using this approach, the authors successfully predicted the specificity of most a domains in their dataset using only these 10 residues, which were then aptly named the specificity-conferring code. here, we present a new approach for predicting the specificity of nrps a domains using automatic identification of sequence motifs discriminating sequences of a domains with different specificities. evaluated on a manually curated, non-redundant dataset, our method achieves an overall prediction accuracy of 71.3, higher than the 66.3 obtained by the current state-of-the-art method. the motifs discovered include the well-known specificity-conferring code but also other sites not previously associated with substrate specificity. we then discuss the significance of these sites from a biological and structural perspective.  
