sequence analysis computational identification of natural peptides based on analysis of molecular evolution motivation: many secretory peptides are synthesized as inactive precursors that must undergo post-translational processing to become biologically active peptides. attempts to predict natural peptides are limited by the low performance of proteolytic site predictors and by the high combinatorial complexity of pairing such sites. to overcome these limitations, we analyzed the site-wise evolutionary mutation rates of peptide hormone precursors, calculated using the rate4site algorithm. results: our analysis revealed that within their precursors, peptide residues are significantly more conserved than the pro-peptide residues. this disparity enables the prediction of peptides with a precision of 60 at a recall of 40 [receiver-operating characteristic curve (roc) auc 0.79]. subsequently, combining the rate4site score with additional features and training a random forest classifier enable the prediction of natural peptides hidden within secreted human proteins at a precision of 90 at a recall of 50 (roc auc 0.96). the high performance of our method allows it to be applied to full secretomes and to predict naturally occurring active peptides. our prediction on homo sapiens revealed several putative peptides in the human secre-tome that are currently unannotated. furthermore, the unique expression of some of these peptides implies a potential hormone function, including peptides that are highly expressed in endocrine glands.many secretory proteins and peptides are initially synthesized as larger precursors, usually in the form of pre-pro-proteins. (note that the term peptide is sometimes used also to describe a protein fragment. this study, however, focuses on endogenous peptides that are synthesized by translation of messenger rna (mrna) followed by proteolysis to generate the mature form.) such precursor proteins undergo post-translational proteolysis: the n-terminal pre-region, known as signal peptide, is cleaved by a well-characterized signal peptidase , whereas various proteases liberate the active peptides from the pro-proteins . they are often subjected to proteolysis to generate the mature form. examples of peptide hormones, whose proteolytic processing regulates their activities, include insulin, somatostatin, parathyroid hormone, glucagon and glp-1. many of these are used as therapeutic peptides for treating various disorders. the importance of identifying mature peptides fuels both experimental and computational approaches aimed at discovering and predicting proteolytic sites. traditionally, the main method for discovering short peptides, such as hormones or gpcr ligands, was performed through biochemical separation coupled with functional assays. this approach is challenging, as peptides often have restricted expression, exist at low abundance in complex biological matrices together with other secreted and shedded proteins and have highly diverse physiological functions. in recent years, there have been several attempts based on biochemical separation and purification coupled with various mass spectrometry techniques . today, prediction of natural peptides is possible because of advancements in computational biology algorithms enabling the analysis of the fast-growing genome and proteome databases. nevertheless, many computational approaches are limited to the classical furin and dibasic proteolytic sites, which can be identified through the use of simple regular expressions , whereas predictors aiming to treat more complex pro-hormone convertase cleavage sites have relatively low performance , which leads to many falsely predicted peptides. approaches where putative peptides are computationally identified directly, based on a hidden markov model or machine learning, are limited to cases where sequence similarity to known peptides is significant . we speculate that sequence and structural divergence impairs the computational identification of many peptides using this approach. thus, we looked for methods that can circumvent these obstacles. in this study, we test the hypothesis that the amino acid sequence of functional peptides is more conserved (among orthologous proteins) in comparison with the rest of the precursor sequence. this is true in several well-known examples, like corticoliberin, tachykinin-3 and insulin . using a secretomewide analysis, we demonstrate that the relative conservation of peptide sequences is high enough to allow prediction of peptides to whom correspondence should be addressed.to the best of our knowledge, usage of evolutionary profile to predict functional native peptides has not been studied before, although it has been implemented in the past to uncover functional residues and functional patches on protein surfaces . we can speculate that others have not chosen this approach for peptide identification because of the concern that functional native peptides could not be distinguished from functional segments or domains within proteins (which reside between falsely predicted proteolytic sites) on the basis of their relative sequence conservation. our study found that in many cases peptides can be separated from functional segments. a reasonable explanation for this success is that although there are few constraints on sequences that are removed during peptide maturation (propeptides), there are many more constraints applied to sequences adjacent to functional segments and domains, as these segments are part of a mature protein. sequence-based methods for peptide identification, whether based on hmm or other techniques, can only find novel peptides with some sequence similarity to known ones. one of the advantages of the approach described in this study is that its learning phase is sequence-independent and therefore can identify peptides that have no sequence similarity to any known peptide. for example, we predicted the existence of a few peptides in the cf057_human and f150b_human precursors . in both cases, there is no sequence similarity to any known peptide. in cf057_human, we predict that there is a proteolytic site between residues 104 and 105 (rkgr104jc) followed by the removal of r104 by carboxypeptidase e and amidation of k102. note that c-terminal amidation is a well-known post-translational modification that increases the stability of many native peptides . there are two options for the n-terminus of this potential peptideg90 and y96which cannot be easily distinguished by this approach. according to proteinatlas, the precursor of this potential peptide is highly expressed in the testis leydig cells, the placentas trophoblastic cells, melanocytes, some neuronal cells and glandular cells of various tissues including gall bladder, digestive tract, uterus, fallopian tube, parathyroid gland and adrenal gland. for f150b_human, we predict a peptide at the c-terminus (, bottom panel). it is an interesting peptide because it possesses two cysteines that might form a stabilizing intra-peptide disulphide bridge. the expression of this precursor in the adrenal gland, duodenum and small intestine glandular cells supports the functionality of this peptide as genuine. it is noteworthy that a similar predicted peptide appears in the paralogous f150a_human precursor. another potential benefit of the peptide classifier described here is to determine whether currently annotated peptides possess a function, i.e. detecting false-positive findings in the scientific literature and databases. notably, calcitonin (calc_human, residues 85116) is conserved relative to the upstream pro-peptide, whereas katacalcin (calc_human, residues 121141) is variable. thus, we posit that katacalcin is not a functional peptide (, top). similarly, we suggest that the highly variable potential peptide (residues 105134) and, and f150b_human, where we suggest a novel peptide at a conserved segment between a predicted proteolytic site and the c-terminus of the protein (bottom). seefor details234) of pro-opiomelanocortin (coli_human) are not functional peptides (, bottom). in this study, we preferred rate4site over entropy because the former takes into account the topology and branch lengths of the phylogenetic tree. thus, rate4site accounts for sequence redundancy without discarding part of the data and is therefore expected to be more accurate than entropy.demonstrates that rate4site has a stronger predictive power than entropy: at a recall of 40, rate4site gives a precision of 60 compared with that of 45 given by entropy. in conclusion, this study highlights how evolutionary analysis can be instrumental in functional annotation.  
