genome analysis computational identification of protein binding sites on rnas using high-throughput rna structure-probing data motivation: high-throughput sequencing has been used to probe rna structures, by treating rnas with reagents that preferentially cleave or mark certain nucleotides according to their local structures, followed by sequencing of the resulting fragments. the data produced contain valuable information for studying various rna properties. results: we developed methods for statistically modeling these structure probing data and extracting structural features from them. we show that the extracted features can be used to predict rna zip-codes in yeast, regions bound by the she complex in asymmetric localization. the prediction accuracy was better than using raw rna probing data or sequence features. we further demonstrate the use of the extracted features in identifying binding sites of rna binding proteins from whole-transcriptome global photoactivatable-ribonucleoside-enhanced cross-linking and immunopurification (gpar-clip) data. availability: the source code of our implemented methods is available atnext-generation sequencing technologies have created opportunities for studying many diverse properties of nucleic acids in a high-throughput manner. recently, it has been used to probe rna structures, which reveals interesting properties of rna, including the largely unexplored mrna structures . one method involves treating rnas with an enzyme that preferentially cleaves either double-stranded (such as rnase v1) or single-stranded (such as s1 nuclease and p1 nuclease) nucleic acids, and sequencing the resulting fragments . paired and unpaired nucleotides can then be deduced by comparing the distributions of read counts under the two different enzymatic treatments or by comparing with a control. another method is based on selective 2 0-hydroxyl acylation analyzed by primer extension (shape) chemistry . rnas are treated with a shape reagent, which chemically modifies the 2 0-hydroxyl groups with reactivity at individual nucleotides depending on their local spatial disorder. the treated rnas are then reverse-transcribed and subsequently sequenced. because reverse transcription is blocked by the shape adducts, the distribution of read counts can serve as an indicator of local structures . for both methods, specialized algorithms have been proposed for processing the sequencing reads and analyzing the read counts . these algorithms were designed to consider special properties of the corresponding experiments. for example, in shape sequencing, reverse transcription could be stopped either by a shape adduct or due to natural polymerase drop off. different statistical models were designed for these processes for estimating the reactivity of the shape reagent at each nucleotide. in addition to these method-specific factors, read counts may also be affected by biases common to many sequencing protocols. for example, gc-rich regions may have more reads than at-rich regions . primer binding and amplification efficiency also depend on local sequences . here we show that statistical models that explicitly consider potential sequence-specific biases can be used to fit these highthroughput structure-probing data. the effectiveness of our models is demonstrated by a better goodness of fit to the data than some other models based on a cross-validation procedure. to further explore the utility of our models, we show that features of structure-probing data extracted by our models can be used to locate zipcodes on yeast mrnas, which are regions bound by the she complex in asymmetric localization . previous studies have shown that localization activity depends on secondary structure . a short sequence motif involving a to whom correspondence should be addressed. cga triplet in a loop and a conserved cytosine six bases away in another loop has also been shown to be necessary for bud localization of several rnas . nonetheless, these criteria are not sufficient to identify all zipcodes . it has been suggested that recognition and transport depend not only on the zipcodes but also on adjacent sequence and structural features . we show that our extracted features could help distinguish zipcodes from other regions on the same mrnas with good accuracy. there exist experimental methods for transcriptome-wide identification of rna regions bound by a specific rna binding protein (rbp). the main idea is to crosslink rbps with rnas, followed by immunoprecipitation (clip) and microarray analysis or sequencing. the latter includes methods known as hitsclip , clip-seq , par-clip and rip-seq . as these large-scale datasets become available for more rbps, it is interesting to ask whether different rbps recognize similar features at their binding sites. it has recently been shown that a common set of features can be used to identify rnas targeted by a group of different rbps , although in the same study it is also shown that if the training set lacks any known targets of an rbp, the resulting statistical model is less capable of identifying its targets, indicating that the model may not have captured the binding site signals recognized by all rbps. here we use our extracted features from rna structure-probing data to study this question in a different way, and ask if it is possible to build statistical models that can distinguish general rbp binding sites from other regions. using a wholetranscriptome dataset of rbp binding sites, we show that such a model can be constructed with high distinguishing power using a small set of features, which supports the idea that different rbps may share similar recognition signals of their targets.  
