a-dago-fun: an adaptable gene ontology semantic similarity-based functional analysis tool gene ontology (go) semantic similarity measures are being used for biological knowledge discovery based on go annotations by integrating biological information contained in the go structure into data analyses. to empower users to quickly compute, manipulate and explore these measures, we introduce a-dago-fun (adaptable gene ontology semantic similarity-based functional analysis). it is a portable software package integrating all known go information content-based semantic similarity measures and relevant biological applications associated with these measures. a-dago-fun has the advantage not only of handling datasets from the current high-throughput genome-wide applications , but also allowing users to choose the most relevant semantic similarity approach for their biological applications and to adapt a given module to their needs. availability and implementation: a-dago-fun is freely available to the research community atrecent years have experienced an exponential growth of publicly available and accessible genomics, proteomics and other biological data resulting from high-throughput biology technologies and computational scanning approaches. retrieving information from these different biological data constitutes an essential step and challenging task which requires the use of computational tools and algorithms for translating these data into different applications. in the context of functional annotation data, the gene ontology provides a way of consistently describing genes and proteins in any organism, producing a well-adapted platform to computationally process data at the functional level. currently, 30 629 514 proteins are already annotated with gene ontology (go) terms in the existing biological databases (see the latest version of goa uniprot version 143 at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/goa/uniprot_release, released on 27), thus enabling protein comparisons on the basis of their go annotations. several semantic similarity (ss) measures have been suggested to tackle major challenges for knowledge discovery based on these go annotations. the recent proliferation of these measures in the biomedical and bioinformatics areas was accompanied by the development of tools (http://neurolex.org/wiki/category:resource:gene_ontology_tools) that facilitate effective exploration of these measures. these tools include software packages and web-based on-line tools. none of these tools support all relevant topology-based approaches in the context of go, except the dago-fun on-line tool v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com implementing the go-universal metric, theapproaches, the g-sesame on-line tool and the gosemsim r package which implement theapproach. these tools are often context dependent and only implement ss measures shown to perform well in a specific application. moreover, these tools work only for proteins contained in the goa dataset or existing go-annotated organisms for ss calculations and each has its specific gene or protein identifier (id) system, making it difficult to meet input requirements of current genome-and proteome-wide applications from high-throughput analysis. here, we present a-dago-fun (adaptable gene ontology semantic similaritybased functional analysis), which overcomes these limitations, enabling effective exploration of different protein functional similarity measures, calibrating datasets from high-throughput experiment analyses and providing researchers with the freedom to choose the most relevant measure for their specific applications using their gene or protein id system and associated go annotations.a-dago-fun provides a python portable application to the large community of go users and to a broad computational audience, enabling tool designers or developers and experienced end-users as well as non-programmers to retrieve ss scores. this application can be extended, modified and adapted to a defined user need, ensuring that go ss data and related biological applications are conveniently accessible to researchers and can effectively be used in their functional analyses based on go annotations.  
