computational inference of grammars for larger-than-gene structures from annotated gene sequences motivation: larger than gene structures (lgs) are dna segments that include at least one gene and often other segments such as inverted repeats and gene promoters. mobile genetic elements (mge) such as integrons are lgs that play an important role in horizontal gene transfer, primarily in gram-negative organisms. known lgs have a profound effect on organism virulence, antibiotic resistance and other properties of the organism due to the number of genes involved. expert-compiled grammars have been shown to be an effective computational representation of lgs, well suited to automating annotation, and supporting de novo gene discovery. however, development of lgs grammars by experts is labour intensive and restricted to known lgs. objectives: this study uses computational grammar inference methods to automate lgs discovery. we compare the ability of six algorithms to infer lgs grammars from dna sequences annotated with genes and other short sequences. we compared the predictive power of learned grammars against an expert-developed grammar for gene cassette arrays found in class 1, 2 and 3 integrons, which are modular lgs containing up to 9 of about 240 cassette types. results: using a bayesian generalization algorithm our inferred grammar was able to predict 95 of mge structures in a corpus of 1760 sequences obtained from genbank (f-score 75). even with 100 noise added to the training and test sets, we obtained an f-score of 68, indicating that the method is robust and has the potential to predict de novo lgs structures when the underlying gene features are known. availability: http://www2.the study of dna has particularly focused on regions that code rna (primarily genes) and regions that interact with proteins such as transcription factor binding sites. in 1961, jacob andpublished the first example of a gene regulation mechanism that exploits the position of genes to simultaneously control the expression of genes that are part of the same metabolic pathway.list 12 classes of larger than gene structures (lgs) that can transfer regions of dna to whom correspondence should be addressed. containing one or more genes between dna molecules in a cell or, through conjugation, between organisms. many examples of each class of these mobile genetic elements (mges) are found in genbank . these mges have all been discovered after initial observations of unexpected phenomena. integrons, for example, were first identified when manual observations found a similar sequence pattern (restriction enzyme digestion sites) repeatedly flanking a variety of quite different antibiotic resistance genes . the development of a systematic method for making such observations would potentially reveal new structures and new mechanisms for gene regulation and transposition. methods of computational support for mge discovery typically focus on a subset of mges called genomic islands . these methods include: @bullet methods that use sequence similarity, either through wholegenome alignment , or clusters of genes . these methods depend on having similar genomes that differ by inserted genomic islands. they cannot discover the structure of the inserted sequence.@bullet methods that rely the on similarity of genomic sequence properties of such as gc content or oligonucleotide frequencies . these methods can discover insertions with limited accuracy and also do not identify sequence structure.@bullet methods based upon the occurrence of direct repeats (dr) and trna genes to identify mge insertions. however, as many mge are not inserted in trna genes nor have dr, this approach is not generalizable . all of these methods have been designed for bacterial chromosomal dna and not plasmids. an important class of tools can identify new mge from known classes of mge . these methods require the creation a priori of computational models of mge structures to permit automatic mge annotation. we present a method to support de novo discovery of lgs based upon computational grammars. short sequences (e.g. genes, recurring motifs, dr and inverted repeats) are annotated by other methods. our method then identifies recurring patterns in these annotations to infer new lgs and represents them as grammatical models. the grammar is then used to provide a second level ofpage: 792 791796the results indicate that, at least in our domain, inferring grammars for lgs can be achieved with a moderate training set size. selecting sequences for the sdb from genbank may have worked in our favour as genbanks bias is likely to over-represent class 1 integrons compared with the general bacterial population. this bias is unavoidable and may work against, not for, de novo structure discovery. however, the relatively small training set needed to identify a recurring structure and the high tolerance to noise are encouraging and mean that despite this bias, new structures may yet be found in genbank. further experiments are required to test algorithm performance on sequences from natural populations. in this article, we have set a framework for such evaluation. we have used two methods to evaluate the ability of the generated grammars to identify structures correctly. proportional matching of the grammar accounts for structures that were partially discovered.for example, when a sequence of five tokens (leaves) has a gold standard cassarray annotation but only four were annotated with a structure predicting token. in this case, the annotation itself is not exactly right but the correct region was indeed identified. we have shown that our method outperforms hmms using this evaluation. we also report a measure based upon whole structure identification. hmms predict arrays very poorly, in particular when negative predictions are assigned the same weight as positive ones (f-score). a possible explanation to hmms poor performance is the small training set (10) and we have shown that adding generalization improves performance. among horizontal gene transfer mechanisms, gene cassette arrays are the most modular with the highest variability in the type and number of antibiotic resistance genes. we therefore believe that our algorithm will be able to identify other structures such as transposons and insertion sequences much more accurately. the noise experiments simulate a de novo discovery scenario where not all annotations processed by the system belong to a single structure. in these experiments, we needed to ensure integrons remain the dominant structure for a meaningful comparison with the gold standard. we thus added noise annotations from several other structures to the annotation set ensuring that relevant annotations are always at least 50 of the annotations our system sees leaving integrons as the dominant structure. in a de novo discovery scenario, we expect that annotations of parts of known structures will be removed from the annotations before the system is run so that the remaining most dominant structure is discovered. de novo discovery of lgs using our methods relies on previously known component features (e.g. gene cassettes), but does not require prior knowledge of their relationship in a structure. existing methods for prediction of component genes , inverted repeats and other features can be used in conjunction with our method.we have shown that novel lgs can be discovered in dna sequences in which relevant features of the structure are annotated even using a relatively small training set (5) and large amounts of noise (100). an important aspect of this approach is that the inferred grammar represents a general model that accurately identifies structures without referring to prior knowledge about them. hence, this method seems promising for de novo discovery even if only a few examples exist in the corpus.  
