computational modeling of the expansion of human cord blood cd133 1 hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells with different cytokine combinations downloaded from motivation: many important problems in cell biology require dense non-linear interactions between functional modules to be considered. the importance of computer simulation in understanding cellular processes is now widely accepted, and a variety of simulation algorithms useful for studying certain subsystems have been designed. expansion of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (hsc/hpc) in ex vivo culture with cytokines and small molecules is a method to increase the restricted numbers of stem cells found in umbilical cord blood (cb), while also enhancing the content of early engrafting neutrophil and platelet precursors. the efficacy of the expanded product depends on the composition of the cocktail of cytokines and small molecules used for culture. testing the influence of a cytokine or small molecule on the expansion of hsc/hpc is a laborious and expensive process. we therefore developed a computational model based on cellular signaling interactions that predict the influence of a cytokine on the survival, duplication and differentiation of the cd133 hsc/hpc subset from human umbilical cb. results: we have used results from in vitro expansion cultures with different combinations of one or more cytokines to develop an ordinary differential equation model that includes the effect of cytokines on survival, duplication and differentiation of the cd133 hsc/hpc. comparing the results of in vitro and in silico experiments, we show that the model can predict the effect of a cyto-kine on the fold expansion and differentiation of cb cd133 hsc/hpc after 8-day culture on a 3d scaffold. availability and implementation: the model is available visiting the following url: http://www. francescopappalardo.net/bioinformatics_cd133_model. contact:hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is a potentially curative therapy for severe hematological malignancies and other severe disorders of the blood and bone marrow. umbilical cord blood (cb) is used as an alternative for bone marrow or mobilized peripheral blood grafts, particularly when no hla matched related or unrelated donor can be found . however, single cb grafts have a limited number of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (hsc/hpc) and, when compared with mobilized peripheral blood grafts, show significantly delayed early neutrophil and platelet engraftment . this leads to significant morbidity and mortality in myeloablated recipients in the cb transplant setting. recent studies suggest that cb units contain 2550-fold fewer early engrafting neutrophil and platelet progenitor cells than mobilized peripheral blood and that the frequency of these progenitors in individual cb grafts is independently variable and correlates with the clonogenic cfu-gm and cfu-mk content, respectively . indeed, cb grafts with a higher content of cfu and viable cd34 cells (1.8 10 5 cd34 cells transplanted per kilogram of the recipients body weight) demonstrate improved median time to and probability of neutrophil and platelet engraftment . the latter, as well as longer term hematological reconstitution of cb cd133 cd34 hsc/hpc post-transplant can be measured in the peripheral blood in surrogate nsg mouse models , although neutrophil recovery is over 10-fold lower in peripheral blood than bone marrow in nsg recipients . however, longer term and serial transplantation in nsg mice and especially transplantation into non-human primates more closely resembles the human in vivo transplant setting . recent studies have demonstrated that $half of the mobilized peripheral blood cd34 hsc/hpc contribute to 310-year long-term and $half to short-term repopulation, while 410 of clones (or $0.1 of cd34 cells) have durable lympho-myeloid reconstitution in nonhuman primates . the limited number of hscs in a single cb unit often restricts these grafts to children and small adults. although double cb units can be transplanted into adults to enhance stem cell content, this does not significantly improve early neutrophil and platelet recovery post-transplant and only one of the transplanted cb units generally engrafts long term . the numbers of hsc/hpcs in a cb graft can be increased by culturing human cb cd34 or cd133 hsc/hpc ex vivo in the presence of cytokines and small molecules prior to transplantation. notably, the cd133 fraction of human cb has been shown to contain all repopulating cells, at least in surrogate models of hematopoiesis . clinical trials have shown that ex vivo cb hsc/hpc expansion can improve the outcome of cb transplantation in terms of time to neutrophil engraftment . however, experimentally, ex vivo culture can also deplete, expand or maintain the long term engrafting hscs in a cb graft . the protocol for expanding cb cells should therefore not only focus on the highest fold expansion of the early engrafting neutrophil and platelet progenitor cells but also on maintaining and amplifying the durable long term repopulating hsc. the rationale behind the use of cytokines and small molecules to expand such cells is based on knowledge of the cues that signal to hsc/hpc cells from their microenvironmental niches in the bone marrow . the efficiency of the ex vivo expansion of hsc/hpc subsets thus depends on the cytokine and small molecule combinations used and can be further modulated with 3d scaffolds or by controlling the supply of nutrients and depletion of inhibitory molecules in the cultures . in most clinical protocols, a minimum basic combination of stem cell factor (scf), thrombopoietin (tpo) and flt3-ligand (flt3l) is used . addition of other cytokines such as interleukin-6 (il-6), hyper-il-6, interleukin-3, g-csf, insulin growth factor binding protein 2 (igfbp-2), notch ligands and angiopoietin-like 5 (angptl5) can improve the fold expansion of the human cd34 and/or cd133 hsc/hpc . more recently, with the ability to segregate human hsc/ hpc into phenotypically enriched cell subsets and to correlate this with their transplantability into surrogate models, other factors [e.g. the aryl hydrocarbon receptor antagonist sr1, hdac and apoptotic inhibitors, pyrimidazoindole derivatives (histone demethylases), dmpge2, nicotinamide] have been added to basic cytokine cocktails (e.g. scf, tpo, flt3l 6 other factors) to enhance the content of short or long term repopulating hsc/hpc . for clinical application, gmp-grade expansion of cd133 or cd34 hsc/hpc is required but is a costly procedure and addition of multiple cytokines increases the cost of an expanded product. therefore, it is vital to use a basic cytokine combination that provides the best expansion without increasing the cost of the procedure while preserving stemness characteristics. in this study, we have analyzed the influence of different combinations of the cytokines scf, tpo, flt3l, igfbp-2, angptl5, il-6, fibroblast growth factor-1 (fgf-1) and oncostatin m (osm) on the fold expansion of human cb cd133 cd34 cells, which contain hscs and their multipotent (mmp, lmpp, mlp and gmp) progeny . we present a computational approach to elicit the effect of different cytokines, by modeling the signaling cascades of the cytokines and thereby their effect on the proliferation, differentiation and survival of these cells in ex vivo culture. we retrieved signaling pathways of the specified cytokines from specialized literature and by database mining. then, we extracted in a rational way all the prevalent effects of signals, merging them into an integrated graph (see supplementary) that we used to model, by means of ordinary differential equations (odes), the biological microenvironment. the model is intrinsically multiscale, i.e. it takes into account events at the molecular level (biochemical signaling pathways) and at the cellular level (differentiation, survival and duplication of target cd34 cd133 cells and the dynamics of cytokines used in the cocktail). the model was tuned by reference to in vitro experiments and then used as a virtual lab. the virtual lab was then applied to search for cytokine cocktails that maximize the duplication of and minimize the loss of cd34 and cd133 cells, using a trial and error procedure. the best in silico protocol was then confirmed by in vitro experiments. this study provides evidence that in vitro data relating to the proliferation of human hsc/hpc can be theoretically modeled with a computational approach. in future applications, this model could be extended to computational modeling of the expansion of human cbstudy whether other cytokines and/or small molecules can improve the survival, proliferation and/or differentiation of defined hsc/hpc subsets or other stem cells (e.g. mesenchymal stem cells) that are used in cellular therapy or inhibit the proliferation of cancer initiating or stem-like cells.  
