computational phosphorylation site prediction in plants using random forests and organism-specific instance weights motivation: phosphorylation is the most important post-translational modification in eukaryotes. although many computational phosphor-ylation site prediction tools exist for mammals, and a few were created specifically for arabidopsis thaliana, none are currently available for other plants. results: in this article, we propose a novel random forest-based method called phosfer (phosphorylation site finder) for applying phosphorylation data from other organisms to enhance the accuracy of predictions in a target organism. as a test case, phosfer is applied to phosphorylation sites in soybean, and we show that it more accurately predicts soybean sites than both the existing arabidopsis-specific predictors, and a simpler machine-learning scheme that uses only known phosphorylation sites and non-phosphorylation sites from soybean. in addition to soybean, phosfer will be extended to other organisms in the near future. availability: phosfer is available via a web interface atkinase-mediated protein phosphorylation is a critical mechanism for the regulation of virtually all cellular processes in eukaryotes . to fully understand signaling mechanisms in an organism of interest, it is necessary to identify both its protein kinases and the sites that those kinases phosphorylate. although the protein kinase complement of many organisms is known , many phosphorylation sites have yet to be identified, particularly in less well-studied organisms. although mass spectrometry enables phosphorylation sites to be detected in a high-throughput manner, most laboratories do not have access to the instruments and expertise required to use this technique. as a result, computational methods for predicting phosphorylation sites have become increasingly popular. dozens of predictors are now available; to review these, see xue et al.most current predictors focus on human phosphorylation sites. however, the protein kinase complements in various organisms differ significantly both in quantity and in kind ; for example, the plant arabidopsis thaliana encodes twice as many protein kinases as does human , but it seems to lack any that are similar to classical human tyrosine kinases. this makes most current predictors suboptimal for predicting phosphorylation sites in non-human organisms. although three toolsphosphat , plantphos and an unnamed tool developed byare specific to arabidopsis, predictors are lacking for other plants. this article describes phosfer (phosphorylation site finder), a phosphorylation site prediction tool for plants, particularly those for which little phosphorylation site data are available. as a test case, we use soybean (glycine max), an economically important crop in many areas of the world. we use a novel strategy for using phosphorylation site data from other organisms to boost predictive performance. specifically, basic local alignment search tool (blast) searches are used to determine the degree of conservation between phosphorylation sites in soybean and those in several other organisms for which known phosphorylation sites are available. a machine-learning scheme is used in which a specific training instance from organism x is given a weight proportional to the level of phosphorylation site conservation between soybean and x, with greater weights implying more influence on the learning process. we show that the resultant predictors outperform the aforementioned arabidopsis-specific tools when applied to soybean, and they also outperform a simpler machine-learning technique that uses only known phosphorylation sites from soybean. in the near future, phosfer will be extended to predict phosphorylation sites in other organisms.in this article, we have described a novel machine-learning model for predicting phosphorylation sites in soybean using known phosphorylation sites from both soybean and other organisms. the use of data from other species resulted in a large improvement in predictive accuracy for t and y sites and a more modest improvement for s sites. the species-specific instance weights generally imparted a modest, but noticeable, increase in predictive performance over similar models that lacked them; however, surprisingly a model using only arabidopsis data for training was able to achieve roughly equivalent performance. we hope that the techniques outlined hererandom forests, aaindex features and the use of cross-species training datacan be used as the basis for even more accurate phosphorylation site predictors, especially for organisms having few experimentally characterized phosphorylation sites.  
