structural bioinformatics computational prediction of n-linked glycosylation incorporating structural properties and patterns motivation: n-linked glycosylation occurs predominantly at the n-x-t/s motif, where x is any amino acid except proline. not all n-x-t/s sequons are glycosylated, and a number of web servers for predicting n-linked glycan occupancy using sequence and/or residue pattern information have been developed. none of the currently available servers, however, utilizes protein structural information for the prediction of n-glycan occupancy. results: here, we describe a novel classifier algorithm, nglycpred, for the prediction of glycan occupancy at the n-x-t/s sequons. the algorithm utilizes both structural as well as residue pattern information and was trained on a set of glycosylated protein structures using the random forest algorithm. the best predictor achieved a balanced accuracy of 0.687 under 10-fold cross-validation on a curated dataset of 479 n-x-t/s sequons and outperformed sequence-based pre-dictors when evaluated on the same dataset. the incorporation of structural information, including local contact order, surface accessi-bility/composition and secondary structure thus improves the prediction accuracy of glycan occupancy at the n-x-t/s consensus sequon. availability and implementation: nglycpred is freely available to non-commercial users as a web-based server at http://exon.niaid. nih.gov/nglycpred/.n-linked glycosylation, the attachment of glycan to the amide nitrogen of asparagine, is an ubiquitous co-/post-translational modification in eukaryotic cells that occurs as the nascent protein is extruded into the endoplasmic reticulum. glycosylation plays an important role in a number of biological processes ranging from protein folding, sorting and degradation to immune response . n-linked glycosylation occurs predominantly at the sequons n-x-t and n-x-s, with rare occurrence at n-x-c, where x is any standard amino acid except proline . studies suggest that about half of n-x-t/s sequons might be glycosylated , and an accurate algorithm that could predict the glycan occupancy (the presence or absence of a glycan) at these sequons would be useful for understanding and utilizing this ubiquitous co-/ post-translational protein modification. a number of algorithms trained with sequence or sequencebased information have been developed to improve the prediction of n-linked glycosylation . to that end,trained artificial neural networks on the surrounding sequence of the n-x-t/s sequons;trained ensembles of support vector machine classifiers based on sequence neighbors;used the random forest (rf) algorithm with pairwise patterns; andtrained support vector machine classifiers based on surrounding sequence, whole protein sequence and sub-cellular localization information. statistical analyses, however, have demonstrated that in addition to sequence differences, there are also structural differences between protein residues in spatial proximity to glycosylated versus nonglycosylated sites . thus, the incorporation of protein structural information might be expected to improve the prediction of the glycan occupancy. the incorporation of structural features in the prediction of n-linked glycan occupancy was previously reported in a conference proceeding ; however, the statistical differences between structure-based and sequence-based predictors were not analyzed, and no publicly available software or web server was provided. in this article, we report the development of, the theoretical basis for, and the properties of a novel predictor, nglycpred, which predicts the glycan occupancy of n-x-t/s sequons of eukaryotic proteins. nglycpred was trained on n-linked glycosylated proteins with structures available in the rcsb pdb database using the rf algorithm . in essence, the rf algorithm uses multiple classification trees constructed with different boot strap samples from the original data, with each tree participating in the final classification. the algorithm is efficient and can handle numeric and nominal values simultaneously. the ability to predict n-glycan occupancy should allow for a better understanding of overall protein structure as well as the aforementioned biological processes and may also assist in the design of hyperglycosylated immunogens . statistical analyses showed that nglycpred performed significantly better than the sequencebased predictors generated using the same dataset. nglycpred is available in the form of a web server andto our knowledge is the first publicly available web server to predict n-glycan occupancy at n-x-t/s sequons that is trained on information derived from experimental structures.five classes of rf predictors were defined: predictors trained on structural properties only, predictors trained on sequence only, predictors trained on pattern only, predictors trained on structural properties and sequence, and predictors trained on structural properties and pattern (see methods section). the performances of these predictors were evaluated based on 10-fold cross-validation of our dataset. the performances of the best rf predictors, ranked by balanced accuracy (the average value of true-positive rate and false-positive rate), from each of the five classes are shown inour results indicate that the incorporation of structural information can improve the prediction of glycan occupancy of n-x-t/s sequons. in our study, the rf predictors generated using structural information, with or without additional pattern information, outperformed the predictors trained on sequence information with statistical significance, as well as a number of other sequence-based servers that were evaluated on our dataset (supplementary). overall, a comparison between different predictors and their underlying algorithms is complicated by the fact that the predictors (and their respective servers) were developed and optimized on different datasets. nevertheless, analyses based on our dataset clearly demonstrated that predictors generated using structural properties could give better predictions than those generated solely by sequence information. differences in local structural features between glycosylated and non-glycosylated sequons were not only observed in our dataset but also in previous studies . moreover, recent evidence has shown that specific amino acid side chains could directly stabilize the first n-acetylglucosamine of the glycan , suggesting that in addition to sequence, structural features could directly affect glycan occupancy. a comparison of the best predictors built on all four and three of the four structural properties (and supplementary) suggested that the ss property might be the most important factor in the improvement of the prediction accuracy. surface accessibility played a lesser role: although the sequons with sa less than the 3.7 2 threshold had a much higher tendency to be non-glycosylated (13 of the 97 non-glycosylated sequons compared with 2 of the 382 glycosylated sequons), sa of496 of the entries (464 out of 479) were above the threshold, and thus the property was less effective for improving prediction accuracy. the reason for the lesser effect of local contact order on prediction accuracy could be similar: for example, in the case of l 13, non-glycosylated entries were enriched in the set with co40.3 (4 of the 97 non-glycosylated sequons compared with 4 of the 382 glycosylated sequons); co of 498 (471 out of 479), however, were below the 0.3 threshold.several limitations are inherent to our current approach. the 154 protein structures used to generate the dataset only encompass a very small subset of the eukaryotic proteome. although we only selected crystal structures with resolution better than 2.5 to generate the dataset, the presence or the conformation of specific amino acid or sugar residues could still be ambiguous in some cases. to increase the reliability of the computational predictions, the dataset used in our study was extensively curated. since the eukaryotic and prokaryotic n-linked glycosylation schemes are different , sequons were only selected from pdb files where the proteins were expressed in eukaryotic systems. to reduce the incidences of false negatives in the dataset, the sequons without asn-nag linkage from the pdb files were considered glycosylated if they were annotated as such in uniprot . the incidences of false negatives were further reduced by considering as glycosylated sequons for which the asn-nag linkage could be modeled in the electron densities from the pdb structure factor file. nevertheless, false negative sequons could still be present in the dataset, in cases where the glycosylation site is occupied but both the glycan electron densities were absent and the site was not annotated as glycosylated in uniprot. furthermore, the ratio of glycosylated to non-glycosylated entries in the dataset was adjusted to roughly 1:1, while the actual ratio of glycosylated to non-glycosylated sites in reality is unknown. additional curation of the dataset could thus further improve the accuracy of the predictions. tuning of some of the rf input parameters, such as the maximum depth of each tree and the number of input variables to be randomly selected at each node, could further optimize the performance of the different predictors. the structural features chosen for the nglycpred algorithm are less sensitive to the exact coordinates of the protein, and therefore should be suitable for use with homology models. in our analysis, we noticed that the knowledge of side chain torsion angles improved the prediction of n-linked glycan occupancy (data not shown). however, since side chain torsions are more difficult to predict for homology models and might differ dramatically before/after glycosylation, we chose not to include this feature in our models so that the nglycpred algorithm would be applicable to both crystal structures and homology models. nonetheless, it should be noted that the accuracy of the predictions may be affected by the quality of the homology models. also, as nglycpred uses structural properties of the protein as input, different predictions would be generated for sequons on sequence-identical domains if the tertiary/quaternary context is different (for example, sequons on the outer-domain of hiv-1 gp120 monomer versus sequons on an outer-domain-only construct). finally, we note that differences in glycosylation do occur between different eukaryotic species (e.g. mammalian versus insect) as well as in different tissues of the same organism; further improvements in n-glycan prediction may be needed to incorporate these variables. furthermore, as the addition of n-linked glycosylation typically occurs during protein translation, with the n-x-t/s sequon recognized by the glycosylation machinery as the nascent polypeptide is synthesized and extruded into the endoplasmic reticulum, the theoretical link between structure-based information and n-glycan prediction is unclear: the protein is not yet folded when n-glycans are incorporated. differences in n-glycan prediction accuracy between artificially incorporated sites and naturally evolved sites may provide insight into this conundrum. the nglycpred algorithm described here should provide better prediction of glycan occupancy, and such a prediction is likely to have a number of applications. for example, the ability to silence immunodominant epitopes reliably, through targeted addition of n-glycans, should contribute to immunogen design. n-glycan can also affect half-life and trafficking of protein therapeutics and correct prediction of glycan occupancy would be of utility. thus, despite recent advancement in experimental technology to detect n-linked glycosylation , a computational algorithm that can quickly identify glycosylation sequons with higher probabilities of glycan occupancy should be of use.  
