systems biology computing biological functions using bio, a formal description of biological processes based on elementary bricks of actions motivation: in the available databases, biological processes are described from molecular and cellular points of view, but these descriptions are represented with text annotations that make it difficult to handle them for computation. consequently, there is an obvious need for formal descriptions of biological processes. results: we present a formalism that uses the bio concepts to model biological processes from molecular details to networks. this computational approach, based on elementary bricks of actions, allows us to calculate on biological functions (e.g. process comparison, mapping structurefunction relationships, etc.). we illustrate its application with two examples: the functional comparison of proteases and the functional description of the glycolysis network. this computational approach is compatible with detailed biological knowledge and can be applied to different kinds of systems of simulation.the identification of the biological functions of all genes and gene products and the understanding of how they interact to yield a living cell is still a challenge for post-genomic biology despite the fact that a huge amount of detailed information on molecular functions has been accumulated by biologists. indeed, such detailed functional knowledge is poorly accessible for biocomputing since it is not (or rarely) formalized and it is often partial. on the other hand, the biological systems modelling community has developed robust formalisms, in which molecular processes can be implemented in a very simplified way. the notion of biological function of a given molecule is very complex because it can vary depending on the environment. in addition, different meanings can be given to this concept based on the level of abstraction chosen by the user (molecular, cellular, etc.). consequently, the functions of gene products have been described in many different ways over the years . to whom correspondence should be addressed.there is, however, a need to establish and use a common reference for functional annotations. current databases describe processes from a molecular and cellular point of view but they use text annotations, which make it difficult to handle them. thus, to calculate with functional annotations, one would require a formal description of such biological processes. in this context, we use the term to calculate to describe the action of computing with biological processes as we do with sequences (i.e. to do process comparisons, evolution, additions, etc. or to simulate dynamic combinations of processes in different environments). such a task is obviously difficult and existing classifications and ontologies are not sufficient to provide a description compatible with comparison, modelling and simulation of sophisticated processes. this is due to the fact that the available classifications have intrinsic limitations because they do not take into account the environment, elements of action shared between two functions, etc. for example, gene ontology (go;) is becoming the standard in the field of classification of terms associated with biological processes. although very useful, the description of biological processes in go is limited to tagging molecules with standardized terms that are hierarchically classified. likewise, the hierarchic enzyme commission (ec) nomenclature system (ec number) is used to classify enzyme reactions. it defines and categorizes catalysed reactions , but often the relation between ec number and enzyme is ambiguous. indeed, a given enzymatic complex can sometimes be characterized not by a global ec number but by several ec numbers, because it contains several active sub-units that participate in different activities (e.g. the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex), as each of them catalyses a different reaction. alternatively, the association of different polypeptides may be required to catalyse a given reaction and they will be all catalogued under a single ec number (i.e. citrate synthase). moreover, a mono-domain enzyme has only one ec number, whereas it can have different actions in different contexts. thus, there are different ec numbers for enzymes that have similar actions and the ec number cannot always represent properly the entire spectrum of enzymatic processes. it is worth noting that biological processes are many and heterogeneous and most of them can be decomposed into combinations of more simple processes, in which a process can be performed by part of a protein (domain), a single protein or a network. thus, biological processes have to be described at different levels of abstraction. moreover, the same process can be performed by different proteins depending on the context. as a consequence, it would be an advantage to describe processes in a generic form. for this, it is necessary to take into account theto compute with biological functions, we need a formalism that on one hand, can integrate part of the complexity of the existing knowledge, and on the other hand, can allow us to make calculations with biological processes. the biological knowledge on functions is wide and very heterogeneous but very little is available in databases about such biological processes despite the fact that a considerable wealth of annotations exist on the biological objects (proteins, nas, small molecules, etc.) that support such processes. in others words, we know more about the players of a process than about the process itself. in addition descriptions of functions and bioobjects are often confusing. bio clearly separates process description and bioobject description and focuses on the different levels, going from the chemical, sub-molecular and molecular entities to the network level. all other existing function annotations do not or only partially address this view. bio is based on the integration of all these levels and it could extend to additional levels if required. we described bea at the chemical level, which can be considered as the elementary bricks that compose all functions in nature. beas fall into four classes and their relationships with ec are available at biodb (http://www.sysdiag.cnrs.fr/publications/ supplementary-materials/biopsi_manager/). obviously, the description of elementary actions provides a generic view of a biological process. it can be used as an element of comparison. to integrate available knowledge on functions, we can complement the description of a biological process with parameters such as substrate specificity, kinetics, conditionality of the process execution based on contextual information (ph, temperature, etc.). these parameters can be global (i.e. temperature) or local to a given page: 1547 15421547  
