structural bioinformatics computing cavities, channels, pores and pockets in proteins from non-spherical ligands models motivation: identifying protein cavities, channels and pockets accessible to ligands is a major step to predict potential proteinligands complexes. it is also essential for preparation of proteinligand docking experiments in the context of enzymatic activity mechanism and structure-based drug design. results: we introduce a new method, implemented in a program named cccpp, which computes the void parts of the proteins, i.e. cavities, channels and pockets. the present approach is a variant of the alpha shapes method, with the advantage of taking into account the size and the shape of the ligand. we show that the widely used spherical model of ligands is most of the time inadequate and that cylindrical shapes are more realistic. the analysis of the void parts of the protein is done via a network of channels depending on the ligand. the performance of cccpp is tested with known substrates of cyto-chromes p450 (cyp) 1a2 and 3a4 involved in xenobiotics metabolism. the test results indicate that cccpp is able to find pathways to the buried heminic p450 active site even for high molecular weight cyp 3a4 substrates such as two ketoconazoles together, an experimentally observed situation. availability: free binaries are available through a software repository atprotein concavities play an important role for biological functions at the molecular level such as ligand binding. knowledge of proteinligand binding sites and their access routes contributes to optimize virtual screening of chemical libraries and then to propose new potential drugs. the concavity containing the active site may be located at various places in the protein. when it is at the surface of the protein, the concavity is called a pocket, and it is called a cavity when the active site is buried inside the protein, in which case the route to the active site is called a channel.in any case, defining the shape of the protein needs to locate the boundary between the protein and its void parts. many algorithms were proposed in the literature to solve this non-trivial problem. in a recent review , 20 geometric algorithms were reported, plus 10 algorithms based either on genomic information or on energy calculations. these latter being devoted to proteinligand complexes energy calculation by docking (seefor a review), they are outside the scope of this article. we report ina nonexhaustive list of 35 geometric algorithms and their variants. there are several ways to classify them. the main criteria are:(i) the computation is dependent or not on probes spheres assumed to represent ligands, (ii) the computation is based either on a rectangular grid or on a delaunay triangulation or on none of them. it has to be noticed that building the delaunay triangulation of n input vertices in the 3d space consists practically in partitioning the smallest convex polyhedron enclosing the n input vertices into non-overlapping adjacent tetrahedra with endpoints edges at input vertices, such that none interior of the spheres circumscribed to these tetrahedra contains any of the input vertices . the dual structure of the delaunay triangulation is the voronoi diagram , which, roughly speaking, is the union of the n polyhedral cells defined from the set of the planes mid-perpendicular to the sides of these tetrahedra. to each of the input vertices k, 1 k n, is associated its polyhedral cell (possibly unbounded) which is the domain containing all points of the space closest to k than to any of the n 1 other vertices. this important property explains why voronoi tessellations were used to visualize the shape of proteins, such as in voro3d . grid methods offer several drawbacks. the orientation of the 3d grid is arbitrary, and most of the time an increase of the precision by 10 needs to increase the number of nodes by 10 3 , thus increasing computing times by 1000. it is the case, when the measures of cavity volumes are estimated from the number of nodes or from the number of voxels (i.e. the 3d analogs of pixels). when the grid nodes are in a graph in which paths are seeked to identify channels, the number of paths to be enumerated increases exponentially with the number of nodes. to overcome this problem, the user can define an arbitrary upper bound to whom correspondence should be addressed.of the shortest paths, but in this case the major part of the network of channels is lost. at the opposite of a grid of virtual nodes, the delaunay triangulation of the n atomic centers is more natural, and efficient algorithms exist, the main one being based on a 4d convex hull . it is why the seminal concept of alpha shape appears in most modern pockets and channels calculation algorithms, as seen in. this concept was first introduced in the plane by, and then was generalized to higher dimensional spaces and proposed for molecular applications by edelsbrunner and muckemucke (1992). alpha shapes are a generalization of the convex hull of the n points, this latter being the smallest convex polyhedron enclosing the n points. a spherical probe sphere of radius alpha erases from the polyhedral hull any point at distance less than alpha to the sphere center for all positions where the sphere does not enclose any of the n points. the resulting object is called an alpha hull. substituting straight edges for the circular ones and triangles for the spherical caps, the final object is the alpha shape of the n points set. when alpha tends to zero, the alpha shape reduces to the n points. when alpha is large enough, the alpha shape is the convex polyhedral hull of the points. for intermediate alpha values, the alpha shape is not convex and can be used as a model of the protein shape. the original variant of the alpha shape concept that we introduce is described in the next section.we presented a new algorithm to compute cavities, channels and pockets in proteins, and we developed a software called cccpp which implements this algorithm and outputs the full network of cavities. the void parts are bounded by the convex hull of the atoms of the protein. the structure of the network is stored in a text file and is written in a molecular file to be displayed with any molecular viewer. it was proved that cylindrical ligands shapes are much more realistic than spherical ligands shapes. on the basis of this unusual cylindrical model, cccpp was successful in explaining how large molecules can be admitted in front of the buried heminic active site of cyp450s. for these latter, cccpp indicated that there is a complex network of channels rather than a small finite number of channels. it also indicated that the final part of the network in front of the heme lies at its distal face, which is in agreement with physico chemical data. we do not claim that our methodology is superior to the tenths of available other ones. we just point out that our methodology gave rise to an alternative tool providing new information about pockets and channels in proteins. it can be used in a virtual screening context, eventually in addition to energy-based methods.  
