gene expression adaption of the global test idea to proteomics data with missing values motivation: global test procedures are frequently used in gene expression analysis to study the relationship between a functional subset of rna transcripts and an experimental group factor. however, these procedures have been rarely used for the analysis of high-throughput data from other sources, such as proteome expression data. the main difficulties in transferring global test procedures from genomics to proteomics data are the more complicated way of obtaining functional annotations and the handling of missing values in some types of prote-omics data. results: we propose a simple mixed linear model in combination with a permutation procedure and missing values imputation to conduct global tests in proteomics experiments. this new approach is motivated by protein expression data obtained by means of 2-d gel elec-trophoresis within a mouse experiment of our current research. a simulation study yielded that power and testing level of the mixed model alone can be affected by missing values in the dataset. imputation of missing values was able to correct for a bias in some simulation settings. our new approach provides the possibility to rank gene ontology (go) terms associated with protein sets. it is also helpful in the case in which a specific protein is represented by multiple spots on a 2-d gel by considering these spots also as a protein set. analysis of our data points at correlations between the deficiency of the protein calreticulin and protein sets related to biological processes in the heart muscle. availability and implementation: our proposed approach is included in the r-package repeatedhighdim, which already contains a global test procedure for gene expression data. the package can be retrieved from http://cran.rcan certain molecular functions, cellular components or biological processes be related to the levels of the grouping factor of a study or an experiment? this question is frequently studied in the analysis of expression data from high-throughput experiments (e.g. with dna microarrays). to answer this question, expression levels of those features that are connected to a particular molecular function can be compared between the different study groups. with this approach, grond, for example, detected a relation between a set of genes involved in the molecular mechanisms of inflammation and acute ischemic stroke. in another study,detected a relation between genes involved in the p53 pathway and the union for international cancer control (uicc) stages of colorectal cancer. statistically, the previously mentioned questions can be analyzed by means of global test procedures. in contrast to methods that analyze the expression levels of all features from a highthroughput experiment individually , a global test focuses on sets of features that are all involved in the same biological function or cellular pathway. although a number of global test approaches for the analysis of functional gene sets have been published , the idea was rarely considered in protein expression data from proteomics experiments. in such experiments, protein expression is usually measured in a high-throughput manner by either mass spectrometry (ms) or 2-d gel electrophoresis (2-de) . for protein expression data measured by ms, a global test approach based on hotellings t 2-statistic to relate specific phenotypes to functionally related sets of proteins was proposed by. besides, an approach for testing protein set enrichment in ms experiments was presented . in this article, we present a new approach for global testing of functional protein sets in the case where expression levels are measured by 2-de. although the ms-based protein expression data referred to bypresent as a complete (d n)-matrix, i.e. without missing values, up to 30 of entries may be empty in the matrix of 2-de-based expression data . however, missing values are also not atypical in ms-based data because of missing peaks in the mass spectra . here, d denotes the number of proteins and n the sample size. missing values in protein expression data from 2-de are because features on a 2-d gel are not placed on an ordered grid like the probe sets on a dna microarray where the location of each particular feature is known. in contrast, spots of labeled proteins appear at more or less different locations on 2-d gels, and spot matching algorithms must be used to bring the information of the experimental replications in line . for a number of protein spots the matching fails, and missing values occur. therefore, a global test procedure for proteomics data from 2-de has to deal with two main difficulties. on the one hand, there is an issue of missing values, and on the other hand, it is more complicated to get functional annotations for the protein to whom correspondence should be addressed. spots, as these spots must first be removed from the gel and the underlying protein must be identified by ms unlike dna microarray data, where the identity of a probe set is given directly. not specific for 2-de data, the problem for all high-throughput data is that the number d of features in a functional set can be much larger than that of the sample size n. the new approach we present here is based on a simple mixed linear model, which is able to handle missing values, in combination with a permutation algorithm to account for the high dimensionality. we evaluate this approach when being applied on the incomplete data on the one hand and on data filled up by a missing value imputation procedure proposed byon the other hand. our article is structured as follows. we first detail the mixed linear model, the permutation procedure and the missing value imputation algorithm, followed by a description of our proteomics experiment. next, we evaluate the methods in a simulation study and apply them to the data example. finally, we provide a discussion of the results and give some conclusions.the 2-de is widely used in proteomics research. to date, gel spots are typically compared between the experimental groups only individually; also, several spots may belong to the same protein or to the same functional term related to some biological processes, cellular component or molecular function. like in dna microarray analysis, global tests for comprehensive testing of functional subsets of genes are not available for gel-based proteomics data. furthermore, most global tests used for the analysis of genomics data do not allow for missing values as typical in gel-based or ms-based protein expression data. in this regard, we studied the applicability of a simple global test procedure to such proteomics data and evaluated the effect of missing values onto the testing level and the power. our simulations with arranged and real-world covariance matrices have shown, that in combination with a permutation procedure, a pre-specified testing levels can be maintained in diverse scenarios. permutation approaches were also successfully used in global test procedures in genomics to correct for biases in the testing level . with regard to our simulation results, we would generallyrecommend the permutation approach for global tests on gelbased proteomics data with missing values. without permutation procedures, the global test performed poor in each of our simulated scenarios. our simulations also yielded that scenarios with unequal sizes of the experimental groups (a2, a3, b4b6) are critical with regard to testing level and power. however, in one of these cases (b6), a bias through missing values could be corrected by means of a missing values imputation approach. in more detail, an inappropriate decrease of simulated levels was observed in scenarios a2 and a3, whereas an inappropriate increase of simulated levels was observed in scenarios b4 and b5. from these results, we would recommend that users should use the mixed model without imputation procedure in the case of unequal sample sizes. interestingly, the missing values were more frequent in the calr/ than those in wt group in our example. from this, one could conclude that the missingness is group-specific here. however, it is known that in multiplex gel approaches, where a gel is prepared with more than one sample (e.g. one treatment and one control sample), missing values appear parallel in both groups. although, the p-values in our analysis of the real data from our mouse experiment were not adjusted for multiple testing , the generation of p-values by the global test procedure allowed at least for a ranking of functional terms. therefore, we are cautious with the biological conclusions in this concrete example. nevertheless, the analysis of our mouse data points at correlations between the deficiency of the protein calreticulin and protein sets related to biological processes in the heart muscle. these correlations were also reported in the context of other experiments . moreover, our analysis detected a correlation between the protein actin, alpha cardiac muscle 1 and the experimental group factor calreticulin. likewise, this correlation was reported earlier in another experiment . both reproductions of known results show, additional to the simulation results, that our methods produced reasonable results. it should also be pointed out that the protein actin, alpha cardiac muscle 1 was not detected in the analysis of the individual spots but detected only when analyzed as a set of multiple spots. this might be explained by an increased statistical power when testing a set of spots globally in comparison to individual testing. an alternative to global tests can be enrichment analysis. in microarray analyses, for example, enrichment tests are used to see whether a certain functional term is overrepresented among the differentially expressed features compared to the non-significant features. in the context of gel-based expression data, such an enrichment approach appears to be less reasonable because not each gel spot is identified and related to a functional annotation. an enrichment procedure, proposed for mass spectrometric protein expression data by, is, therefore, not adequate for gel-based data. thus, our proposed global test procedure is a more useable approach for the biological interpretation of group comparison in gel-based proteomics. although we focused specifically on global tests for gel-based proteomics data, other proteomics data, e.g. from liquid chromatography-ms/ms (lc-ms/ms) experiments, are also concerned with missing values. for these cases, further methodsnote: the upper part lists the top five terms in the different ontology domains. in the lower part, gel spots that were assigned to the same protein were tested as a set.for missing values imputation have been proposed . because the frequency of lc-ms/ ms experiments has overtaken that of 2-de experiments in proteomics, the adaption of the global test idea to these types of data presents an interesting challenge for subsequent research.  
