genome analysis comtar: a web tool for the prediction and characterization of conserved microrna targets in plants motivation: micrornas (mirnas) are major regulators of gene expression in plants and animals. they recognize their target messenger rnas (mrnas) by sequence complementarity and guide them to cleavage or translational arrest. so far, the prediction of plant mirnatarget pairs generally relies on the use of empirical parameters deduced from known mirnatarget interactions. results: we developed comtar, a web tool for the prediction of mirna targets that is mainly based on the conservation of the potential regulation in different species. we used data generated from a pipeline applied to transcript datasets of 33 angiosperms that was used to build a database of potential mirna targets of different plant species. the database contains information describing each mirnatarget pair, their function and evolutionary conservation, while the results are displayed in a user-friendly interface. the tool also allows the search using new mirnas. availability and implementation: the web site is free to all users, with no login requirements, atmicrornas (mirnas) are small rnas processed from larger precursors with foldback structures by ribonuclease type iii enzymes . the mature mirnas are assembled into argonaute complexes and recognize target messenger rnas (mrnas) by partial base complementarity to control their translation and stability . ancient mirnas conserved across angiosperms with important biological roles have been identified, some of them even found in gymnosperms, ferns, lycopods and mosses . the prediction of mirna targets in plants usually relies on the total number and position of mismatches and the minimum free energy (mfe) hybridization . usually, mirna-binding sites are conserved during evolution, and their conservation between arabidopsis thaliana and rice has been exploited to identify mirnas and targets (jones). more recently, it has been shown that the conservation of the target sites using partial genomic information can be used to identify new targets for conserved mirnas in plants . here, we present comtar, a web-based application for the identification of mirna targets in plants based on sequence conservation during evolution. the tool allows users to analyze the variations of known mirna targets during evolution, and to predict new mirna targets.we developed a web tool, comtar, that allows the characterization of mirnatarget interactions in different plant species. the tool also allows the prediction of new candidates based mainly on the conservation of the mirnatarget pair with a relaxed number of mismatches. an advantage of the tool presented here is that evolutionary conserved mirnatarget interactions might be likely involved in relevant biological processes. the approach requests that mirna targeting should be able to occur in the context of a minimum set of interacting parameters in different species. therefore, the sequence of the target itself does not need to be conserved. a previous report using a similar strategy, but using a fewer species and datasets, was successfully used to detect targets previously validated in a.thaliana and to predict and experimentally validate new targets in a.thaliana . the web tool can also be used in a reverse way to search for species where a gene of interest is potentially regulated by an mirna.comtar allows users to predict and characterize mirna-regulated genes by focusing on the conservation of the potential targeting. it provides an alternative strategy to other predictions tools based solely on empirical parameters.  
