structural bioinformatics conformational sampling and structure prediction of multiple interacting loops in soluble and b-barrel membrane proteins using multi-loop distance-guided chain-growth monte carlo method motivation: loops in proteins are often involved in biochemical functions. their irregularity and flexibility make experimental structure determination and computational modeling challenging. most current loop modeling methods focus on modeling single loops. in protein structure prediction , multiple loops often need to be modeled simultaneously. as interactions among loops in spatial proximity can be rather complex, sampling the conformations of multiple interacting loops is a challenging task. results: in this study, we report a new method called multi-loop distance-guided sequential chain-growth monte carlo (m-disgro) for prediction of the conformations of multiple interacting loops in proteins. our method achieves an average rmsd of 1.93 a for lowest energy conformations of 36 pairs of interacting protein loops with the total length ranging from 12 to 24 residues. we further constructed a data set containing proteins with 2, 3 and 4 interacting loops. for the most challenging target proteins with four loops, the average rmsd of the lowest energy conformations is 2.35 a . our method is also tested for predicting multiple loops in b-barrel membrane proteins. for outer-membrane protein g, the lowest energy conformation has a rmsd of 2.62 a for the three extracellular interacting loops with a total length of 34 residues (12, 12 and 10 residues in each loop). availability and implementation: the software is freely available at:protein loops are key structural regions involved in recognition and binding of small molecules and proteins. in structure prediction, accurately predicted loop regions can provide valuable information for understanding the function and dynamics of the proteins. prediction of loop structures, or loop modeling, has received considerable attention in the past (v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com). among these, database search methods can make accurate loop prediction if templates of loop fragments to a query protein are found at a high level of confidence . with the rapid expansion of the pdb, fragment-based approaches are very effective for modeling loop structures . nevertheless, fragment based loop modeling approaches are blind to the local environment of loops, and currently are not applicable for modeling multiple loops that are interacting with each other. in such cases, it is necessary to use template-free methods to predict loop structures. recent advances have enabled template-free prediction of loops with high accuracy . most previous loop modeling studies have focused on predicting structure of a single loop. in reality, multiple loops often need to be modeled for a particular protein target, where loops in spatial proximity can interact in complex ways . an example of interacting loops can be found in the bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (bpti, pdb 6pti), where loop a (residues 716) interacts with loop b (3546). a single substitution in loop b (y35g, pdb 8pti) results in substantial changes to the conformations of both loop a and loop b . in this case, the conformations of the two loops are stabilized by their interactions. interacting loops are also found in membrane proteins. for example, in the b-barrel assembly machinery a protein, the extracellular loops interact with one another, and form a dome over the top of the b-barrel domain . given that the transmembrane strands of many b-barrel membrane proteins can be predicted , accurate loop structure prediction will facilitate the prediction of full structures of this important class of membrane proteins. conventional methods for modeling interacting loops are to generate single loops sequentially one loop after another. however, these methods are prone to be trapped at local energy minima formed by intra-loop interactions, since it cannot effectively model the complex interactions among the loops in spatial proximity. to resolve this issue, several methods have been developed that can model two interacting loops . in, a method for simultaneous prediction of the structure of multiple loops based on the bond-scaling-relaxation loop-closure algorithm was reported. for two loops of lengths of five to seven residues in spatial proximity, their results showed that more accurate predictions can be made than modeling individual loop sequentially.developed the corlps method, in which an energetically feasible ensemble of individual loops are generated using the loopymod method disregarding the presence of other loops. although successful in predicting a number of interacting loop pairs, this method does not work well when both loops have !9 residues. methods have also been developed to model loops in certain protein classes (e.g. antibodies,), using information specific to these classes of proteins. to the best of our knowledge, none of these existing methods can effectively predict three or more interacting loops. in this study, we describe the multi-loop distance-guided chaingrowth monte carlo method (m-disgro) for simultaneously modeling of two or more interacting loops. based on chain-growth monte carlo sampling, which has been applied to a number of studies of proteins , m-disgro simultaneously constructs multiple loops, and does not require completeness of one loop before growing another loop. this sampling strategy randomizes the order of the residues being sampled to generate more diverse loop conformations, making it less likely to over-sample conformations in certain local energy minima. consequently, inter-loop interactions are taken into account more effectively compared with sampling one loop at a time. in addition, loop growth is guided by empirical end-to-end distance functions and backbone dihedral angle distributions, allowing effective exploration of low-energy conformational space . to improve the sampling of long loops, we further introduce a strategy of regrowing loops using fragments. this article is organized as follows. we first describe the mdisgro method in detail. we then present results for loop prediction of soluble proteins using two different test data sets, followed by results on predicting multiple interacting loops in b-barrel membrane proteins. we show that m-disgro has significant advantages in modeling native-like multi-loop compared with corlps reported in danielson and lill (2010). the performance is further improved when loop fragments are used.  
