genetics and population analysis adaptive gene-and pathway-trait association testing with gwas summary statistics background: gene-and pathway-based analyses offer a useful alternative and complement to the usual single snp-based analysis for gwas. on the other hand, most existing gene-and pathway-based tests are not highly adaptive, and/or require the availability of individual-level genotype and phenotype data. it would be desirable to have highly adaptive tests applicable to summary statistics for single snps. this has become increasingly important given the popularity of large-scale meta-analyses of multiple gwass and the practical availability of either single gwas or meta-analyzed gwas summary statistics for single snps. results: we extend two adaptive tests for gene-and pathway-level association with a univariate trait to the case with gwas summary statistics without individual-level genotype and phenotype data. we use the wtccc gwas data to evaluate and compare the proposed methods and several existing methods. we further illustrate their applications to a meta-analyzed dataset to identify genes and pathways associated with blood pressure, demonstrating the potential usefulness of the proposed methods. the methods are implemented in r package aspu, freely and publicly available. availability and implementation: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/aspu/in spite of the tremendous success of genome-wide association studies (gwass), due to modest to small effect sizes of the majority of causal snps for complex and common disease, large sample sizes and more powerful statistical tests are always needed. furthermore, even when some associated snps or loci are identified by the most popular single snp-based analysis, it is often extremely difficult to offer a functional interpretation that can shed light on the underlying biology. as alternatives, gene-and pathway-based analyses have been proposed and applied for single traits, demonstrating their useful and complementary roles . a statistical challenge is that, due to unknown true association patterns, there is no uniformly most powerful test to detect multiple snp-single trait associations; an association test may perform well for one dataset, but not necessarily for another. for example, the presence of non-associated snps will largely diminish the power of a standard test if no effective snp selection or weighting is adopted .proposed a data-adaptive (aspu) approach based on estimating and selecting the most powerful test among a class of so-called sum of powered score (spu) tests, which cover several popular tests as special cases, such as the burden test, a variance component test and a univariate test. the main idea is to use various values of a parameter to construct data-driven and varying weights for the snps, thus adaptive to unknown signal sparsity and association directions among the multiple snps being tested. furthermore,extended the methodology to pathway analysis (aspupath). in particular, two parameters are introduced such that the test is adaptive at both the snp and gene levels. as demonstrated therein, due to their high data-adaptivity, the two adaptive tests remained powerful across a wide range of scenarios.however, the two adaptive tests for gene-and pathway-single trait associations are only applicable to the case with individuallevel genotype and phenotype data. due to various reasons, it is often difficult for many researchers to obtain access to individuallevel data. at the same time, it is easier to obtain access to some summary statistics, e.g. p-values, of individual snps in a gwas. in addition, use of some summary statistics is often necessary for practical meta analyses, which have become increasingly popular and important for complex disease and traits . here we propose extending the two highly adaptive tests to the case with only summary statistics for individual snps, demonstrating their applications to a meta-analyzed gwas dataset for blood pressure . in numerical examples we compared our methods with genebased gates and three pathway-based approaches, gates-simes , hyst and magma . all methods are for a single (univariate) trait. gates adopts an extended simes procedure to correct multiple testing while calculating the p-value quickly based on snp summary statistics. gates-simes extends the main idea of gates to extract the most significant gene-level p-value for a pathway, whereas hyst uses fishers method to combine multiple genes p-values. magma is based on multiple regression. we also considered one gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) method, i-gseagwas , an extension of gsea to gwas summary statistics. note that here our goal is global association testing in the category of selfcontained tests with a null hypothesis h 0 that none of any genes in a pathway is associated with disease, in contrast to enrichment or competitive testing with a null hypothesis h 0;e that the proportion of associated genes in a pathway is no more than that in the rest of the genes; since rejecting h 0;e implies rejecting h 0 , a global testing is often more powerful than an enrichment analysis . the proposed methods are available in r package aspu, which is downloadable from cran.we have proposed two adaptive tests, aspus and aspuspath, respectively for gene-and pathway-level association analyses of a univariate trait with the availability of only summary statistics, such as z-statistics or p-values, for individual snps. with only summary statistics like z-statistics or p-values, one has to recourse to some reference panel to estimate ld or correlations among snps, whichadaptive gene-and pathway-trait association testingmight influence the performance of subsequent association testing. overall, the p-values calculated from using different panels were similar as shown in our analysis of the wtccc data. however, depending on the reference panels being used, the results for a small number of the genes or pathways could be different. hence, caution must be taken, and an independent validation on any detected associations based on summary statistics becomes more important. we have further illustrated the application of the proposed methods to a meta-analyzed gwas data, demonstrating their usefulness as compared to the popular single snp-based analysis. in addition, we have compared their performance with several other existing tests. since there is no uniformly most powerful test for multiple snps, it would be desirable to have an adaptive test that can robustly maintain high, not necessarily highest, power across various scenarios, which motivated our proposed two tests . our proposed tests offer an alternative and complement to existing gene-and pathway-level association testing. we have developed an r package aspu to facilitate their use.  
