sequence analysis consed: a graphical editor for next-generation sequencing the rapid growth of dna sequencing throughput in recent years implies that graphical interfaces for viewing and correcting errors must now handle large numbers of reads, efficiently pinpoint regions of interest and automate as many tasks as possible. we have adapted consed to reflect this. to allow full-feature editing of large datasets while keeping memory requirements low, we developed a viewer, bamscape, that reads billion-read bam files, identifies and displays problem areas for user review and launches the consed graphical editor on user-selected regions, allowing, in addition to long-standing consed capabilities such as assembly editing, a variety of new features including direct editing of the reference sequence, variant and error detection, display of annotation tracks and the ability to simultaneously process a group of reads. many batch processing capabilities have been added. availability: the consed package is free to academic, government and non-profit users, and licensed to others for a fee by the university of washington. the current version (26.0) is available for linux, macosx and solaris systems or as c source code. it includes a users manual (with exercises) and example datasets.dna sequencing practice has changed dramatically in recent years. for many organisms, high-quality reference genomes are now available, and current research focuses on identifying variants in particular individuals via resequencing, rather than de novo genome assembly. in addition, several high-throughput next-generation sequencing technologies, which generate reads that are generally shorter and/or less accurate than sanger sequencing reads, have become widely available . in resequencing applications, newly derived reads are aligned to an existing reference using an alignment program, e.g.. when no reference is available, the reads must first be assembled into contigs using a de novo assembly program, e.g.in the following, we use assembly to mean either read alignment to a reference or de novo assembly.) although such programs are reasonably accurate, errors are not uncommon. much useful information can be extracted from an imperfect assembly, but accurate sequence is crucial for some applications. mismapped reads and systematic base-calling errors can confuse snp-calling programs. accurate sequence is also needed to reliably identify mutations and when biological features in the sequenced region will be the subject of significant experimental work. as a result, finishingthe process of identifying and correcting assembly errorsremains an important component of many sequencing projects. reliable finishing generally requires some viewing and manipulation of the assembly by the researcher using a graphical assembly editing program . several programs allow viewing but not manipulating the assembly, e.g., whereas others allow automated but not manually directed finishing, e.g.. to our knowledge, gap5 and consed are the only programs that allow editing billion-read assemblies. consed was originally developed in the era of sanger sequencing and used in finishing the human and other genomes; it continues to be widely used, with $190 citations per year and $1000 downloads per year. here we describe recent adaptations to handle large datasets of next-generation reads, as well as new viewing and searching features unrelated to finishing.  
