construction and completion of flux balance models from pathway databases motivation: flux balance analysis (fba) is a well-known technique for genome-scale modeling of metabolic flux. typically, an fba formulation requires the accurate specification of four sets: biochemical reactions, biomass metabolites, nutrients and secreted metabolites. the development of fba models can be time consuming and tedious because of the difficulty in assembling completely accurate descriptions of these sets, and in identifying errors in the composition of these sets. for example, the presence of a single non-producible metabolite in the biomass will make the entire model infeasible. other difficulties in fba modeling are that model distributions, and predicted fluxes, can be cryptic and difficult to understand. results: we present a multiple gap-filling method to accelerate the development of fba models using a new tool, called metaflux, based on mixed integer linear programming (milp). the method suggests corrections to the sets of reactions, biomass metabolites, nutrients and secretions. the method generates fba models directly from pathway/genome databases. thus, fba models developed in this framework are easily queried and visualized using the pathway tools software. predicted fluxes are more easily comprehended by visualizing them on diagrams of individual metabolic pathways or of metabolic maps. metaflux can also remove redundant high-flux loops, solve fba models once they are generated and model the effects of gene knockouts. metaflux has been validated through construction of fba models for escherichia coli and homo sapiens.flux balance analysis (fba) is a methodology for constructing genome-scale, steady-state models of metabolic networks. it has a variety of applications from evaluation of potential growth media for an organism to prediction of phenotypes of knockout mutants. however, current fba technology has a number of limitations. the development of fba models is extremely time consuming, requiring 1224 months . once developed, models are typically communicated using cryptic data files that make the models difficult for other parties to comprehend and evaluate. the fluxes calculated by a model are also difficult to comprehendinterpreting the long list of fluxes produced from an fba computation to understand the flux levels of reactions within the network can be very time consuming. we present a new software technology for generating fba models that accelerates model development and produces models that are easier to inspect and comprehend. our approach, based on a new tool called metaflux, couples fba with pathway databases (dbs) via the pathway tools software environment, of which metaflux is a part. the first phase of model development is to infer a metabolic reaction list from an annotated genome sequence. although some groups appear to still perform this process in a manual fashion , pathway tools has performed this process automatically for many years . it maps the enzyme names, ec numbers and gene ontology terms found in an annotated genome to reactions in the metacyc db . the resulting reaction list (and predicted metabolic pathways and pathway hole fillers) are stored in the form of a pathway/genome database (pgdb). metaflux provides a novel completion method for accelerating the second phase of model development, in which the reaction list, plus associated nutrient, secretion,and biomass metabolite sets, are converted to a functional fba model. by completion we mean the software suggests components (e.g. reactions and nutrients) to add to a model to render the model feasible. a model is feasible if the linear optimizer used to solve the system of equations of which an fba model is comprised, can find a non-zero solution to those equations. intuitively, for an fba model to be feasible, it means that the metabolic network can produce all compounds in the biomass equation from the nutrients. the completion method reduces the time-consuming work of meticulously refining the network of reactions, the set of biomass metabolites and the selection of appropriate metabolites as nutrients and secretions (e.g. byproducts, toxins and signaling molecules), which are needed to produce a feasible fba model. genome-scale metabolic network models typically contain hundreds of reactions, and are typically missing reactions in their early formulations, since most genome-scale networks are derived from genome annotations that are themselves incomplete. similarly, the initially formulated set of nutrient and secreted compounds may be incomplete. any of the preceding omissions can result in an  
