context similarity scoring improves protein sequence alignments in the midnight zone motivation: high-quality protein sequence alignments are essential for a number of downstream applications such as template-based protein structure prediction. in addition to the similarity score between sequence profile columns, many current profileprofile alignment tools use extra terms that compare 1d-structural properties such as secondary structure and solvent accessibility, which are predicted from short profile windows around each sequence position. such scores add non-redundant information by evaluating the conservation of local patterns of hydrophobicity and other amino acid properties and thus exploiting correlations between profile columns. results: here, instead of predicting and comparing known 1d properties, we follow an agnostic approach. we learn in an unsupervised fashion a set of maximally conserved patterns represented by 13-residue sequence profiles, without the need to know the cause of the conservation of these patterns. we use a maximum likelihood approach to train a set of 32 such profiles that can best represent patterns conserved within pairs of remotely homologs, structurally aligned training profiles. we include the new context score into our hmm-hmm alignment tool hhsearch and improve especially the quality of difficult alignments significantly. conclusion: the context similarity score improves the quality of homology models and other methods that depend on accurate pairwise alignments.most methods for fold recognition and protein structure prediction are based on the pairwise alignment of query and template sequence profiles . top-performing structure prediction tools add to the profile column similarity score a secondary structure score, which improves the sensitivity for detecting remote homologs and the quality of the resulting alignments . in order to maximize the information gain and therefore the improvements in alignment quality, various finer-grained alphabets of backbone structure states have been developedtogether with tools to predict these states . in addition to secondary structure, other 1d structural properties are employed to improve sequence alignments in the so-called twilight and midnight zone, such as solvent accessibility , residue coordination numbers , backbone dihedral torsion angles , 1d environmental fitness scores , or a combination of these . in allcases, the discretized 1d structural property is predicted from a local sequence profile window of 13 to 15 positions, and the similarity between predicted and actual 1d properties of the aligned query and template positions is scored. one can get independent of structural information by comparing 1d predictions with 1d predictions. surprisingly, this works almost as well . we believe the reason is that the conservation of a 1d structural property is tied to the conservation of characteristic local patterns of amino acid properties, and the conservation of these patterns is scored indirectly by comparing the predicted 1d property. because the relationship of patterns to properties is many to few, for example, many quite different patterns are all characteristic of alpha helix states, more information might be extracted by learning and comparing conserved patterns directly, independent of what actual structural properties they are associated with. two studies learned local sequence context patterns to improve alignments.train a self organizing map (som) to cluster local profile windows. they then trained a neural network to compute an optimum similarity score for aligned pairs of som states. improvements were small, however.and(2013) reported substantial improvements in alignment quality using a non-linear extension of conditional random fields which include as features the local sequence profile neighborhood. here, we devised a method to explicitly learn strongly conserved local patterns. for training, we cut out pairs of sequence profile windows from structurally aligned, homologous proteins and learn the set of the 32 best-conserved patterns using the expectation maximization (em) algorithm. with these patterns, which we call context states, we define a score that helps to discriminate homologous from nonhomologous positions by analyzing the conservation of patterns between the aligned positions. we show that the new context similarity score improves the quality of global and local alignments of our pairwise alignment tools hhsearch and hhalign and that this in turn results in better 3d homology models.the new context score helps most in the difficult cases: (i) when little evolutionary information is contained in the hmms to be aligned, and (ii) when proteins are remotely related. in the first case, integrating the sparse evolutionary information vertically within an msa leads to only little noise suppression (i.e. the distinction of correct from incorrect alignments). therefore, we profit most from pulling together information horizontally along the msas. in the second case, it makes sense to focus on the features that are best conserved among remote homologs, which is what our context score was trained to do. the new score slows down hhsearch by a factor of 100. this precludes its use in hhblits, whereas it will be unproblematic for homology modeling and other applications, where a relatively small set of proteins needs to be aligned with the best possible quality.profile only ss ss+str ss+ctxplot: fraction of query hmms whose roc5 value is above the value on the x-axis. the roc5 value for a query is the average sensitivity in a query-specific roc plot up to the fifth fp match  
