systems biology contextual analysis of rnai-based functional screens using interaction networks motivation: considerable attention has been directed in recent years toward the development of methods for the contextual analysis of expression data using interaction networks. of particular interest has been the identification of active subnetworks by detecting regions enriched with differential expression. in contrast, however, very little effort has been made toward the application of comparable methods to other types of high-throughput data. results: here, we propose a new method based on co-clustering that is specifically designed for the exploratory analysis of large-scale, rnai-based functional screens. we demonstrate our approach by applying it to a genome-scale dataset aimed at identifying host factors of the human pathogen, hepatitis c virus (hcv). in addition to recovering known cellular modules relevant to hcv infection, the results enabled us to identify new candidates and formulate biological hypotheses regarding possible roles and mechanisms for a number of them. for example, our analysis indicated that hcv, similar to other enveloped viruses, exploits elements within the endosomal pathway in order to acquire a membrane and facilitate assembly and release. this echoed a number of recent studies which showed that the escrt-iii complex is essential to productive infection. contact:an important challenge in the analysis of high-throughput datasets, such as transcriptomic and proteomic data, is the integration of prior knowledge in their interpretation. one class of methods that has arisen to address this challenge is gene set analysis (gsa) . motivated by the increasing body of evidence that cellular responses are usually organized into pathways or active modules , gsa methods try to assess the overall association between the phenotype of interest and known groupings of genes, by comparing the latter with the data. although hugely successful, as evidenced by a large body of literature, gsa suffers from a number of drawbacks. probably foremost of these, and somewhat ironic, is its reliance on predetermined gene sets. as a consequence of this dependency, gsa cannot be expected to whom correspondence should be addressed. to discover novel pathways. in addition, with few exceptions (see), gsa algorithms treat pathways simply as sets; i.e. they completely ignore information on the individual interactions between entities (e.g. topology). such information could potentially also be of use. to complement the shortcomings of gsa, methods that try to more generally integrate interaction with expression data, outside the scope of canonical pathways, have emerged. we collectively refer to these as significant area search (sigarsearch) methods. one of the earliest of these was the co-clustering approach by. in their paper, they proposed to cluster genes based on a distance function that integrated measures of both expression correlation and interaction network proximity. almost at the same time,presented a method that framed the contextual interpretation task as an optimization problem. specifically, they defined a scoring function on subnetworks based on the data values of the genes included in a subgraphand employed a search algorithm to find high scoring regions. because the underlying combinatorial problem, i.e. that of finding the maximal-scoring connected subgraph with additive scores defined on the vertices, was proven to be np-hard, the authors proposed a heuristic strategy based on simulated annealing. similar to gsa, the interpretative power of sigarsearch is also limited by the scope of the background knowledge/information that is used (i.e. the interaction network). however, a key difference between the two paradigms exists, owing to the different roles that gene groups play in them. whereas gsa requires that these be specified beforehand, sigarsearch actually tries to infer such modular relationships between genes directly (at least the ones relevant to the current expression data), subject to the binary relations encoded in the network. thus, sigarsearch is potentially able to discover new groupings, which could, for example, correspond to uncharacterized protein complexes or pathways. this capability is particularly relevant if the background network used consists of, or includes, interactions taken from unbiased, large-scale interaction screens (e.g. using y2h or tap/ms; see shoemaker and panchenko, 2007 for a review of such methods). the optimization framework introduced byfor sigarsearch later inspired the development of several improvements. for example, a number of groups proposed the use of alternative heuristic search strategies, such as the greedy approaches of. others proposed extensions to the scoring system, such as including scores defined on the edges (interactions) instead of just the vertices (genes). subsequently,pointed out that the existing methods (based on the optimization framework)  
