control: an open source framework for the analysis of chemical reaction networks we introduce control, a web-based framework for analysis of chemical reaction networks (crns). it is designed to be both extensible and simple to use, complementing existing crn-related tools. control currently implements a number of necessary and/or sufficient structural tests for multiple equilibria, stable periodic orbits, convergence to equilibria and persistence, with the potential for incorporation of further tests.differential equation models of chemical reaction networks (crns), encompassing many ecological, epidemiological and related non-negative systems, are almost universally complicated by parameter uncertainty. however, dynamical properties of large classes of crn models are remarkably robust to changes in parameter values, leading to a range of results relating network structure to dynamical behavior. such parameter-free approaches to the analysis of crns fall into the scope of chemical reaction network theory . fuelled in part by its implications to systems biology , chemical reaction network theory has seen a surge of interest in recent years, attacking questions about multistationarity , global stability , oscillatory behavior and persistence . many of the results in chemical reaction network theory lend themselves to algorithmic implementation, which is useful for large networks. in this article, we introduce control (crn tool), a new, fully open source platform, currently coded in c, java, octave and php, to perform computations on crns without the need for any proprietary software. control has a web-based front-end interfacing with a suite of modular tests, to which users may add new tests in any language. with its array of features, control complements existing software tools. the chemical reaction network toolbox is a proprietary windows program that implements the results of deficiency theory , as well as checks for concordance , equivalent to network injectivity. it applies to various types of kinetics, including mass action, and generates detailed information about network properties, multiple and degenerate steady states and their stability. reaction network equilibria study toolbox (ernest) and crnreals are matlab toolboxes aimed at testing multistationarity, and distinguishability and identifiability of crns, respectively. tests for multistationarity of crns are also implemented in maple . while not all criteria included in these tools are currently tested in control, its extensible nature allows for their future inclusion.we have written control aiming for a user-friendly tool with maximal functionality, implementing state-of-the-art theory on crns. we expect future inclusion of further results from the rich theory of crns, with contributions from the research community.gk, general kinetics; ma, mass action kinetics; , the system is injective on the relative interior of each non-trivial stoichiometry class; , the fully open system is injective on the non-negative orthant. for example, with mass action kinetics, 45 (ma) of the networks was injective on the relative interior on each non-trivial stoichiometric class, only slightly more than with general kinetics (gk). see for more details.. futile cycle dsr graph  
