control-free calling of copy number alterations in deep-sequencing data using gc-content normalization we present a tool for control-free copy number alteration (cna) detection using deep-sequencing data, particularly useful for cancer studies. the tool deals with two frequent problems in the analysis of cancer deep-sequencing data: absence of control sample and possible polyploidy of cancer cells. freec (control-free copy number caller) automatically normalizes and segments copy number profiles (cnps) and calls cnas. if ploidy is known, freec assigns absolute copy number to each predicted cna. to normalize raw cnps, the user can provide a control dataset if available; otherwise gc content is used. we demonstrate that for illumina single-end, mate-pair or paired-end sequencing, gc-contentr normalization provides smooth profiles that can be further segmented and analyzed in order to predict cnas. availability: source code and sample data are available atin many studies that apply deep sequencing to cancer genomes, one has to calculate copy number profiles (cnps) and predict regions of gain and loss. there exist two frequent obstacles in the analysis of cancer genomes: absence of an appropriate control sample for normal tissue and possible polyploidy. most current tools do not take these points into account (supplementary). for various reasons, sequencing of an appropriate control sample is not always possible. there is therefore a need for a bioinformatics tool able to automatically detect copy number alterations (cnas) without use of a control dataset. several programs have been published that allow automatic calculation and analysis of cnps . however, both cnv-seq and segseq need datasets for the given tumor and its paired normal dna. moreover, both programs predict cnas without providing information about how many copies were lost or gained. an interesting approach for predicting copy number variants was suggested by, where gc content is used to normalize data. however, to estimate the normal copy number, to whom correspondence should be addressed. they rely on the assumption that there are similar percentages of amplified and deleted regions, which is not true in general for cancer cells. moreover, their tool was designed to analyze normal human genomes and is unable to take into account possible polyploidy. here, we propose an algorithm to call cnas with or without a control sample. the algorithm is implemented in the c++ program freec (control-free copy number caller). freec uses a sliding window approach to calculate read count (rc) in non-overlapping windows (raw cnp). then, if a control sample is available, the program normalizes raw cnp using the control profile. otherwise, the program calculates gc content in the same set of windows and performs normalization by gc content. since this removes a major source of variability in raw cnps , the resulting normalized profile becomes sufficiently smooth to apply segmentation. this is followed by the analysis of predicted regions of gains and losses in order to assign copy numbers to these regions.we applied the method to predict cnas in mate-pair datasets for the melanoma cell line colo-829 and matched normal cell line colo829bl , a paired-end dataset for the smallcell lung cancer cell line nci-h2171 and a single-end dataset for the breast cancer cell line hcc1143 . all four samples were sequenced using the illumina genome analyzer platform. the number of reads in samples varied from 14 to 20 million (supplementary). the polynomial fit by gc content explained well the observed rc (d). using cnps normalized by gc content, we identified regions of gain and loss in the four samples (h, supplementary4). we also assessed true positive and false positive rate for a normal diploid sample na18507 (; supplemenary). we compared freec with three other existing tools: cnv-seq, segseq and rdxplorer (supplementary tables 1 and 4). as well as providing other additional functionalities, freec understands more input formats than any other tool. it can be used to analyze data produced for any organism and for polyploid genomes. being implemented in c++, freec shows excellent performance and operating system portability.we have presented a tool for automatic detection of cnas and calculation of cna frequency. freec provides more functionalities than existing tools; in particular, it can deal with the situation when no control experiment is available and when the genome is polyploid, frequent problems in cancer studies. the main steps are (i) normalization of the cnp using gc content (or control cnp if available), (ii) segmentation of normalized profiles and (iii) assignment of copy number changes to losses and gains. the program is fast, accurate and freely available.  
