convolutional neural network architectures for predicting dna–protein binding motivation: convolutional neural networks (cnn) have outperformed conventional methods in modeling the sequence specificity of dnaprotein binding. yet inappropriate cnn architectures can yield poorer performance than simpler models. thus an in-depth understanding of how to match cnn architecture to a given task is needed to fully harness the power of cnns for computational biology applications. results: we present a systematic exploration of cnn architectures for predicting dna sequence binding using a large compendium of transcription factor datasets. we identify the best-performing architectures by varying cnn width, depth and pooling designs. we find that adding convolutional kernels to a network is important for motif-based tasks. we show the benefits of cnns in learning rich higher-order sequence features, such as secondary motifs and local sequence context, by comparing network performance on multiple modeling tasks ranging in difficulty. we also demonstrate how careful construction of sequence benchmark datasets, using approaches that control potentially confounding effects like positional or motif strength bias, is critical in making fair comparisons between competing methods. we explore how to establish the sufficiency of training data for these learning tasks, and we have created a flexible cloud-based framework that permits the rapid exploration of alternative neural network architectures for problems in computational biology. availability and implementation: all the models analyzed are available at http://cnn.the recent application of convolutional neural networks to sequence-based problems in genomics signals the advent of the deep learning era in computational biology. two recent methods, deepbind and deepsea , successfully applied deep learning to modeling the sequence specificity of protein binding with a performance superior to the best existing conventional learning methods. learning tasks in genomics often have tens of thousands or more training examples, which makes them well adapted to training convolutional neural networks without overfitting. such training examples are typically drawn from high-throughput data, such as those produced by the encyclopedia of dna elements (encode) project . the convolutional neural networks used by deepbind and deepsea are essential building blocks in deep learning approaches in computer vision . the adaptation of convolutional neural networks from computer vision to genomics can be accomplished by considering a window of genome sequence as an image. instead of processing 2-d images with three color channels (r,g,b), we consider a genome sequence as a fixed length 1-d sequence window with four channels (a,c,g,t). therefore the genomic task of modeling dna sequence proteinbinding specificity is analogous to the computer vision task of twoclass image classification. one of the biggest advantages of a convolutional neural network for genomics is its ability to detect a motif wherever it is in the sequence window, which perfectly suits the task of motif identification and hence binding classification. we have conducted a systematic exploration of the performance of convolutional network architectures for the fundamental genomic task of characterizing the binding affinity of transcription factors to dna sequence in 690 different chip-seq experiments. we designed v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.  
