gene expression co-regulation in embryonic stem cells via context-dependent binding of transcription factors motivation: with the accumulation of genome-wide binding data for many transcription factors (tfs) in the same cell type or cellular condition , it is of great current interest to systematically infer the complex regulatory logic among multiple tfs. in particular, chip-seq data have been generated for 14 core tfs critical to the maintenance and reprogramming of mouse embryonic stem cells (escs). this provides a great opportunity to study the regulatory collaboration and interaction among these tfs and with other unknown co-regulators. results: in combination with liquid association among gene expression profiles, we develop a computational method to predict context-dependent (cd) co-egulators of these core tfs in escs from pairwise binding datasets. that is, co-occupancy between a core tf and a predicted co-regulator depends on the presence or absence of binding sites of another core tf, which is regarded as a binding context. unbiased external validation confirms that the predicted cd binding of a co-regulator is reliable. our results reveal a detailed cd co-regulation network among the 14 core tfs and provide many other potential co-regulators showing strong agreement with the literature.many efforts have been made recently to identify the core regulatory network in mouse embryonic stem cells (escs;). the network is anchored on three master regulators, namely, oct4 (pou5f1), sox2 and nanog. on the other hand, four transcription factors (tfs), oct4, sox2, cmyc and klf4, can reprogram somatic cells back to esc-like cells having the characteristics of self-renewal and pluripotency . genome-wide chip-seq data provide the binding regions of 410 tfs that play key regulatory roles in mouse escs . computational analyses have been performed to identify the sequence motifs of these core tfs and to detect other co-regulators that may regulate genes by working with these tfs . a common observation on these binding data is the partial and significant overlapping between the binding regions of almost any pair of the tfs, suggesting extensive co-regulatory interactions among all of them. in general, one may define three sets of binding regions given two tfs, x and y, that is, the co-bound regions s xy, and the regions bound only by x or y, denoted by s xny and s ynx , respectively. from the perspective of tf x, the regions s xy and s xny can be regarded as two different binding contexts, defined by whether binding is accompanied by tf y. in our previous work , we developed a specific motif discovery method, the contrast motif finder (cmf), which finds de novo motifs by contrasting two sets of sequences, say s xy and s x ny. motifs found by cmf are differentially enriched between the two sequence sets. applying cmf to contrast co-bound sequences of oct4 and sox2 against sequences bound only by oct4, we discovered novel context-dependent (cd) motifs for oct4, that is, the motif pattern recognized by oct4 depends on the nearby sox2 binding . in this work, we generalize this idea to the prediction of cd co-regulators of a tf. for a tf x with binding context defined by another tf y, we aim at finding motifs that show differential enrichment between s xy and s xny. these motifs may be bound by co-regulators of tf x, dependent on the binding of y. if a co-regulator z only works with x when y is present, one may expect to find the motif of z in s xy but not in s xny. on the contrary, if z collaborates with x when y is absent, then the motif of z will be enriched in s xny but not in s xy. seefor an illustration. the motif of such a cd co-regulator can be reliably found by cmf when contrasting the two sets of sequences. on the other hand, gene expression profiles of the three tfs, x, y and z, may provide independent evidence for the potential cd co-regulation. if z is a co-regulator of x when y is present (or absent), one expects to observe strong positive correlation between the expression profiles of x and z when the expression level of y is high (or low) . such a three-way correlation pattern can be measured by liquid association (la) developed by. by combining cd binding and la among three tfs, we restrict our analysis to some specific cd co-regulation patterns. we assume that binding site patterns are identical across all samples from which gene expression data are collected. use the right panels inand b to demonstrate our model. the binding pattern that x co-binds, respectively, with z and y for different target genes is assumed to be true across all samples. together with the three-way expression pattern among the three tfs, we are considering the following co-regulatory relationship. when to whom correspondence should be addressed. the expression of y is low but that between x and z is highly correlated, the co-occurrence between the sites of x and y is not functional (because of a lack of y expression), while the co-binding between x and z regulates their target genes. when high expression of y with low correlation between the expression of x and z is observed, the opposite scenario is considered. this is of course a simplified model, which does not include other types of more general conditional co-regulation. but for the data we analyzed in this work, a substantial fraction of tf triplets with cd binding in their chip-seq data indeed show significant la among their expression profiles. see section 2.3 for details.we performed a systematic study on 14 tfs with available chip-seq data to find cd co-regulators in mouse escs. all of the 14 tfs play critical or relevant regulatory roles in escs. for instance, oct4, sox2, nanog, esrrb and zfx are known regulators of pluripotency and/or self-renewal ; lif signal pathway can sustain self-renewal of cells by activating stat3 ; together with oct4 and sox2, cmyc and klf4 can reprogram somatic cells to pluripotent cells . we call them core tfs hereafter. expression data ofwere integrated for la analysis.reported expression data on 70 samples in response to rnai of a few key tfs and during retinoic acid induction of mouse escs.generated 16 expression profiles, including 3 profiles of undifferentiated mouse escs, 5 profiles from early embryoid body (eb) with high oct4 expression, and 8 profiles from eb with low oct4 expression. to unify description and simplify notations, we present our results on the 182 ( 14 13) ordered pairs among the 14 core tfs. for an ordered pair x, y, our goal is to predict co-regulators z of x with context defined by the presence or absence of y binding sites. two sets of sequences, s xy and s xny , were extracted from the chip-seq data of x and y for each ordered pair (more details in methods section). seefor a flowchart including the key steps of our analysis.we used a computational method to predict cd co-regulators based on chip-seq data of two tfs and gene expression data. this method can be applied to many available chip-seq and gene expression data, and is able to decode complex combinatorial regulation among multiple regulators. our application to mouse esc data demonstrated the novel biological insights that can be generated by this method. in particular, we constructed a reliable cd co-regulation network among 14 core tfs in mouse escs and identified a list of novel co-regulators for future investigation. a few lines of future work may further widen the application of our approach. it is tempting to detect co-regulators under more complex binding context, say, defined by the combinatorial binding of three or more tfs. however, an efficient way to identify a small set of most relevant binding contexts is crucial, as a naive comparison among all combinatorial binding regions will be prohibitive computationally. therefore, a principled statistical method to detect combinatorial binding regions from chip-seq data of multiple (potentially a large collection of) tfs is highly desired. generalization of cmf to an efficient tool that finds differentially enriched motifs by comparing multiple sets of sequences is another necessary step. it is also interesting to study the relation between epigenetic factors and cd binding of tfs.  
