correcting population stratification in genetic association studies using a phylogenetic approach motivation: the rapid development of genotyping technology and extensive cataloguing of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) across the human genome have made genetic association studies the mainstream for gene mapping of complex human diseases. for many diseases, the most practical approach is the population-based design with unrelated individuals. although having the advantages of easier sample collection and greater power than family-based designs, unrecognized population stratification in the study samples can lead to both false-positive and false-negative findings and might obscure the true association signals if not appropriately corrected. methods: we report phylostrat, a new method that corrects for population stratification by combining phylogeny constructed from snp genotypes and principal coordinates from multi-dimensional scaling (mds) analysis. this hybrid approach efficiently captures both discrete and admixed population structures. results: by extensive simulations, the analysis of a synthetic genome-wide association dataset created using data from the human genome diversity project, and the analysis of a lactase-height dataset, we show that our method can correct for population stratification more efficiently than several existing population stratification correction methods, including eigenstrat, a hybrid approach based on mds and clustering, and stratscore , in terms of requiring fewer random snps for inference of population structure. by combining the flexibility and hierarchical nature of phylogenetic trees with the advantage of representing admixture using mds, our hybrid approach can capture the complex population structures in human populations effectively. software availability: codes can be downloaded fromthe rapid development of genotyping technology and extensive cataloguing of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) across to whom correspondence should be addressed. the human genome have made genetic association studies the mainstream for gene mapping of complex human diseases. for many diseases, the most practical approach is the population-based design with unrelated individuals. although having the advantages of easier sample collection and greater power than family-based designs, population-based design is prone to population stratification . population stratification refers to the presence of a systematic difference in allele frequencies between subpopulations in a study due to ancestry difference between study subjects. unrecognized population stratification can lead to both false-positive and false-negative findings and can obscure the true association signals if not appropriately corrected. there are three types of population structures that might be observed in genetic association studies: discrete population structure consists of populations that are remotely related (such as europeans, africans and asians) and the population structure is easy to discern as the individuals are clearly separated. admixed population structure consists of subjects of admixed ancestry (such as african americans and hispanic americans) with different individuals having different degrees of admixture, and that cannot be separated into discrete clusters. intercontinental gradients can also be considered as admixed, although the degree of admixture is smaller than african americans and hispanic americans. in other scenarios, we may see hierarchical population structure that consists of both discrete and admixed population structures. hierarchical population structures may be seen in studies that involve multi-ethnic cohorts, which are becoming increasingly common in genetics consortiums . recognizing the issue of population stratification induced by population structures, various methods have been developed to control for population stratification. two early approaches are genomic control and structured association . the genomic control method corrects for stratification by adjusting association statistics with an overall inflation factor obtained from a set of random markers that are not associated with the phenotypes of interest. however, some markers differ in their allele frequencies across ancestral populations more than others. thus, the uniform adjustment may be insufficient at markers having strong differentiation across ancestral populations and may be superfluous at markers lacking such differentiation. structured association uses structure program to assign the study subjects to discrete subpopulations and then aggregates evidence of association within each subpopulation. this method is computationally intensive, andpage: 799 798806to evaluate our proposed method, we carried out extensive simulations, including discrete population structure, admixed population structure and a synthetic casecontrol gwas dataset generated from the hgdp data, which represents hierarchical population structure. we assessed whether the proposed method can appropriately correct for population stratification by estimating type i error rate, and also assessed its power in detecting disease association. we compared phylostrat with four other methods, including (i) the conventional cochranarmitage trend test , which does not control for population stratification, (ii) the eigenstrat approach , (iii) the mds clustering approach ; and (iv) the stratscore approach . for stratscore, as suggested by the authors (dr michael epstein, personal communication), we adjusted the continuous stratification scores (obtained from principal components) rather than the quartiles of the stratification scores because this modified version of stratscore generally leads to smaller type i errors than the original method under the simulation settings we considered. we did not compare with the genomic control approach becauseand li and yu (2008) have demonstrated its unsatisfactory performance. for type i error and power estimation, significance was evaluated at the 1 level.we have developed a new method to correct for population stratification in genetic association analysis by combining information obtained from phylogenetic trees and mds analysis. our method represents relations between individuals genetic background using a set of phylogenetic bipartitions and principal coordinates from mds analysis, and incorporates them as covariates in a regression framework to adjust for the confounding effect due to hidden population stratification.as shown in our simulations, this hybrid approach effectively captures both discrete and admixed population structures. it yields a more appropriate correction for population stratification than eigenstrat , mds clustering and stratscore under discrete population structures; its performance is similar to these three approaches under admixed population structures. to evaluate the performance of our method when the population structure is hierarchical, we applied our method to the hgdp dataset, which contains real genetic variation patterns. although none of the methods could completely remove the confounding effect of population stratification, phylostrat performs favorably against the other methods and yields type i error rates that are closer to the nominal level. to test the performance of our method in real genetic association studies, we applied our method to a lactaseheight dataset and found that phylostrat is able to correct for population stratification with only 250 aims, smaller than the number of aims required by the other methods. our results suggest that phylogenetics is a robust and useful tool for inferring complex population structures, and appropriate utilization of information captured by phylogenetics trees can help correct for population stratification in genetic association analysis, especially when the number of random snps is small. we note that as the number of random snps used for inference of population structure increases (e.g. when m = 50 000), the type i errors of phylostrat, eigenstrat and mds clustering are all close to the nominal level under simulation settings we considered, but the type i errors of stratscore are conservative with the patterns similar to those seen in tables 34 and supplementary. these results suggest that when only a small number of random snps are available, one might consider using phylostrat to control for population stratification, but when the number of random snps is large, eigenstrat would be a preferable approach as it is computationally faster. it is worth noting that the bipartitions obtained from the phylogenetics tree can be used together with principal components as basis functions to build the stratification scores (dr glen satten, personal communication), page: 805 798806  
