correcting systematic bias and instrument measurement drift with mzrefinery motivation: systematic bias in mass measurement adversely affects data quality and negates the advantages of high precision instruments. results: we introduce the mzrefinery tool for calibration of mass spectrometry data files. using confident peptide spectrum matches, three different calibration methods are explored and the optimal transform function is chosen. after calibration, systematic bias is removed and the mass measurement errors are centered at 0 ppm. because it is part of the proteowizard package, mzrefinery can read and write a wide variety of file formats. availability and implementation: the mzrefinery tool is part of msconvert, available with the proteowizard open source package at http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/for data analysis algorithms to take advantage of the higher accuracy of newer mass spectrometers, it is essential to remove systematic bias in mass measurement. mass measurement error may originate from a variety of sources, e.g. power supply voltage/temperature drift, space charge effects, temperature/humidity variation in the laboratory, vacuum system stability, etc. real-time calibration adjusts the mass measurement during data acquisition , typically using a known species as an internal reference. lock mass methods may also be used to calibrate after the run has completed . a separate method for calibration utilizes spectrum identifications to estimate measurement error and guide mass correction . we present a new calibration tool, mzrefinery, written directly into the proteowizard package . like existing tools, mzrefinery models mass measurement error based on peptide identifications and finds the optimal calibration function. in addition to simply adjusting the precursor ion, mzrefinery corrects the m/z of every ion in any high-resolution spectrum. with the increasingly common use of high-resolution tandem mass spectra in prm and dia experiments, more data are being created with highresolution fragments. given the inherent complexity of such multiplexed fragmentation protocols, calibrating the mass accuracy will be a great benefit for these experiments.  
