data and text mining adapt-nmr enhancer: complete package for reduced dimensionality in protein nmr spectroscopy adapt-nuclear magnetic resonance (adapt-nmr) offers an automated approach to the concurrent acquisition and processing of protein nmr data with the goal of complete backbone and side chain assignments. what the approach lacks is a useful graphical interface for reviewing results and for searching for missing peaks that may have prevented assignments or led to incorrect assignments. because most of the data adapt-nmr collects are 2d tilted planes used to find peaks in 3d spectra, it would be helpful to have a tool that reconstructs the 3d spectra. the software package reported here, adapt-nmr enhancer, supports the visualization of both 2d tilted planes and reconstructed 3d peaks on each tilted plane. adapt-nmr enhancer can be used interactively with adapt-nmr to automatically assign selected peaks, or it can be used to produce pine-sparky-like graphical dialogs that support atom-by-atom and peak-by-peak assignment strategies. results can be exported in various formats, including xeasy proton file (.prot), pine pre-assignment file (.str), pine probabilistic output file, sparky peak list file (.list) and talos input file (.tab). as an example, we show how adapt-nmr enhancer was used to extend the automated data collection and assignment results for the protein aedes aegypti sterol carrier protein 2. availability: the program, in the form of binary code along with tutor-ials and reference manuals, is available at http://pine.one of the goals of protein nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) spectroscopy is to increase its throughput by automating the steps of data collection, spectral assignment and structure determination. the latest approach towards this goal from our laboratory is adapt-nmr , a software package that interfaces with the nmr spectrometer and uses an algorithm for devising a pathway for optimal data collection to approach the goal of complete data assignment. as new data are collected, adapt-nmr analyzes the set of data collected up to that point and chooses the next step for data collection. each data collection step involves choosing a 3d nmr experiment and a particular tilted plane that will identify peaks in the 3d spectrum. adapt-nmr incorporates an earlier approach to fast data collection, hifi-nmr and an algorithm for automated probabilistic assignment, pinenmr . the output from adapt-nmr is a probabilistic assignment table and analysis of secondary structure. as a means for visualizing the spectral data, picked peaks and spin system assemblies underlying these assignments, we have developed the standalone software package described here, adapt-nmr enhancer.experiment that pine considered as possible assignments for the selected atom. if the constructed 3d spectrum does not exhibit the predicted peak, the user can examine the linked 2d tilted planes for evidence of a peak. this examination is accomplished by double-clicking the candidates, so as to view the corresponding 3d peak. the probable assignment dialog box pops up when a 3d peak from the 3d list box or from the spectral view is selected. it lists possible assignments for a peak along with their probabilities. the pine assignment dialog box is based on atoms, whereas the probable assignment dialog box is based on peaks. the user can either confirm or modify the assignment for a 3d peak. the decision is stored in the confirmation list box, and the results can be exported in a variety of file formats.  
