sequence analysis correction of sequencing errors in a mixed set of reads motivation: high-throughput sequencing technologies produce large sets of short reads that may contain errors. these sequencing errors make de novo assembly challenging. error correction aims to reduce the error rate prior assembly. many de novo sequencing projects use reads from several sequencing technologies to get the benefits of all used technologies and to alleviate their shortcomings. however, combining such a mixed set of reads is problematic as many tools are specific to one sequencing platform. the solid sequencing platform is especially problematic in this regard because of the two base color coding of the reads. therefore, new tools for working with mixed read sets are needed. results: we present an error correction tool for correcting substitutions, insertions and deletions in a mixed set of reads produced by various sequencing platforms. we first develop a method for correcting reads from any sequencing technology producing base space reads such as the solexa/illumina and roche/454 life sciences sequencing platforms. we then further refine the algorithm to correct the color space reads from the applied biosystems solid sequencing platform together with normal base space reads. our new tool is based on the shrec program that is aimed at correcting solexa/illumina reads. our experiments show that we can detect errors with 99 sensitivity and 98 specificity if the combined sequencing coverage of the sets is at least 12. we also show that the error rate of the reads is greatly reduced. availability: the java source code is freely available atthe high-throughput sequencing machines such as solexa/illumina, applied biosystems solid and roche/454 life sciences produce millions of short reads in a single run. the reads may contain errors, which continues to present a challenge to de novo assemblers. the error rate of the reads can be reduced with trimming and by correcting the reads. the different sequencing platforms have their own benefits and shortcomings. for example, the distribution of error types varies from one platform to another . the dominant error type in solexa/illumina and solid reads is substitution, reads produced by the 454/roche platform tend to have many insertions and deletions because of the technologys inability to assess the length of homopolymer runs correctly and the dominant error type in helicos reads is deletion.translation from bases to colorswhile most sequencing platforms produce base space reads, i.e. the reads are sequences of bases a, c, g and t, the solid platform produces reads in color space . the solid sequencer interrogates bases in overlapping pairs so that each base is sequenced twice. the pairs are coded with four colors as shown in. due to different characteristics of the sequencing platforms, it is an attractive idea to combine reads produced by several platforms. this kind of mixed read sets could improve the results of both error correction and de novo assembly. there are not many tools that can take full benefit from a mixed set of reads especially if part of the reads are solid color space reads. we present this kind of tool for error correction in this article. many tools for error correction of reads from second generation sequencers use the spectral alignment method first introduced in the euler-sr assembler . this method first computes the spectrum of the reads which consists of all l-tuples that are frequent enough in the read set. then a string r is computed for each read r such that all l-tuples in r are in the spectrum and the distance between r and r is minimized. the distance measure can be, e.g. the hamming distance allowing only substitutions or edit distance allowing both insertions and deletions. a similar approach is taken in several error correction tools such as solid accuracy enhancement tool (saet, http://solidsoftwaretools.com/gf/project/saet/) and as preprocessing in many assemblers such as allpaths and soapdenovo . in the alignment approach, multiple alignments are computed for the reads and then errors are detected and corrected based on the columns of these alignments. this approach has been used with reads from the classical sanger sequencing . examples of such tools are mised and the preprocessing step in arachne . the problem of this approach is that it is not feasible to compute the multiple alignments for millions of reads produced by the newer sequencing technologies. recently, the error correction tool shrec extended this approach to solexa/illumina reads bypage: 1285 12841290we have presented a tool for the hybrid correction of a mixed set of reads produced by several sequencing platforms including the solid sequencing technology that produces color space reads. we showed that our method can detect errors with high sensitivity and specificity and also the error rate of the reads is reduced. we also showed that low-coverage read sets clearly benefit from hybrid correction with other read sets.  
