gene expression cosine: condition-specific sub-network identification using a global optimization method motivation: the identification of condition specific sub-networks from gene expression profiles has important biological applications, ranging from the selection of disease-related biomarkers to the discovery of pathway alterations across different phenotypes. although many methods exist for extracting these sub-networks, very few existing approaches simultaneously consider both the differential expression of individual genes and the differential correlation of gene pairs, losing potentially valuable information in the data. results: in this article, we propose a new method, cosine (condition specific sub-network), which employs a scoring function that jointly measures the condition-specific changes of both nodes (individual genes) and edges (genegene co-expression). it uses the genetic algorithm to search for the single optimal sub-network which maximizes the scoring function. we applied cosine to both simulated datasets with various differential expression patterns, and three real datasets, one prostate cancer dataset, a second one from the across-tissue comparison of morbidly obese patients and the other from the across-population comparison of the hapmap samples. compared with previous methods, cosine is more powerful in identifying truly significant sub-networks of appropriate size and meaningful biological relevance. availability: the r code is available as the cosine package on cran: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/cosine/index.html.various statistical methods exist for comparative analysis of two or more sets of microarray data. based on how prior knowledge is utilized, these methods can be generally classified into four categories [a similar classification scheme was presented in: (i) single gene-based differential expression analysis. these methods start by quantifying the level of differential to whom correspondence should be addressed. expression of individual genes using various statistics [for a comprehensive review, see. genes with significant p-values are then checked for enrichment in predefined biological processes or pathways using annotation tools such as david . this approach is simple and intuitive. however, the choice of a significance level for the p-values can be arbitrary, and this approach ignores the dependency between genes. (ii) gene set-based differential analysis, among which the gene set enrichment analysis is a well-known example. for a good review and method comparison, see. this class of approaches has the advantage of clear biological interpretation; however, it relies on the prior knowledge of gene sets (genes in the same pathway or related to the same disease), which is still far from being complete and accurate. moreover, under many circumstances, only a subset of genes in a pathway exhibit expression alterations, and testing on the whole set may give rise to false negatives . (iii) topology-based gene co-expression network analysis. horvath and colleagues developed the weighted gene co-expression network analysis, wgcna , which is a clustering method taking into account topological similarity between genes. however, for high-dimensional datasets (e.g. 1000 genes), clustering methods may lead to very large modules, making interpretation based on gene ontology (go) annotation less informative. (iv) responsive sub-network identification using graph search methods. here the goal is to identify a subset of genes showing condition-specific changes. this class of methods has two main components: a scoring function quantifying the alternation of a given sub-network between different conditions, and a search algorithm to extract the highest scoring sub-networks. the seminal work ofused sum of z-score (which is the standard normal inverse of a single genes p-value) adjusted for the size of the sub-network as the scoring function, and employed simulated annealing to search for the best sub-networks.used an edge-based scoring function rather than node score to account for genegene correlation. due to the non-deterministic polynomial-time hard (np-hard) nature of the problem of finding the maximal-scoring connected subgraph, it can only be approached by heuristic or approximate methods. apart from simulated annealing, previous studies have also employed local greedy search algorithms (page: 1291 12901298the advantages of cosine include: (i) the scoring function is a weighted combination of both the node score and the edge score. in this way, cosine takes into account not only the alteration in the expression level of individual genes, but also the variation of genegene correlation, which is the building block of other higher order topological metrics, so that it can better reflect thefold enrichment is calculated as follows: number of genes recovered/(48size of selected sub-network/1327). integrative changes of a sub-network. (ii) cosine uses the genetic algorithm, which is efficient for global optimization involving binary variables. for practical use, we recommend using the default parameter setting in the cosine package. (iii) cosine can be easily applied to gene prioritization within the extracted subnetwork. (iv) cosine naturally eases the issue of scoring over more than two conditions, since both the f-statistic and the ecf-statistic are defined for multiple groups. in contrast, previous methods use either p-value or signal-to-noise ratio to measure the differential gene expression, which requires additional transformation when scoring over multiple conditions and thus may lead to misinterpretation of the original information. (v) distinct from various clustering methods, the goal of cosine is not to assign each gene to a specific module. it aims at extracting the most variable sub-networks which are of real biological interest. (vi) cosine uses a simple empirical procedure to select weight parameter , making it adaptive to the specific datasets being analyzed. an issue of note is the effect of gene positions in the binary vector on the genetic algorithm. it has been reported that the ordering of genes on the chromosome can affect the convergence of the genetic algorithm . in future studies, we would like to compare genetic algorithm with other global optimization algorithms to perform more efficient sub-graph search. we also note that appropriate scoring function is essential for sub-network identification. apart from our proposed procedure to select , there have been numerous studies in the field of network alignment as well as structural alignment in biophysics on parameter optimization for an objective function. therefore, it would be interesting to test other more sophisticated parameter learning algorithms in cosine. last but not the least, cosine can be easily applied to other types of networks, such as ppi network and gene regulatory networks, to search for altered gene interaction patterns in casecontrol groups.in this article, we have proposed a new method, cosine, to identify condition-specific sub-network across two or more gene expression datasets. different from previous methods, cosine coordinately considers single genes expression variation and genepairs differential correlation, in order to extract a globally optimal sub-network which can maximize the across-group difference. we have shown using both simulated and real datasets that cosine can successfully identify biologically meaningful sub-networks that exhibit significant alterations across a set of phenotypes.  
