gene expression cplexa: a mathematica package to study macromolecular-assembly control of gene expression macromolecular assembly coordinates essential cellular processes, such as gene regulation and signal transduction. a major challenge for conventional computational methods to study these processes is tackling the exponential increase of the number of configurational states with the number of components. cplexa is a mathematica package that uses functional programming to efficiently compute probabilities and average properties over such exponentially large number of states from the energetics of the interactions. the package is particularly suited to study gene expression at complex promoters controlled by multiple, local and distal, dna binding sites for transcription factors. availability: cplexa is freely available together with documentation at http://sourceforge.net/projects/cplexa/the study of the cellular behavior from the molecular components often requires approximations in terms of chemical reactions. however, there are many instances, such as combinatorial macromolecular assembly, that cannot be efficiently described in terms of chemical reactions . macromolecular complexes are typically made of smaller building blocks with a modular organization that can be combined in a number of different ways. the result of each combination is a specific molecular species. therefore, there are potentially as many reactants as the number of possible ways of arranging the different elements, which grows exponentially with the number of the constituent elements. several approaches have been developed to tackle this exponentially large multiplicity in the number of states. they involve a diversity of methodologies that range from stochastic configuration sampling (le) to automatic generation of all the underlying equations . the complexity of the general problem makes each of these approaches work efficiently only on a particular type of problems, be it conformational changes, multi-site phosphorylationthe package cplexa provides the function avconfthat computes the thermodynamic average .illustrates the use of cplexa with mathematica 7 to compute the effective transcription rate at the p rm promoter of phage . this system consists of two sets of three contiguous binding sites for the ci dimer. the two sets, known as left and right operators, are 2 kb; for details, see supplementary material). apart from each other. ci dimers bound at different operators can interact with each other by looping the intervening dna. in this case, just a few lines of code, from lines in to in in, can achieve the same results as a table with entries for each of the 128 states. the state of the system, s, is described by six binding and one looping state variables in line in. the free energy,g(s), in line in includes, in a very compact manner, binding to each of the six sites as a function of the dimer concentration, interactions between neighboring dimers, dna looping and the formation of octamers and tetramers between dimers bound at different sets of binding sites. the transcription rate, (s), as a function of the binding and looping state is given in line in. its average value, =avconf, closely matches the experimental data on the transcriptional activity of the promoter . cplexa also provides the function dgtable, which constructs a table with the free energy and statistical weight (boltzmann factor) of each state that has a non-zero probability.  
