crisprdirect: software for designing crispr/ cas guide rna with reduced off-target sites crisprdirect is a simple and functional web server for selecting rational crispr/cas targets from an input sequence. the crispr/cas system is a promising technique for genome engineering which allows target-specific cleavage of genomic dna guided by cas9 nuclease in complex with a guide rna (grna), that complementarily binds to a 20 nt targeted sequence. the target sequence requirements are twofold. first, the 5 0-ngg protospacer adjacent motif (pam) sequence must be located adjacent to the target sequence. second, the target sequence should be specific within the entire genome in order to avoid off-target editing. crisprdirect enables users to easily select rational target sequences with minimized off-target sites by performing exhaustive searches against genomic sequences. the server currently incorporates the genomic sequences of human,genome engineering is a promising technique to manipulate endogenous chromosomal dna in a site-specific manner. a novel system that employs the prokaryotic immune defense system based on the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crispr) and crispr-associated (cas) protein has been reported as a prominent genome engineering approach . recent studies utilize the rna-guided endonuclease cas9 from streptococcus pyogenes and a guide rna (grna), which acts as a guide to define the target site to introduce dna double-stranded break. a remarkable advantage of the crispr/cas system is that the target dna sequence is recognized by simple base-pairing complementarity by the grna. thus, the crispr/cas system can be programmed only by changing the grna sequence, and the synthesis of the grna for targeting a specific gene is easy at low cost. however, it should be a critical issue to avoid the cleavage of the unintended off-target genes, since double-stranded break results in stable and heritable modification of the genome. in this study, we present crisprdirect (http://crispr.dbcls.jp/), which provides efficient selection of crispr/cas target sites with reduced numbers of potential off-target candidates. crisprdirect investigates the entire genome for perfect matches with each candidate target sequence (20 mer) and their seed sequence (12 or 8 mer) flanking the pam. users can also browse the detailed list of potential off-target sites that have partial complementarity with the selected sequence. the server incorporates genomic sequences of human, mouse, rat, marmoset, pig, chicken, frog, zebrafish, ciona, fruit fly, silkworm, caenorhabditis elegans, arabidopsis, rice,  
