crispr-era: a comprehensive design tool for crispr-mediated gene editing, repression and activation the crispr/cas9 system was recently developed as a powerful and flexible technology for targeted genome engineering, including genome editing (altering the genetic sequence) and gene regulation (without altering the genetic sequence). these applications require the design of single guide rnas (sgrnas) that are efficient and specific. however, this remains challenging, as it requires the consideration of many criteria. several sgrna design tools have been developed for gene editing, but currently there is no tool for the design of sgrnas for gene regulation. with accumulating experimental data on the use of crispr/cas9 for gene editing and regulation, we implement a comprehensive computational tool based on a set of sgrna design rules summarized from these published reports. we report a genome-wide sgrna design tool and provide an online web-site for predicting sgrnas that are efficient and specific. we name the tool crispr-era, for clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat-mediated editing, repression, and activation (era). availability and implementation: http://crispr-erathe bacterial adaptive immune system, crispr (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats), was recently developed as a powerful and multi-purpose technology for genome engineering, including editing (modifying the genomic sequence) , and regulation (repressing or activating expression of genes) . the system is highly programmable, utilizing a single protein, the nuclease cas9 for editing or the nuclease-deficient dcas9 for regulation. a single guide rna (sgrna) is required for precise and programmable dna targeting . effective and specific genome engineering requires careful design of sgrnas, which remains a major challenge. computational tools have been used to facilitate the design of sgrnas for crispr editing but not for other applications such as transcriptional regulation. these computational tools should enable automated sgrna design and offtarget site validation . a major goal of our designer tool is to address the discrepancy for designing sgrnas that allow efficient and highly specific repression or activation of genes and for generating genome-wide sgrna libraries for genetic screening in different organisms.  
