crnreals: a toolbox for distinguishability and identifiability analysis of biochemical reaction networks chemical reaction network theory is widely used in modeling and analyzing complex biochemical systems such as metabolic networks and cell signalling pathways. being able to produce all the biologically and chemically important qualitative dynamical features, chemical reaction networks (crns) have attracted significant attention in the systems biology community. it is well-known that the reliable inference of crn models generally requires thorough identifiability and distinguishability analysis together with carefully selected prior modeling assumptions. here, we present a software toolbox crnreals that supports the distinguishability and identifiability analysis of crn models using recently published optimization-based procedures. availability and implementation: the crnreals toolbox and the associated documentation are available at http://www.iim.csic.es/gingproc/crnreals/. the toolbox runs under the popular matlab computational environment and supports several free and commercial linear programming and mixed integer linear programming solvers. contact:the key importance of dynamics in the explanation of complex phenomena occurring in living systems is now a commonly accepted view that underscores the importance of mathematical model building and model parameter estimation . an important family of non-negative non-linear dynamical systems is the class of deterministic chemical reaction network (crn) models obeying the mass-action law . such networks can be used to describe pure chemical reactions, but they are also widely used to model the dynamics of intracellular processes, metabolic or cell signalling pathways. chemical reaction network theory (crnt) is originated in the 1970s by the pioneering works of horn, jackson and feinberg . since then, crnt has gained an increasing attention, and many strong results have been published in the field on the relation between network structure and qualitative dynamical properties . to whom correspondence should be addressed.it is known from the early literature that different crns can produce exactly the same kinetic differential equations . this phenomenon is called macro-equivalence or dynamical equivalence. however, effective optimization-based procedures for the analysis and synthesis of dynamically equivalent crns have been developed only recently, using the possibility of transforming propositional logic statements encoding structural properties into mixed integer linear programming (milp) problems . the primary purpose of our toolbox is to make these numerical methods accessible in an easily usable way. as a related software tool, first we have to mention the chemical reaction network toolbox that can produce detailed reports about the basic network properties, multiple and degenerate steady states, injectivity and (strong) concordance. additionally, the open source ernest toolbox performs a detailed model analysis of the input crn by determining the basic system features and by using the deficiency zero or deficiency one theorems. the toolbox is also capable of running the deficiency one algorithm where applicable. however, both of the above-mentioned toolboxes assume that the structure of the analyzed network is a priori known, therefore they have no functionality for examining dynamical equivalence.a software toolbox called crnreals was presented in this note for the analysis and synthesis of dynamically equivalent crns. the tools provided by our software aid modeling and dynamical analysis in the following areas: (i) they support the distinguishability and identifiability analysis of crn models by deciding whether a given crn has a unique structure or not; (ii) they clearly extend the application scope of crnt results by searching for dynamically equivalent network structures with preferred properties such as density/sparsity, (weak) reversibility, detailed/complex balance, etc.; and (iii) they allow the crnt-based analysis of non-negative polynomial models possibly coming from application areas other than (bio)chemistry. further work in future versions will be focused on making the applied numerical methods more effective, and on including the recently developed algorithms related to linear conjugacy thus extending the notion of dynamical equivalence.  
