structural bioinformatics crossfinder-assisted mapping of protein crosslinks formed by site-specifically incorporated crosslinkers protein crosslinking has been used for decades to derive structural information about proteins and protein complexes. only recently, however, it became possible to map the amino acids involved in the crosslinks with the advent of high resolution mass spectrometry (ms). here, we present crossfinder, which automates the search for crosslinks formed by site-specifically incorporated crosslinking amino acids in lc-ms-ms data. availability and implementation: an executable version of crossfinder for windows machines (64-bit) is freely available to non-commercial users. it is bundled with a manual and example data.for decades, protein crosslinking has been a widely used technique to obtain information about the structural architecture of proteins and protein complexes. the full potential of the technique however was achieved only recently when it became technically feasible to map the precise amino acids that are involved in the crosslink by high accuracy mass spectrometry (ms) and dedicated bioinformatic tools that mine the ms datasets. applications include probing protein conformations, mapping interaction surfaces between proteins and elucidating the structural architectures of protein complexes . crosslinking can be induced for example by adding a chemical with two reactive groups to a protein solution. the chemical will then crosslink accessible amino acids. several software solutions exist to map these kinds of crosslinks from ms data. alternatively, the crosslinker can be site-specifically installed into the protein, e.g. during chemical synthesis or by using genetically encoded crosslinking amino acids . sitespecifically attached crosslinkers have several advantages (see, for discussion). among them is the possibility to target the crosslinker to specific regions of the protein. through this targeted approach, we could, e.g. validate a crystal interface in solution . dedicated software tools to map crosslinks formed by site-specifically installed crosslinkers are scarce, unfortunately . to map such crosslinks, we previously developed a collection of matlab scripts . programming skills were needed to use the scripts, however, limiting their practicality. moreover, the scripts lacked a convenient workflow, had no intuitive user interface, and it was not possible to easily visualize and browse through the results. collectively, these issues limited wide-spread application of crosslinking approaches in which the crosslinking moiety is sitespecifically incorporated into the protein. we introduce here an easy-to-use executable version of crossfinder that intuitively integrates all steps of the analysis.  
