genome analysis crossmap: a versatile tool for coordinate conversion between genome assemblies motivation: reference genome assemblies are subject to change and refinement from time to time. generally, researchers need to convert the results that have been analyzed according to old assemblies to newer versions, or vice versa, to facilitate meta-analysis, direct comparison , data integration and visualization. several useful conversion tools can convert genome interval files in browser extensible data or general feature format, but none have the functionality to convert files in sequence alignment map or bigwig format. this is a significant gap in computational genomics tools, as these formats are the ones most widely used for representing high-throughput sequencing data, such as rna-seq, chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing, dna-seq, etc. results: here we developed crossmap, a versatile and efficient tool for converting genome coordinates between assemblies. crossmap supports most of the commonly used file formats, including bam, sequence alignment map, wiggle, bigwig, browser extensible data, general feature format, gene transfer format and variant call format. availability and implementation: crossmap is written in python and c. source code and a comprehensive users manual are freely available at: http://crossmap.sourceforge.net/.the human genome project brought into the world the first human reference genome that has been widely used as basis for biomedical research. this reference genome has been and is still being refined and improved. the first working draft assembly became available in 2000 with 150 000 gaps . subsequently, several assemblies were released. in 2010, the human reference genome was in its 19th version (hg19 or grch37) with remaining 271 gaps (239 mb), and a new human reference assembly (grch38) is to be released at the end of 2013. hundreds of thousands of studies have been performed, and sequence data have been analyzed according to different versions of the reference genome. as more accurate versions of the reference genome become available, the compatibility and therefore the ability to integrate new and old genomics results becomes a major barrier. when dealing with such heterogeneous datasets, two approaches can be considered. the first consists of re-aligning all the data to the same reference genome. however, redoing the whole analyses is time-consuming, especially for high-throughput sequencing (hts) data. in some cases, re-aligning is impossible if the original raw data were not available. the second approach, faster and more convenient, consists of converting genome coordinates between assemblies. tools like the university of california, santa cruz (ucsc) liftover , ensembl assembly converter and galaxy are able to convert plain text files containing genome intervals in browser extensible data (bed), general feature format (gff)/browser extensible data (gtf) format. however, most hts data are in bam, sam, bigwig format rather than in plain text files because binary compressed files such as bam or bigwig facilitate data storage, fast transferring, efficient retrieving and visualization. for instance, nearly all processed data generated by encode and tcga were represented in bam or bigwig format or both. to the best of our knowledge, no bioinformatics tool is available to convert these big data files.here we introduce crossmap, a versatile tool to convert coordinates or annotation files between genome assemblies. it supports the most commonly used file types, including bam, bed, bigwig, gff, gtf, sam, wiggle (wig) and vcf (variant cell format) formats. for large plain text file types, such as bed, gff, gtf and vcf, reading from remote servers and compressed files is supported (see online manual). this versatile tool will greatly facilitate meta-analysis and integration of hts data.  
