gene expression cross-platform comparison of microarray data using order restricted inference motivation: titration experiments measuring the gene expression from two different tissues, along with total rna mixtures of the pure samples, are frequently used for quality evaluation of microarray technologies. such a design implies that the true mrna expression of each gene, is either constant or follows a monotonic trend between the mixtures, applying itself to the use of order restricted inference procedures. exploiting only the postulated monotonicity of titration designs, we propose three statistical analysis methods for the validation of high-throughput genetic data and corresponding preprocessing techniques. results: our methods allow for inference of accuracy, repeatability and cross-platform agreement, with minimal required assumptions regarding the underlying data generating process. therefore, they are readily applicable to all sorts of genetic high-throughput data independent of the degree of preprocessing. an application to the emerald dataset was used to demonstrate how our methods provide a rich spectrum of easily interpretable quality metrics and allow the comparison of different microarray technologies and normalization methods. the results are on par with previous work, but provide additional new insights that cast doubt on the utility of popular preprocessing techniques, specifically concerning the emerald projects dataset. availability: all datasets are available on ebis arrayexpress web site (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/microarray-as/ae/) under accession numbers e-tabm-536, e-tabm-554 and e-tabm-555. source code implemented in c and r is available at:microarrays measure the abundance of thousands of distinct mrna fragments simultaneously. the high dimension of the acquired data pose a complex issue to quality assessment. titration experiments to whom correspondence should be addressed.that measure the gene expression in two different tissues, along with total rna mixtures of the pure samples, have been shown to provide a valuable tool for the evaluation of quality related aspects of microarray data . such experiments operate on the assumption that for any fragment the abundance in the mixed samples can be determined as a function of their expression in the pure samples and the given mixture proportions (seefor a schematic depiction of this concept). in contrast to spike-in studies where a set of mrna fragments are added at predetermined concentrations to some of the samples, titration series are not based on synthetic rna fragments [see e.g.responding to. titration series provide measurements from authentic biological samples that reflect the intricate characteristics of rna samples. their disadvantage is that they do not provide a gold standard (i.e. the set of true differentially expressed genes is unknown). the only knowledge available a priori in titration experiments is given by the mixture proportions and the thereby defined relationship between mrna amounts throughout the titration series. solely this relationship can be investigated, tested and compared on measurements acquired from several combinations of microarray platforms and preprocessing methods and is the basis for quality assessment., for example, assume that the measured abundances follow a linear trend throughout the titration series., however, observe signal compression and expansion, which would comprise a violation to such assumptions. similarly, in microarray doseresponse studies,report that linear model-based inference procedures fail to identify monotonic effects with non-linear response curves, therefore methods allowing for more general monotonic trends are more efficient.exploratory investigation of the raw data has uncovered a distinct overall trend of expression values.shows that the nonnormalized signals are on average larger in kidney than in liver samples. typically, the proportion of fragments that change between conditions is expected to be small enough so that the per sample distributions of expression values are similar. this assumption is, as an example, explicitly used in several quality assessment procedures and deviations are considered as an indication for quality issues . a likely explanation for this phenomenon is that differences in the total to messenger rna proportions generate such an overall trend. while equal amounts of total rna were used for each array, the observed signals reflect only the fraction constituted bythe methods suggested in this article allow the inference of accuracy, repeatability and cross-platform agreement of genetic data acquired from titration experiments. exploiting only the postulated monotonicity of this design, our framework needs little assumptions on the underlying data generating process and is therefore applicable to all sorts of genetic high-throughput data [e.g. the maqc titration experiment (. such data are acquired from numerable platforms each of which executes and preprocesses slightly differently. therefore, independence from the degree of preprocessing is an essential requirement for an objective data quality evaluation. although the focus of this article has been on microarrays, it has to be stressed that we derive our methods in the absence of microarray-specific assumptions. this makes them easily portable to upcoming technologies, as for example next-generation sequencing. the results from the emerald dataset demonstrate how our methods provide easily interpretable quality metrics are on par with results from the previous work on titration experiments as well as corresponding findings from the maqc project . additionally, we provide new insights regarding the investigated normalization procedures. to our knowledge, we are the first to compare non-normalized to normalized data, in the context of a microarray titration experiment, that is designed with the aim to produce authentic biological data with a proportion of differentially expressed genes larger than what can be simulated using spike-in experiments. therefore, it poses an interesting challenge to the evaluation of such procedures. this is due to common assumptions, namely that the true differentially expressed genes are relatively few and balanced in terms of direction (, chapter 2), being violated by the measurements generated in such experiments. under this premise, they provide an opportunity to study the robustness of such procedures against violations of their corresponding assumptions. the emerald dataset highlights some of the pitfalls of microarray data analysis and its subsequent interpretation. initially, there is the issue whether the large proportion of upward trends is a biological feature or a procedural artifact. this phenomenon has been discussed in and in the context of the maqc project titration experiment. the hypothesis of unequal total to messenger rna concentrations would be an adequate explanation for many aspects of the data. considering this assumption, baseline and quantile normalization would appear to be satisfactory candidate methods to remove such a trend. our results show, however, that the performance of neither baseline or quantile normalization is convincing in the case of the emerald dataset. the increase in non-monotonous trends, as well as directional decisions being inconsistent across platforms, clearly indicates the introduction of bias by normalization. non-normalized data provide preferable accuracy and agreement with the only slight disadvantage in terms of repeatability. according to our results, normalization poses a tradeoff between accuracy and agreement on the one hand and repeatability and power on the other, when dealing with a large proportion of differentially expressed genes. this tradeoff should be considered in the choice of a normalization procedure for experiments for which the assumption that the proportion of differential expressed genes is small is likely to be violated. regarding general cross-platform gene comparisons, our results show that the agreement across platforms using the same normalization is higher than the agreement across normalizations within one platform, making it advisable to decide on a single normalization procedure. a significant limitation of the agreement measure used in this analysis is its dependency on the power of the test and the distribution of alternative hypotheses. the specific numbers are of limited generalizability with regard to other experiments, where these conditions might differ. it might be possible to construct alternative measures utilizing estimates of the power in order to achieve better comparability between different studies.  
