genome analysis crowdsourcing for bioinformatics motivation: bioinformatics is faced with a variety of problems that require human involvement. tasks like genome annotation, image analysis, knowledge-base population and protein structure determination all benefit from human input. in some cases, people are needed in vast quantities, whereas in others, we need just a few with rare abilities. crowdsourcing encompasses an emerging collection of approaches for harnessing such distributed human intelligence. recently, the bioinformatics community has begun to apply crowd-sourcing in a variety of contexts, yet few resources are available that describe how these human-powered systems work and how to use them effectively in scientific domains. results: here, we provide a framework for understanding and applying several different types of crowdsourcing. the framework considers two broad classes: systems for solving large-volume microtasks and systems for solving high-difficulty megatasks. within these classes, we discuss system types, including volunteer labor, games with a purpose, microtask markets and open innovation contests. we illustrate each system type with successful examples in bioinformatics and conclude with a guide for matching problems to crowdsourcing solutions that highlights the positives and negatives of different approaches.imagine having easy, inexpensive access to a willing team of millions of intelligent workers. what could you accomplish? lakhani and colleagues produced 30 new sequence alignment algorithms that each improved on the state-of-the-art, in 2 weeks, for $6000 . others improved a 44-species multiple alignment , developed a new protein folding algorithm , produced accurate parasite counts for tens of thousands of images of infected blood cells , and still others are attempting to translate the entire web into every major language (http://duolingo.com). crowdsourcing systems make these and many other monumental tasks approachable. here, we explore what these systems are and how they are being applied in bioinformatics. the term crowdsourcing was coined in 2006 to describe the act of taking a job traditionally performed by a designated agent(usually an employee) and outsourcing it to an undefined, generally large group of people in the form of an open call . now, it is used to describe a range of activities that span the gamut from volunteers editing wiki pages or tagging astronomical images to experienced professionals tackling complex algorithm development challenges. here, we will focus specifically on systems for accomplishing directed work that requires human intelligence. these human-powered systems are built to solve discrete tasks with clear end points. they are distinct from other common, community-driven branches of crowdsourcing, such as wikis, in that they allow for top-down control over the work that is conducted. (for an extensive introduction to wikis in biology, see). the tasks discussed here have been historically approached from an artificial intelligence perspectivewhere algorithms attempt to mimic human abilities . now, crowdsourcing gives us access to a new methodology: artificial artificial intelligence (https://www.mturk.com/). the objective of this review is to give insights into how, from a practical perspective based on recent successes, to use this new force to tackle difficult problems in biology. we divide crowdsourcing systems into two major groups: those for solving microtasks that are large in number but low in difficulty, and those for solving individually challenging megatasks. in section 2, we present an overview of microtask solutions with subsections on volunteer systems, casual games, microtask markets, forced labor (workflow sequestration) and education. section 3 describes crowdsourcing approaches to megatasks with subsections on innovation challenges and hard games. section 4 concludes the article with a guide for matching problems to potential crowdsourcing solutions, pointers to information about forms of crowdsourcing not covered here and a brief exploration of the potential consequences of crowdsourcing on society.  
