genome analysis cruzdb: software for annotation of genomic intervals with ucsc genome-browser database motivation: the biological significance of genomic features is often context dependent. annotating a particular dataset with existing external data can provide insight into function. results: we present cruzdb, a fast and intuitive programmatic interface to the university of california, santa cruz (ucsc) genome browser that facilitates integrative analyses of diverse local and remotely hosted datasets. we showcase the syntax of cruzdb using microrna binding sites as examples, and further demonstrate its utility with three biological discoveries. first, dna replication timing is stratified in gene regionsexons tend to replicate early and introns late during s phase. second, several non-coding variants associated with cognitive functions map to lincrna transcripts of relevant function, suggesting potential function of these regulatory rnas in neuronal diseases. third, lamina-associated genomic regions are highly enriched in olfaction-related genes, indicating a role of nuclear organization in their regulation. availability: cruzdb is available at https://github.com/brentp/cruzdb under the mit open-source license.biological significance of many genomic and epigenomic features is context dependent. recently, large scale integrative projects such as the encyclopedia of dna elements (encode) project (encode, 2012) have systematically analyzed the regions of active transcription, gene regulation and chromatin patterns in the genome. even though decades of research provided insights into many individual functional elements, integrative analyses have presented a systems-level picture that could not be captured previously. moreover, these integrative projects have highlighted that biological function of certain features can be appreciated in the context of other genomic and epigenomic features in the genomic neighborhood . systematic presentation of large-scale datasets from the encode and other projects in the university of california, santa cruz (ucsc) genome browser has enabled individual investigators to analyze their local data in the context of these already available features. already, we are beginning to see the utility of such a community-wide integration of diverse datasets and their role in uncovering new facets of basic biology and clinical research. researchers routinely use publicly available datatables from the encode project and many other large-scale projects from the ucsc genome browser, which also allow programmatic access to much of the information used on that site via its public mysql servers . even so, there exists no user-friendly computational framework that allows integration of multiple in-house and publicly available data-tables and parallelized context-dependent analyses of the integrated datasets. today, in the era of the $1000 genome, the $100 000 analysis , we believe that such a computational framework can increase the speed and efficiency of integrative analyses in many areas of biomedical research. we present cruzdb, a programmatic interface to the genome data resources from ucsc that offers a simple, parallelizable and intuitive syntax to address common use-cases including annotation and spatial querying. we first describe the design features of cruzdb, flexibility of the user interface and potential utilities. we present example code from the library and then describe four diverse findings that we made using cruzdb.we have showcased the programmatic interface of cruzdb using mirna binding sites as motivation, and further demonstrated its utility using three biological examples. the biological examples and their cruzdb code demonstrate the simple syntax, and the potential of this utility to facilitate hypothesis-driven studies. although the examples we have shown are in human version hg19, cruzdb can be used for any organism and version available in the ucsc database by using, for example, dm3 as the initializer. although previous studies have demonstrated higher order organization of dna replication timing patterns in the human genome, our observation that replication timing patterns correlate with intronexon structures reveals a finer-scale stratification of dna replication patterns within gene regions. lincrnas play major regulatory roles in different biological processes in neuronal and other tissue types, but their role in complex cognitive traits and diseases has not been systematically assessed yet. we report several instances where disease-associated variants overlap with lincrnas with relevant biological functions. our findings, combined with the recent study showing a lower incidence of snps within lincrnas , highlight the importance of examining gwas hits in this context. finally, integrating data on lads and protein-coding regions, we find that olfactory receptor genes are highly enriched in the lads. our findings are consistent with a recent report that nuclear clustering of olfactory receptor genes governs their monogenic expression, and that laminb receptor-induced changes in nuclear architecture influence singular transcription pattern of the olfactory receptor genes . further work needs to be done to validate this work and to demonstrate the broader impact of our findings in each of these four biological cases in detail, we aim to pursue them outside the scope of this method article. nevertheless, the four examples outline the broad utility of cruzdb and its applications in diverse areas of biomedical research.we have introduced cruzdb, a parallelizable and intuitive programmatic interface with ucsc genome browser that allows integrative context-dependent analyses of diverse local and remotely hosted datasets, as well as annotation and spatial querying. some of the functions that make cruzdb a library of broad and general utility are the feature extraction, fast queries and simple syntax. using the library, one can mirror the ucsc databases to a local sqlite or mysql database, perform location-based queries and perform integrative analyses combining local and remotely hosted features. we have shown how to create a local copy of selected tables is a single line of code and how having that local copy improves the speed of later analyses.  
