databases and ontologies cso validator: improving manual curation workflow for biological pathways manual curation and validation of large-scale biological pathways are required to obtain high-quality pathway databases. in a typical curation process, model validation and model update based on appropriate feedback are repeated and requires considerable cooperation of scientists. we have developed a cso (cell system ontology) validator to reduce the repetition and time during the curation process. this tool assists in quickly obtaining agreement among curators and domain experts and in providing a consistent and accurate pathway database. availability: the tool is available onmodeling in systems biology is increasingly important for the system-level understanding of biological processes and predicting the behavior of the system. to obtain high-quality pathway databases, many important databases are built by manual curation. the creation of the pathway models is followed by validation of the created pathways by domain experts and update of the pathways based on appropriate feedback by curators. these procedures are iterative to record the desired specific annotated pathway. improving the efficiency of model validation and model update is essential for reducing the time and effort required to construct high-quality biological pathways. we had suggested a new method for validation of ontology, particularly cell system ontology (cso;). cso is a generic framework to represent dynamic biological pathways with visualization in owl (web ontology language). based on the proposed method , we have developed an efficient, user-friendly tool that considers biological meaning beyond checking for correct xml syntax. although the curation criteria and rules are given to curators, it is sometimes difficult correctly to assign a more specific subclass in the hierarchical structure of the ontology or a suitable term from controlled vocabularies. the correct annotation of the entity type, cellular location, the name of biological event and the number of molecules is important to represent biological meaning. it is helpful to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. to visualize the pathway via visualization tools which can recognize and differently display the entity type and cellular location in cell system. furthermore, it is also useful for simulation tools that can consider the concentration of the molecules and adjust parameters based on the type of biological event.shows four warnings in the model. the highlighted part in (a) is a dna binding process which is listed because there is no dna as its input entity. therefore, the validation window suggests that one entity from two should be changed into dna. in the setting value pane, the recommended value is dna and two candidate entities are listed below because the corresponding process has two input entities. in (c), the validated model shows the main changes: (i) one entity type is changed into dna, (ii) the product of dna binding is a complex, not a protein, and (iii) the connector is changed to represent the input entity, not an enzyme. participants with cardinality, participant types, cellular location and others properties. @bullet complementation: to add any missing processes, which allows a model to capture generic behaviors that govern system dynamics, such as protein-turnover. @bullet to add a binding process for a starting complex which is not an output of any process. @bullet to add a unknown production process for a starting entity except for complex, which is not an output of any process. @bullet to add a degradation process for protein, complex, mrna if they have no degradation process. for this, a user can select which job will be done in the main window. if the validation option is checked and the given model needs to be modified, a validation window will be popped up for guiding correction. on the other hand, the complementation will be done with no prompt if selected. as an advanced option, our tool also supports the validation of multiple files stored in the same directory with javascript.illustrates the validation procedure by using cso validator. for the given model, cso validator checks whether each process satisfies the given conditions (for details, refer to). if there is any process not to satisfy conditions for validation, warning list is generated as shown in. the validation window consists of four panes: a table to list warnings, a warning description, setting the correct value and buttons on the bottom. each row in the table lists the problematic process and involved entities with information such as any property against the conditions, any current value and recommended values. the detailed explanation for the warning is shown in the warning description. the setting value pane provides an interface for easy correction of the incorrect value. combo boxes are used to display recommended values and selectable values. if there is no appropriate value in the recommended list, all possible values for the current property are listed in the selectable value combo box or a user can specify a customized value. for convenience, it is possible to browse the given model by clicking the display model button and the selected row is shown in the display model window by highlighting related elements. it is useful because during validation, a user may decide a wrong part without launching a visualization tool such as cio.shows the validated result visualized via cio. by using cio, the validated model can be easily edited, visualized and simulated for further investigation.  
