data and text mining ct3d: tracking microglia motility in 3d using a novel cosegmentation approach motivation: cell tracking is an important method to quantitatively analyze time-lapse microscopy data. while numerous methods and tools exist for tracking cells in 2d time-lapse images, only few and very application-specific tracking tools are available for 3d time-lapse images, which is of high relevance in immunoimaging, in particular for studying the motility of microglia in vivo. results: we introduce a novel algorithm for tracking cells in 3d time-lapse microscopy data, based on computing cosegmentations between component trees representing individual time frames using the so-called tree-assignments. for the first time, our method allows to track microglia in three dimensional confocal time-lapse microscopy images. we also evaluate our method on synthetically generated data, demonstrating that our algorithm is robust even in the presence of different types of inhomogeneous background noise. availability: our algorithm is implemented in the ct3d package, which is available undercapturing the motility of cells using time-lapse microscopy has become an important approach to understanding processes such as the cell cycle , neuronal division and migration , immune response or the development of cancer . based on phase-contrast, confocal or two-photon microscopy, such live cell imaging protocols are now commonly established and corresponding equipment is commonly available. this has triggered the need for computational methods to quantitatively analyze timelapse microscopy data. in this context, identifying individual cells and tracking their identities over time is one of the basic ingredients for computational analysis. hence, cell tracking algorithms have attracted considerable attention in recent years . here, we introduce a novel algorithm for cell tracking that allows to track cells, in particular zebrafish microglia, in 3d two-photon image sequences over time. the majority of cell tracking algorithms, as surveyed byor miura (2005), deals with cell tracking in 2d over time. methods range from linking cells identified in individual frames using different segmentation approaches to active-contour or level-set algorithms . the challenges imposed by the nature of the images to be analyzed lie in phenomena such as cell divisions , cells entering or leaving the displayed area, or a large number of cells that needs to be tracked simultaneously. in addition, cell tracking is often complicated by background inhomogeneity, for instance due to uneven illumination , and cells touching each other. while these issues have been addressed extensively for tracking cells in 2d, surprisingly few approaches have addressed cell tracking in 3d. besides naive thresholding approaches, there are only few advanced approaches, such as the active-contour based method proposed by. recently, several authors proposed reliable methods for tracking centrosomes in caenorhabditise legans embryos. yet, these approaches are tailored toward tracking small, bright and circular objects which e.g. resemble a gaussian spot of a specific size. such assumptions, however, are not satisfied by the complex and highly variable shapes of microglia under consideration here. cell tracking is also relevant in the context of tracking cell populations in vitro, which has attracted considerable attention recently . the lack of methods for tracking cells in 3d has been reported as a limiting factor, for instance in the context of immunoimaging . despite the well-established protocol to capture microglia, innate immune cells in the central nervous system, in 3d using two-photon microscopy following the seminal works by, motility analysis has been performed by (and limited to) manual estimations derived from 2d projections in the numerous studies following these protocols. in fact, tracking microglia cells is complicated by several aspects. microglia tightly contact specific brain structures in their resting state , often making it difficult to clearly separate them from their surroundingpage: 565 564571we evaluated our algorithm on two types of data. first, we applied it to an in vivo time-lapse sequence of 3d two-photon images of zebrafish midbrain, displaying the motility of microglia; second, we applied ct3d to synthetically generated data for quantifying the accuracy of our cell tracking results. evalutation on in vivo data was accomplished by comparison with manually annotated trajectories of specific microglia in three datasets. note that manual annotation is limited to trajectories, whereas boundaries of the cell volumes are almost impossible to obtain in 3d, beside systematic problems with manual annotations . hence, we additionally created synthetic ground truth data to further evaluate the performance of our method. we followed the procedure used in, generating (noise perturbed) elliptical objects of average intensity i o above poisson distributed background noise of intensity i b. in addition to the procedure from, we created perturbed images with different types of background inhomogeneities, as shown in: in a second set of data, we introduced a multiplicative vignetting effect to the data, following the vignetting model byunder different focal lengths f and off-axis illumination parameters . in a third set of data, we introduced an additive linear gradient along the x-axis of different slopes . each time series consists of 20 time frames, each of size 20020040 pixels. on these data, we ran ct3d with size cutoffs min = 500 and max = 5000, and a single-node cutoff of 200 pixels. in the resulting sequences, all cells whose identity could be traced through the complete sequence were kept, while all other cells were discarded using the at3d tool.  
