systems biology cyclus3d: a cytoscape plugin for clustering network motifs in integrated networks network motifs in integrated molecular networks represent functional relationships between distinct data types. they aggregate to form dense topological structures corresponding to functional modules which cannot be detected by traditional graph clustering algorithms. we developed cyclus3d, a cytoscape plugin for clustering composite three-node network motifs using a 3d spectral clustering algorithm. availability: via the cytoscape plugin manager orin systems biology, the cell is modeled as an integrated network with multiple types of interactions, e.g. proteinprotein, protein dna, proteinmetabolite or genetic interactions . cellular functions are carried out by independently functioning units called modules , which, in graph-theoretical terms, correspond to clusters of densely connected nodes, and a multitude of algorithms have been developed to identify such clusters in undirected graphs . a major problem remains how to harness the multilayered information contained in different interaction networks in order to identify biologically more realistic topological modules. in the naive bayes approach, multiple interaction types are overlayed to create a single integrated association network which can be clustered by traditional means . in the samba approach, heterogeneous data types are merged in a single bipartite gene-property graph in which modules are defined as dense subgraphs . while samba has the advantage of preserving the identity of each interaction type, information is inevitably lost by representing complex networks as bipartite graphs. we developed cyclus3d, a cytoscape plugin for the identification of modules in integrated networks which uses network motifs to query a 3d spectral clustering algorithm. network motifs are frequently occuring subgraphs in regulatory or integrated networks , which aggregate to form topological modules . each network motif defines a relationship between heterogeneous data types, with a distinct information-processing role or functional interpretation . hence, cyclus3d identifies modules composed of multiple interaction types which reflect regulatory, signaling or compensatory pathway mechanisms in addition to the stable protein complexes found by traditional clustering algorithms.to illustrate the workflow of cyclus3d (postfix for 3-dimensional clustering in cytoscape), we imported an integrated network of physical, genetic and signaling interactions between kinases and phosphatases in yeast (data available as supplementary material). in the cyclus3d control panel , a query motif and one or more input networks are selected, interaction types are assigned to each edge and a value for the resolution parameter r = 1/p (cf. section 2) and the minimal number of motif instances in a cluster are set. an edge type is inferred to be directed if the edge in the motif it is assigned to is directed. the resolution parameter allows to vary the typical size and density of a cluster. at low r, the aggregation score is maximized by large sets of loosely connected motifs, while at high values, high-scoring motif clusters are small and dense. in our experience, the intermediate value r = 0.5 balances size and density and is recommended as a starting value (see supplementary material). after running the algorithm, cyclus3d opens a new network containing all clustered motifs. for instance,shows all clusters of genetically interacting, copointing kinases (with the settings of). by right clicking on a node of interest, we can create new networks for the clusters containing this node, while through the cyclus3d entry in the plugins menu, new networks can be created for all clusters. by default, edges in multicluster networks are colored by their cluster membership (cluster view,), while in single-cluster networks they are colored by interaction type, with the colors matching the edge assignments in the control panel (interaction view,). via the vizmapper panel, the user can easily switch between these two visual styles. multiple motifs can be clustered sequentially and newly found clusters either are added to or replace the existing clustered network (to add them, all query motifs must be formed from subsets of the same three edge types and the interaction view will be updated to the latest edge assignment). by integrating heterogeneous types of molecular interaction data, cyclus3d identifies modules which reflect regulatory, signaling or compensatory functions which are not found by clustering each network in isolation . the underlying algorithms are highly efficient and allow further extension. in particular, future versions will extend cyclus3d toward higher dimensional motifs, with applications in the domain of network alignment and comparison.  
