systems biology cysbml: a cytoscape plugin for sbml cysbml is a plugin designed to work with systems biology markup language (sbml) in cytoscape having the following features: sbml import, support of the sbml layout and qualitative model packages, navigation in network layouts based on sbml structure , access to miriam and sbo-based annotations and sbml validation. cysbml includes an importer for biomodels to load sbml from standard repositories. availability and implementation: freely available for non-commercial purposes through the cytoscape plugin manager or for download at http://sourceforge.net/projects/cysbml/.the systems biology markup language (sbml) is a free and open interchange format for computer models of biological processes , which is currently supported by4230 software tools . sbml is used to represent models for a wide range of cell biology, including cell signaling, metabolism and gene regulation. sbml provides a common standard of interoperability and exchange allowing several researchers to work with diverse tools on building, curation, annotation, simulation, analysis and visualization of the same model. standard repositories of sbml models such as biomodels have been established, providing annotated models on a molecular level for a wide range of biological questions with access to their resources through web services . however, preserving models without the semantic layer of information needed for an unambiguous identification and interpretation of model components is meaningless . to this end, sbml can be annotated based on minimum information required for the annotation of models (miriam;) and systems biology ontology (sbo; lenov re, 2006a, b), a set of controlled vocabularies in systems biology. cytoscape , a widely used open-source platform for complex network analysis and visualization, currently provides only rudimentary sbml capabilities; its application to sbml models is limited to a subset of sbml. the sbml document structure is inaccessible for visualization, validation of sbml files is not possible and neither the information from sbo or miriam annotation nor sbml packages for layout information or qualitative models are supported. visualization of fluxes with fluxviz (konigkonig and holzhutterholzhutter, 2010) .cysbml combines sbml, the standard format of models of biological processes, with cytoscape, one of the standard platforms for the visualization of biological networks. cytoscape has already been used in numerous applications for visualization and graphical network analyses, whereas the biomodels database collects and annotates structural and mathematical models in sbml format that provide insights into the dynamic behavior of biological networks. cysbml makes it possible to combine these two important system biological resources in a convenient and easy-to-use way with special focus on the semantic layer defining the models. this work opens the door for the development of further plugins facilitating the analysis of sbml models in cytoscape.  
