cytogedevo—global alignment of biological networks with cytoscape motivation: in the systems biology era, high-throughput omics technologies have enabled the unraveling of the interplay of some biological entities on a large scale (e.g. genes, proteins, metab-olites or rnas). huge biological networks have emerged, where nodes correspond to these entities and edges between them model their relations. proteinprotein interaction networks, for instance, show the physical interactions of proteins in an organism. the comparison of such networks promises additional insights into protein and cell function as well as knowledge-transfer across species. several computational approaches have been developed previously to solve the network alignment (na) problem, but only a few concentrate on the usability of the implemented tools for the evaluation of proteinprotein interactions by the end users (biologists and medical researchers). results: we have created cytogedevo, a cytoscape app for visual and user-assisted na. it extends the previous gedevo methodology for global pairwise nas with new graphical and functional features. our main focus was on the usability, even by non-programmers and the inter-pretability of the na results with cytoscape. availability and implementation: cytogedevo is publicly available from the cytoscape app store at http://apps.cytoscape.org/apps/cytogedevo. in addition, we provide stand-alone command line executables, source code, documentation and step-by-step user instructions at http://cytogedevo.an increasing amount of data generated by omics technologies has become available in recent years. similar to the ubiquitous availability of sequence data since the mid-2000s, individual proteinprotein interactions (ppis) have been organized as networks and collected in online resources. understanding networks is crucial to complement our knowledge about protein function and evolution, which was initially gained through the dna sequencing projects of the last decades. we believe that understanding differences and commonalities of the topology of networks from different organisms holds great potential to gain deeper insight into how a cell works as a whole . network alignment (na) is a method to find a mapping between nodes in two or more networks, according to some quality criterion. this allows transferring knowledge between the aligned nodes. na is generally categorized into global and local methods: global na results in a one-to-one mapping between nodes, and local na results in either many-to-many or oneto-many mappings, depending on the method. further distinction ismade between pairwise and multiple na, which denotes the number of networks that a method can align at the same time. an exhaustive survey on the field is given in . most tools are command line utilities with varying degrees of stability (some are prone to crash, even under normal operation) and almost none offer a user interface usable for subsequent network analysis. graphcrunch2 has the dated graal method built-in but lacks visualization. some web servers exist, which offer na with limited visualization, such as natalieq or netaligner . gasoline is a cytoscape app for multiple local na with a user interface and visualization capabilities. with the exception of these, none of the existing tools are particularly user-friendly or perform any other function besides aligning a set of networks given as input files and return the alignment result in an output file. in addition, loading a previous intermediate result or an initially given mapping for further refinement is not often supported by existing software; notable exceptions are magna (saraph and milenkovi c, 2014) and piswap , respectively, which can be used to refine existing alignments. most tools rely on complex models (i.e. optimization functions) that make it difficult for the user to understand why the algorithm aligns certain nodes. this also hinders an intuitive understanding of the output. some methods (notably mi-graal and magna) offer optimizing for multiple scores, e.g. scores derived from network topology and from protein sequence alignments, which are often contradictory. most methods integrate two or more scores using a weighted sum of the form p a i score i with p a i 1: ghost attempts to solve the disparity by calculating a suitable weight automatically. more recently, this tradeoff has been thoroughly evaluated for optnetalign and is still an unsolved problem. therefore, we have developed cytogedevo as a cytoscape app, to make the alignment process more transparent, controllable and flexible. cytoscape is a popular tool for network analysis, visualization and exploration, which can be extended by third-party apps. our extension is a user-friendly software for pairwise global na, offering a user front-end that graphically aids with data analysis and follow-up studies. see the advanced tutorial (cytogedevo web site) for a case study. a summary of and citations for related na tools are provided in supplementary file s3.  
