cytoscape 2.8: new features for data integration and network visualization cytoscape is a popular bioinformatics package for biological network visualization and data integration. version 2.8 introduces two powerful new featurescustom node graphics and attribute equationswhich can be used jointly to greatly enhance cytoscapes data integration and visualization capabilities. custom node graphics allow an image to be projected onto a node, including images generated dynamically or at remote locations. attribute equations provide cytoscape with spreadsheet-like functionality in which the value of an attribute is computed dynamically as a function of other attributes and network properties. availability and implementation: cytoscape is a desktop java application released under the library gnu public license (lgpl). binary install bundles and source code for cytoscape 2.8 are available for download from http://cytoscape.org.networks are pervasive in biology. vast datasets are being gathered to delineate networks of various types and levels, including networks of genetic and proteinprotein interaction networks of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation, social networks and multiscale networks that span several of these domains . these network data extend and compliment a great deal of other information available in the biomedical sciences. although various datasets can appear quite different in quality and quantity, they all are reflections of the same underlying biological system and its responses. thus data integration, along with integrated visualization, is a key. cytoscape, now in its eighth year of development, has become a standard tool for integrated analysis and visualization of biological networks . its central organizing principle is a network graph, with biological entities (e.g. genes, proteins, cells, patients) represented as nodes and biological interactions represented as edges between nodes. data are integrated with the network using attributes, which map nodes or edges to specific data values such as gene expression levels or protein functions. attribute values can be used to control visual aspects of nodes and edges (e.g. shape, color, size) as well as to perform complex network searches, filtering operations and other analysis. to whom correspondence should be addressed. version 2.8 of cytoscape has introduced two significant new features that improve its ability to integrate and visualize complex datasets. the first feature allows non-programmers to map graphical images onto nodes, which greatly increases the power and flexibility with which integrated data can be visualized. the second feature is the introduction of spreadsheet-like equations into cytoscapes attribute browser to enable advanced transformation and combination of datasets directly within cytoscape. separately, each of these features provides useful new capabilities to cytoscape. taken together, however, these features provide a mechanism for expressing relationships between sets of data while simultaneously visualizing the integrated results.custom node graphics provide a new tool for non-programmers that allows rich new network visualizations to be created that integrate large and complex datasets. equations provide a powerful mechanism for data transformation within cytoscape. together, these features can be used to embed rich visualizations of data within the nodes of large networks.  
