systems biology cytoseed: a cytoscape plugin for viewing, manipulating and analyzing metabolic models created by the model seed cytoseed is a cytoscape plugin for viewing, manipulating and analyzing metabolic models created using the model seed. the cytoseed plugin enables users of the model seed to create informative visualizations of the reaction networks generated for their organisms of interest. these visualizations are useful for understanding organism-specific biochemistry and for highlighting the results of flux variability analysis experiments. availability and implementation: freely available for download on the web at http://sourceforge.net/projects/cytoseed/. implemented in java se 6 and supported on all platforms that support cytoscape.the model seed (http://www.theseed.org/models) is a web-based resource for the automatic generation of metabolic models from prokaryotic genome sequences . these models are automatically gap-filled by adding reactions that enable the model to produce all specified components of the organisms biomass. although the model seed provides extensive capabilities for viewing and running analyses on these metabolic models, the graphical displays of the biochemical reaction networks are limited to static kegg pathway maps . cytoseed provides model seed users with a complementary means of visualizing their metabolic models using cytoscape . cytoscape is an open-source software platform for dynamic, graphical visualization, manipulation and analysis of networks. the cytoseed plugin extends cytoscape to enable users to load a metabolic model from the model seed, sort the reaction network into metabolic pathways, and modify the pathway visualizations to create the representations they find most informative. through this process, users are able to identify and represent connections in the biochemical reaction network that are not readily apparent in the kegg pathway maps. cytoseed also enables users to display the results of flux variability analysis experiments for visualization in the context of a metabolic model, and to compare multiple models. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
