systems biology da 1.0: parameter estimation of biological pathways using data assimilation approach data assimilation (da) is a computational approach that estimates unknown parameters in a pathway model using time-course information. particle filtering, the underlying method used, is a well-established statistical method that approximates the joint posterior distributions of parameters by using sequentially generated monte carlo samples. in this article, we report the release of java-based software (da 1.0) with an intuitive and user-friendly interface to allow users to carry out parameters estimation using da. availability and implementation: da 1.0 was developed using java and thus would be executable on any platform installed with jdk 6.0 (not jre 6.0) or later. da 1.0 is freely available for academic users and can be launched or downloaded from http://simulating and modeling of biological pathways have been gaining popularity in an attempt to better understand complex biological relationships . however, before a pathway model can be simulated, all parameters in the model must be known. unfortunately, some parameters are usually either unknown or do not agree in literature. to address this problem, we previously introduced a computational method called data assimilation (da) to estimate unknown parameters in a pathway model using the time-course information based on a well-established statistical method, particle filtering . this method has been successfully used to do parameter estimation for the circadian clock model and phosphotyrosine-dependent signaling networks in the epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr) pathway . furthermore, in a recent paper, it has also been shown that particle filtering can be deployed to utilize parallel computing infrastructure that makes it scalable for large, complex models . to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors.  
