dactal: divide-and-conquer trees (almost) without alignments motivation: while phylogenetic analyses of datasets containing 10005000 sequences are challenging for existing methods, the estimation of substantially larger phylogenies poses a problem of much greater complexity and scale. methods: we present dactal, a method for phylogeny estimation that produces trees from unaligned sequence datasets without ever needing to estimate an alignment on the entire dataset. dactal combines iteration with a novel divide-and-conquer approach, so that each iteration begins with a tree produced in the prior iteration, decomposes the taxon set into overlapping subsets, estimates trees on each subset, and then combines the smaller trees into a tree on the full taxon set using a new supertree method. we prove that dactal is guaranteed to produce the true tree under certain conditions. we compare dactal to sat and maximum likelihood trees on estimated alignments using simulated and real datasets with 100027 643 taxa. results: our studies show that on average dactal yields more accurate trees than the two-phase methods we studied on very large datasets that are difficult to align, and has approximately the same accuracy on the easier datasets. the comparison to sat shows that both have the same accuracy, but that dactal achieves this accuracy in a fraction of the time. furthermore, dactal can analyze larger datasets than sat, including a dataset with almost 28 000 sequences. availability: dactal source code and results of dataset analyses are available atphylogeny estimation methods are used to estimate the true tree from sequences that have evolved down the tree. this estimation is typically performed using two phases: first, a multiple sequence alignment (msa) is estimated, and then a statistical estimation method [such as maximum likelihood (ml)] is applied to the alignment. such two-phase approaches produce highly accurate trees when the datasets are small enough (under a few hundred sequences) and have evolved without too many insertions and deletions (called indels) . several methods for coestimation of trees and alignments based on statistical models of evolution that include indels as well as substitutions have been developed, including. of these methods, bali-phy is the only one to whom correspondence should be addressed. that, to our knowledge, has been able to analyze datasets with 100 sequences, but even these analyses can take a week or more. sat is a new coestimation method, but (unlike the methods discussed earlier) estimates these alignments and trees without reference to a parametric model that includes indels as well as substitutions. simulations show that sat produces more accurate trees than twophase methods on large hard-to-align datasets , and does so fairly quickly. because sat uses raxml , a popular ml heuristic, to produce phylogenies, it is computationally intensive for large datasets; furthermore, sats realignment technique can have very large memory requirements on some datasets with 25 000 sequences . thus, none of the current methods is able to produce highly accurate phylogenetic estimation on very large sequence datasets, when they are difficult to align. as large phylogenetic studies are increasingly common (and more will likely arise as a result of next-generation sequencing technologies), this represents a substantial limitation. an alternative approach to two-phase methods are alignmentfree methods that estimate trees without performing any msa at all. although some of the promising methods have not yet been implemented (e.g.), the best of the currently available alignment-free methods, while exhibiting surprising and desirable properties (such as improved accuracy in the presence of among-site rate variation), do not yet produce trees of the same accuracy as two-phase methods that first align and then estimate the tree . here, we present dactal (divide-and-conquer trees (almost) without alignments), a method that is designed to estimate trees, but not a msa, on large datasets. dactal combines iteration with a divide-and-conquer dataset decomposition approach to produce a tree without ever needing to estimate an alignment on the full dataset . the dataset decomposition technique used in dactal is inspired by theoretical results related to supertree estimation methods and observations from extensive experience with phylogenetic analyses of large datasets; the iterative technique, however, is purely empirically motivated. our study compares dactal to several existing methods, including several leading two-phase methods and sat, on simulated and biological datasets with 1000 to almost 28 000 sequences. we show that:@bullet dactal was able to analyze larger datasets than sat can, including one dataset with 28 000 rrna sequences, for which, sats re-alignment technique had excessive memory requirements.  
