sequence analysis dafga: diversity analysis of functional gene amplicons diversity analysis of functional marker genes provides physiological insights into microbial guilds that perform an ecologically relevant process. however, it is challenging to group functional gene sequences to valid taxonomic units, primarily because of differences in the evolutionary rates of individual genes and possible horizontal gene transfer events. we developed a python script package named dafga, which estimates the evolutionary rate of a particular functional gene in a standardized manner by relating its sequence divergence to that of the 16s rrna gene. as a result, dafga provides gene-specific parameter sets for operational taxonomic unit clustering and taxo-nomic assignment at desired rank, and it can be implemented into the diversity measurements offered by qiime.microbes are the most abundant and most diverse organisms on earth playing crucial roles in ecosystem functioning. massively parallel sequencing of 16s rrna genes allows us to explore the phylogenetic diversity and taxonomic composition of microbial communities in any environment (e.g.). contrary to the 16s rrna gene, genes encoding key catalytic enzymes define particular functional guilds that perform ecologically relevant functions, e.g. methane-oxidizing bacteria (pmoa) and nitrogen-fixing bacteria (nifh). exploring the prevalence and diversity of these protein-coding genes can help identify novel lineages of particular functional guilds as well as physiologically differentiate closely related phylotypes. similarity of tree topology with that of the 16s rrna gene should reveal the potential of a functional gene to be used as a phylogenetic marker . protein-coding genes, however, evolve faster than the 16s rrna gene, and at varying rates. there are considerable variations in the evolutionary rates (ers), even among individual genes present in the same genome . use of arbitrary threshold values for clustering functional gene amplicons into operational taxonomic units (otus) could lead to incorrect estimates of microbial diversity within functional guilds. therefore, computational tools for functional gene amplicon analysis have to take into account the er of a targeted gene. because variations in er result primarily from changes in the protein sequence itself rather than from external factors such as changing environment or lifestyle , the er of individual genes can be measured in relation to that of 16s rrna genes . dafga compares the sequence divergence of functional genes with that of 16s rrna genes obtained from the same source organisms. it then extrapolates the sequence identity thresholds that define different taxonomic ranks and use them for otu clustering and taxonomic assignment to the lowest rank possible.the most critical step in the diversity analysis of functional marker genes and rrna genes is to cluster taxonomically homogeneous sequences into valid otus. dafga offers a standardized procedure to determine the er of functional genes in relation to that of the 16s rrna gene, and it provides sequence identity thresholds that correspond to different taxonomic ranks. as such, dafga allows for the automated cluster analysis and taxonomic categorization of environmental sequence data and provides a computational means to evaluate the potential of a functional gene as a phylogenetic marker.. workflow of dafga (a) and correlation plot of pmoa and 16s rrna gene sequence divergence (b). the pmoa gene was selected as a representative example. pmoa reference sequences deposited in fungene (http://fungene.cme.msu.edu/) were obtained in genpept format from ncbi non-redundant protein database. similarity and identity values of protein sequence alignments were plotted in green and blue, respectively. dashed red line is a linear regression curve of, respectively, similarity and identity of pmoa over 16s rrna gene sequence identity  
