adephylo: new tools for investigating the phylogenetic signal in biological traits adephylo is a package for the r software dedicated to the analysis of comparative evolutionary data. phylogenetic comparative methods initially aimed at accounting for or removing the effects of phylogenetic signal in the analysis of biological traits. however, recent approaches have shown that considerable information can be gathered from the study of the phylogenetic signal. in particular, close examination of phylogenetic structures can unveil interesting evolutionary patterns. for this purpose, we developed the package adephylo that provides tools for quantifying and describing the phylogenetic structures of biological traits. adephylo implements tests of phylogenetic signal, phylogenetic distances and proximities, and novel methods for describing further univariate and multivariate phylogenetic structures. these tools open up new perspectives in the analysis of evolutionary comparative data. availability: the stable version is available from cran: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/adephylo/. the development version is hosted by r-forge: http://r-forge.r-project.org/projects/adephylo/.evolutionary comparative data consists of biological traits observed in several taxa forming the tips of a phylogenetic tree. phylogenetic proximity most often engenders non-independence in the distribution of traits between closely related taxa, challenging the assumption of independence among observations required by classical statistical tools used for modeling relationships between traits. this phylogenetic autocorrelation, often referred to as phylogenetic signal, has initially been perceived as a source of nuisance in the analysis of life histories . consequently, phylogenetic comparative methods (pcms) first focused on partialling out the effects of phylogenetic signal in the correlative analysis of biological traits (e.g.). however, precious information can be to whom correspondence should be addressed. gained from studying the phylogenetic signal, e.g. for identifying different selective regimes , detecting shifts in correlation patterns on a phylogeny or inferring changes in rates of evolution (o). moreover, phylogenetic signal can also indicate interesting evolutionary processes such as divergence of life histories, trade-offs or niche conservatism . the r package adephylo aims to complement existing pcms by implementing tools for describing the phylogenetic signal and uncovering phylogenetic patterns from evolutionary comparative data.in large phylogenies (i.e. including thousands of tips). these metrics can be used to code the phylogenetic structure either under the form of a matrix of distances (disttips), proximities (proxtips) or as orthonormal bases (orthobasis.phylo). these different representations of phylogenetic information give rise to a diversity of methods for the analysis of phylogenetic comparative data. phylogenetic proximities are used in the abouheifs test , which provides a nonparametric procedure for detecting phylogenetic signal. abouheifs test is implemented by the function abouheif.moran, which performs independent monte carlo tests for each trait of the analyzed dataset. this approach can be used together with other classical tests of phylogenetic signal such as pagels and blombergs k , the latter being implemented in the r package picante . as a complement to testing procedures, adephylo implements tools for describing phylogenetic structures. the decomposition of a quantitative trait onto an orthonormal basis describing the topology of the tree is implemented by the function orthogram. this approach proposes a series of statistical tests as well as a visual description of the phylogenetic signal, allowing to infer where phylogenetic dependence occurs in the tree. the function orthobasis.phylo extends this approach by proposing new orthonormal bases based on different phylogenetic metrics; therefore, allowing considerable flexibility in the description of phylogenetic relationships. lastly, adephylo also implements the phylogenetic principal component analysis (ppca;), a novel method for investigating phylogenetic structures in multivariate comparative data. the function ppca performs the analysis, while other procedures (summary, plot, screeplot and scatter) allow for extracting useful information and plotting results of a ppca. adephylo is distributed with a tutorial and nine published datasets that are used to illustrate specific methodological points. in appendix a (supplementary material), we illustrate some features of adephylo using the maples data published in ackerly and donoghue (1998). we first test for the presence of phylogenetic signal in the data using the function abouheif.moran, revealing four phylogenetically structured traits . using ppca, we unveil a phylogenetic pattern opposing taxa from either side of node 1, which is remarkably similar to the four traits identified as phylogenetically structured, and points to the likely ancient divergence in life histories of the species considered .  
