damidseq_pipeline: an automated pipeline for processing damid sequencing datasets damid is a powerful technique for identifying regions of the genome bound by a dna-binding (or dna-associated) protein. currently, no method exists for automatically processing next-generation sequencing damid (damid-seq) data, and the use of damid-seq datasets with nor-malization based on read-counts alone can lead to high background and the loss of bound signal. damid-seq thus presents novel challenges in terms of normalization and background minimization. we describe here damidseq_pipeline, a software pipeline that performs automatic normaliza-tion and background reduction on multiple damid-seq fastq datasets. availability and implementation: open-source and freely available from http://owenjm.github.io/ damidseq_pipeline. the damidseq_pipeline is implemented in perl and is compatible with any unix-based operating system (e.g. linux, mac osx). contactdamid is a well-established technique for discovering regions of dna bound by or associated with proteins (van). it has been used to map the genome-wide binding of transcription factors, chromatin proteins, nuclear complexes associated with dna and rna pol ii (for e.g.). the technique can be performed in cell culture, whole organisms (van) or with cell-type specificity , and requires no fixation or antibody purification. damid involves the fusion of a bacterial dna adenine methylase (dam) to any dna-associated protein of interest. the bacterial dam protein methylates adenine in the sequence gatc and, given that higher eukaryotes lack native adenine methylation, the dnabinding footprint of the protein of interest is uniquely detectable through isolating sequences flanked by methylated gatc sites. however, a major consideration with damid is that any dam protein within the nucleus will non-specifically methylate adenines in gatc sequences at accessible regions of the genome. for this reason, damid is always performed concurrently with a dam-only control, and the final dna-binding profile is typically presented as a log 2 (dam-fusion/dam-only) ratio. although the majority of published damid experiments have used tiling microarrays for data analysis, next-generation sequencing (ngs) allows greater sensitivity and higher accuracy. although several recent studies have used ngs with damid , these have relied upon a comparison of peak binding intensities between read-count-normalized dam-fusion and dam samples. depending on the characteristics of the dam-fusion protein (see later) this approach may lead to real signal being lost, and correct normalization of the datasets is required to detect all binding by many damfusion proteins. here, we describe a software pipeline for the automated processing of damid-sequencing (damid-seq) data, including normalization and background reduction algorithms.  
