dann: a deep learning approach for annotating the pathogenicity of genetic variants annotating genetic variants, especially non-coding variants, for the purpose of identifying pathogenic variants remains a challenge. combined annotation-dependent depletion (cadd) is an algorithm designed to annotate both coding and non-coding variants, and has been shown to outper-form other annotation algorithms. cadd trains a linear kernel support vector machine (svm) to differentiate evolutionarily derived, likely benign, alleles from simulated, likely deleterious, variants. however, svms cannot capture non-linear relationships among the features, which can limit performance. to address this issue, we have developed dann. dann uses the same feature set and training data as cadd to train a deep neural network (dnn). dnns can capture non-linear relationships among features and are better suited than svms for problems with a large number of samples and features. we exploit compute unified device architecture-compatible graphics processing units and deep learning techniques such as dropout and momentum training to accelerate the dnn training. dann achieves about a 19 relative reduction in the error rate and about a 14 relative increase in the area under the curve (auc) metric over cadds svm methodology.identifying the genetic variants responsible for diseases can be very challenging. the majority of candidate variants lie in non-coding sections of the genome, whose role in maintaining normal genome function is not well understood. most annotation methods can only annotate protein coding variants, excluding 98 of the human genome. another annotation method, combined annotationdependent depletion (cadd;), can annotate both coding and non-coding variants. cadd trains a linear kernel support vector machine (svm) to separate observed genetic variants from simulated genetic variants. observed genetic variants are derived from differences between human genomes and the inferred humanchimpanzee ancestral genome. because of natural selection effects, observed variants are depleted of deleterious variants. simulated genetic variants are enriched for deleterious variants. cadds svm can only learn linear representations of the data, which limits its performance. to overcome this, we implemented a deep neural network (dnn) algorithm that we have named deleterious annotation of genetic variants using neural networks (dann). a dnn is an artificial neural network with several hidden layers of units between the input and output layers. the extra layers give a dnn-added level of abstraction, but can greatly increase the computational time needed for training. deep learning techniques and graphics processing unit (gpu) hardware can significantly reduce the computational time needed to train dnns. dnns outperform simpler linear approaches such as logistic regression (lr) and svms for classification problems involving many features and samples.  
