data and text mining danter: an extensible r-based tool for quantitative analysis of-omics data motivation: the size and complex nature of mass spectrometry-based proteomics datasets motivate development of specialized software for statistical data analysis and exploration. we present danter, a graphical r package that features extensive statistical and diagnostic functions for quantitative proteomics data analysis, including nor-malization, imputation, hypothesis testing, interactive visualization and peptide-to-protein rollup. more importantly, users can easily extend the existing functionality by including their own algorithms under the add-on tab. availability: danter and its associated user guide are available for download free of charge at http://omics.pnl.gov/software/. we have an updated binary source for the danter package up on our website together with a vignettes document. for windows, a single click automatically installs danter along with the r programming environment. for linux and mac os x, users must install r and then follow instructions on the danter website for package installation.analysis of proteomics data, such as based on liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, presents special challenges due to a number of factors, including sample variation and missing peptide abundances, as well as the need to perform protein-level significance analysis on peptide-level data . existing non-commercial software for proteomics analysis, such as gprox (rigbolt, 2011, http:// bit.ly/pkbswj) and dante , uses multiple programming languages (e.g. r and c) that make additional development and maintenance difficult. moreover, these tools lack the flexibility and extensibility needed to allow end users to add new functionality. danter is a graphical r package for quantitative bottomup proteomics data analysis designed to overcome these limitations; implementation entirely in r makes for an independent and readily extensible data analysis platform. although the software can be installed and used as a stand-alone program, user-defined algorithms can be easily integrated to extend data analysis and visualization.  
