sequence analysis dapple: a pipeline for the homology-based prediction of phosphorylation sites while many experimentally characterized phosphorylation sites exist for certain organisms, such as human, rat and mouse, few sites are known for other organisms, hampering related research efforts. we have developed a software pipeline called dapple that automates the process of using known phosphorylation sites from other organisms to identify putative sites in an organism of interest. availability: dapple is available as a web server at http://saphire.protein phosphorylation is the most widespread cellular signaling mechanism in eukaryotes . knowledge of an organisms phosphorylation sites facilitates the study of its cellular signaling pathways, which in turn has many applications in basic and translational research. although online databases contain many phosphorylation sites for human, rat, and mouse, little data are available for other species. using the cow as a test species, we previously proposed a protocol for making predictions in species with few known sites . taking advantage of sequence homology between human and bovine proteins, this protocol involved manually using known human phosphorylation sites as blast queries to identify bovine sites. if a query and its best match in the bovine proteome had few or no sequence differences, the match was considered a putative bovine site. while useful, several aspects of this protocol could be improved. first, its manual nature makes it time-consuming, and also limits the amount of known phosphorylation data that can be used. second, it uses only known phosphorylation sites from human. it is possible, for instance, that a given bovine site might be homologous to a known rat site, but not to any known human site, and by using only known phosphorylation sites from human, this bovine site would be missed. this problem would be even more pronounced for species that are distantly related to human, such as plants. third, the method used in jalal et al.(2009) to identify non-orthologous proteins (comparing their annotations) has several drawbacks, including its subjective nature, the difficulty of automating these comparisons and the fact that annotations are often inaccurate or incomplete. dapple is a software pipeline that addresses these concerns, ultimately allowing the user to easily, quickly and accurately identify potential phosphorylation sites in an organism of interest.to test dapple, phosphorylation sites in the cow (bos taurus) were identified, as was done by. the files described below were used as input to dapple. the phosphositeplus database was downloaded, and contained  
