data and text mining database.bio: a web application for interpreting human variations rapid advances of next-generation sequencing technology have led to the integration of genetic information with clinical care. genetic basis of diseases and response to drugs provide new ways of disease diagnosis and safer drug usage. this integration reveals the urgent need for effective and accurate tools to analyze genetic variants. due to the number and diversity of sources for annotation, automating variant analysis is a challenging task. here, we present database.bio, a web application that combines variant annotation, prioritization and visualization so as to support insight into the individual genetic characteristics. it enhances annotation speed by preprocessing data on a supercomputer, and reduces database space via a unified database representation with compressed fields.the decreasing cost of sequencing technologies and growing knowledge in the clinical relevance of genomic data have led to rapid adoption of genetic tests in healthcare . while huge amount of data is generated through these tests, the management and analysis of these data present many challenges as discussed here after. variant annotations come from diverse sources, which may not use the same coordinate system and naming convention. once annotations have been integrated, these database files consume large storage space and queries to the databases can be very slow without proper indexing and preprocessing. existing tools have solved some of the stated issues but are lacking in other features. for example, some software can visualize records from different databases across the genome, such as the ucsc genome browser and alamut visual 2.4 (interactive biosoftware; last accessed august 5, 2014). however, it is hard to display all relevant annotations, such as relationships between genes and pathways, by only using a genome browser. moreover, the scale of genome browsers is usually small as they are designed to show information of small genomic regions. it is also not possible for users to sort or filter variants in the browser. in contrast, tables can better summarize variant information and help users prioritize their findings. qiagens ingenuity variant analysis software (iva) (www.qiagen.com/ingenuity) is a popular table-based tool and allows users to configure a filter cascade for data prioritization. however, without an embedded genome browser, it is inconvenient for users to picture genomic characteristics of variants and study-related data from databases integrated in iva. a similar tool,) to display sample details but does not provide detailed disease annotations. here, we present database.bio, a web application that integrates five key elements (variants, genes, diseases, drugs and pathways) and assigns severity levels to variants using customizable categorization rules. variant information is presented in html pages that contain annotation details with a powerful embedded genome browser, allowing clinicians and researchers to carry out analysis of genomic sequencing data in a highly configurable manner. twenty-nine public databases are used to generate variant annotations including variant functional prediction, variant conservation, splicing prediction, regulatory feature prediction, pharmacogenomics information with disease and drug, real sample data such as 1000g, tcga, icgc and lovd, as well as clinical trial details. when developing a web tool for variant interpretation, it is important to ensure that patient data are retrieved and managed over the web in a secure manner. database.bio is built strictly adhering to health insurance portability and accountability act (hipaa), which is a stringent standard for privacy and security.database.bio, empowered by a space-efficient integration of diverse sources of annotations, provides an efficient way for interpreting human genomic variations and supports interactive visualization. as database.bio is a web-based application, the way users retrieve and manage data have been specially designed to ensure a security level up to the standard of hipaa.  
