data-driven integration of epidemiological and toxicological data to select candidate interacting genes and environmental factors in association with disease motivation: complex diseases, such as type 2 diabetes mellitus (t2d), result from the interplay of both environmental and genetic factors. however, most studies investigate either the genetics or the environment and there are a few that study their possible interaction in context of disease. one key challenge in documenting interactions between genes and environment includes choosing which of each to test jointly. here, we attempt to address this challenge through a data-driven integration of epidemiological and toxicological studies. specifically, we derive lists of candidate interacting genetic and environmental factors by integrating findings from genome-wide and environment-wide association studies. next, we search for evidence of toxicological relationships between these genetic and environmental factors that may have an etiological role in the disease. we illustrate our method by selecting candidate interacting factors for t2d.complex diseases and phenotypes, such as type 2 diabetes (t2d), have multifactorial etiology in which both genetic and environmental factors play a role . through multiple genetic association studies, such as the genomewide association study (gwas) we have discovered many common variants associated with complex disease; however, these variants confer very little disease risk and cumulatively explain a limited portion of heritability . it is hypothesized that perhaps some of the unexplained risk may be due to gene-environment interactions, or joint effect of a genetic and environmental factor are different than that of each of the factors alone . we recently put forth an analogous framework to investigate possible environmental influences on disease, called an environment-wide association study (ewas), where we connected over 250 environmental factors to t2d and serum cholesterol levels . humans are not exposed to a few environmental factors at a time, but many types of infectious agents, pollutants, nutrients and vitamins at once, all of which may play a role in disease. ewas evaluates multiple environmental factors to capture the complex nature of environmental exposure in relation to disease. nevertheless, gwas and ewas only examine genetic or environmental factors, respectively, without consideration of the to whom correspondence should be addressed. other. examining interactions is complex, power-intensive and exacts a multiple comparison burden . for example, a list of g genetic variants and e environmental exposures would result in g or e hypothesis tests in gwas and ewas, respectively; however, to screen the possible space of interactions would many more tests, equal to g times e. to accommodate these challenges, statistical methods have been developed to larger space of interactions . another option includes adapting methods used to detect genegene interactions, or epistasis . yet another way includes paring down the list of g and e factors to test. in many variant by environment investigations, factors are selected by convenience, without sufficient documentation of the strength of their marginal associations. there is a need for methods to select common variants and exposures resulting from comprehensive studies, such as gwas and ewas . further still, gwas and ewas operate on the population scale, and there is need to integrate molecular-scale toxicological evidence such as how an environmental factor might modulate a biological processbetween exposures and genes. as yet, there are few ways to integrate environmental findings from epidemiological and toxicological studies. here, we propose integrating findings from genetic and environmental association studies with knowledge regarding molecular-and toxicological-scale interactions. by integrating these data, we aim to assemble a list of genetic and environmental factors to later test jointly against a phenotype or disease of interest. specifically, we attained a comprehensive list of genetic variants associated with disease from a curated database, variants informing medicine (varimed). varimed contains results from over 6500 peer-reviewed genetic epidemiology studies (e.g. gwas), covering over 110 000 variants in 9700 genes associated with over 2000 phenotypes . to prioritize environmental factors, we used an ewas approach with the health and nutrition examination survey (nhanes), a biannual health survey whose participants are representative of the us population [centers for disease control and prevention (cdc),. last, we connected these findings from varimed and ewas with the comparative toxicogenomics database (ctd), a database of curated findings in toxicology. toxicology is the study of the biological response to chemicals, such as how a chemical exposure might induce a gene expression change. as an example, one such toxicological interaction is derived from an investigation studying gestational exposure of the plasticizing agent bisphenol a on adipogenesis in a rattus norvegicus model system , in which mrna levels of the gene lpl increasedwe have described a method to combine epidemiological association findings with results from toxicological experiments to create a tractable list candidate of genes, variants and environmental factors that might interplay in the context of disease. additionally, the method is a data-driven integration of three disparate datasets that span the population to toxicological scale. of interest, this method has drawn attention to nutrient factors that may interact with a gene known to be functional and have a therapeutic role in t2d, pparg . -tocopherol, associated with t2d risk in ewas, has been observed to increase expression of pparg mrna. further, forms of carotene protective for t2d have an opposite role, reducing pparg expression. of note, these candidate interactions are derived from two very different toxicological investigations, one studying the influence of -tocopherol on pparg expression in human cell lines and the other observing the effects of carotenoids on pparg in adipocyte differentiation in mus musculus . a next possible step includes testing these candidate interactions in the context of disease. specifically, we propose an epidemiological study in which the interaction between functional variants in pparg, such as rs1801282, be examined along with) 1.14 (1.081.2) increases gene expression cis--carotene 0.66 (0.550.79) pparg 1.14 (1.081.2) decreases gene expression vitamin d 0.68 (0.570.81) pparg 1.14 (1.081.2) affects gene expression trans--carotene 0.70 (0.580.82) pparg 1.07 (1.051.09) decreases gene expression (  
