datpav—an online processing, analysis and visualization tool for exploratory investigation of experimental data data processing, analysis and visualization (datpav) is an exploratory tool that allows experimentalist to quickly assess the general characteristics of the data. this platform-independent software is designed as a generic tool to process and visualize data matrices. this tool explores organization of the data, detect errors and support basic statistical analyses. processed data can be reused whereby different step-by-step data processing/analysis workflows can be created to carry out detailed investigation. the visualization option provides publication-ready graphics. applications of this tool are demonstrated at the web site for three cases of metabolomics, environmental and hydrodynamic data analysis.it is vital to all the domains of scientific investigations to design systematic experiments and extract relevant knowledge from the data collected. preliminary investigation of the data is required to remove the errors such as instrument noise or misplaced samples or incorrect data entry, all of which lead to serious misinformation during the analysis step. exploratory data analysis uses visualization tools to get overview of data and to transform variables/data for further analysis . for example, systematic sampling or measurement errors can be detected by observing the correlation between the variables or by viewing the nature of the profile for the standard used, during the experiment. a number of application-specific tools are available for handling and processing of experimental datasets and for graphical visualization . however, data preconditioning poses different challenges than what these tools are designed to address. spreadsheet software such as ms excel or minitab requires users to individually select the data in the columns and separately to whom correspondence should be addressed. perform desired calculations by entering the formulae. they involve repetitions of tasks every time a new column or a data sheet has to be analyzed. higher level analysis software such as matlab, spss and sas require special training or programming skills and are expensive commercial packages. for a quick and easy examination of data, we need a simple data exploration software, which can provide options for basic processing and quick data visualization. in this article, we present the description of a platform-independent data exploratory software called datpav (data processing, analysis and visualization).  
