david-ws: a stateful web service to facilitate gene/protein list analysis the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (david), which can be freely accessed at http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/, is a web-based online bioinformatics resource that aims to provide tools for the functional interpretation of large lists of genes/proteins. it has been used by researchers from more than 5000 institutes worldwide, with a daily submission rate of 1200 gene lists from 400 unique researchers, and has been cited by more than 6000 scientific publications. however, the current web interface does not support programmatic access to david, and the uniform resource locator (url)-based application programming interface (api) has a limit on url size and is stateless in nature as it uses url request and response messages to communicate with the server, without keeping any state-related details. david-ws (web service) has been developed to automate user tasks by providing stateful web services to access david programmatically without the need for human interactions. availability: the web service and sample clients (written in java, perl, python and matlab) are made freely available under the david license at http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/content.jsp?file=ws.html.the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (david) bioinformatics resources consists of an integrated biological knowledge base and a comprehensive set of analytic tools to extract biological themes from large gene/protein lists, such as those derived from genomic and proteomic studies. for any uploaded gene list, the david bioinformatics resources provide not only the typical geneterm enrichment analysis but also tools that allow users to condense large gene lists into gene functional groups, visualize many-genesto-many-terms relationships, cluster redundant and heterogeneous terms into groups, search for interesting and related genes ormodules, such as gene functional classification, functional annotation clustering, functional annotation chart, functional annotation table, etc. . more than 20 operations are currently available on the web page and can be categorized into four groups, as follows:@bullet add list: gene list/background population submission; @bullet lookup: check available conversion types, backgrounds, categories, species, tool options, etc.;@bullet select: select background populations, categories and species;@bullet report: generate output from david modules/tools. axis2 supports four types of service scopes. they are request, transport session, soap session and application. david-ws is configured to be stateful at the transport session level. when a client establishes a connection to the service, the server will create a new session for the client. the state-related input, such as the current list, species, backgrounds and annotation categories, can be stored in the session context and used by proceeding operations within the same session. users can select and group operations into workflows and execute them in batch to automate analysis tasks. in, a typical david-ws client can go through the following:(1) add gene/protein list; (2) lookup background/species/categories; (3) select background/species/categories and (4) get reports.  
