structural bioinformatics a discriminatory function for prediction of protein–dna interactions based on alpha shape modeling motivation: proteindna interaction has significant importance in many biological processes. however, the underlying principle of the molecular recognition process is still largely unknown. as more high-resolution 3d structures of proteindna complex are becoming available, the surface characteristics of the complex become an important research topic. result: in our work, we apply an alpha shape model to represent the surface structure of the proteindna complex and developed an interface-atom curvature-dependent conditional probability discriminatory function for the prediction of protein dna interaction. the interface-atom curvature-dependent formalism captures atomic interaction details better than the atomic distance-based method. the proposed method provides good performance in discriminating the native structures from the docking decoy sets, and outperforms the distance-dependent formalism in terms of the z-score. computer experiment results show that the curvature-dependent formalism with the optimal parameters can achieve a native z-score of 8.17 in discriminating the native structure from the highest surface-complementarity scored decoy set and a native z-score of 7.38 in discriminating the native structure from the lowest rmsd decoy set. the interface-atom curvature-dependent formalism can also be used to predict apo version of dna-binding proteins. these results suggest that the interface-atom curvature-dependent formalism has a good prediction capability for proteindna interactions. availability: the code and data sets are available for download onproteindna interaction plays an important role in many biological processes, such as dna replication, transcription and nucleosome remodeling . in the beginning, scientists focused on the nucleic acid sequence information and tried to explain proteindna interaction by genetic codes. however, later research on the geometric analysis of the proteindna interface showed that there is no simple code for to whom correspondence should be addressed. proteindna recognition. in recent years, they paid more attention to the pairwise interatomic distance information provided by the 3d structure of the proteindna complex. samudrala and moult proposed an all-atom distance-dependent discriminatory function for the prediction of nucleic acid binding proteins . they applied the conditional probability theory to the analysis of the protein structures and got good results compared with the free energy theory. later,applied an interface pairwise residue level potential to the screening of predicted docked complex. recently, robertson and varani improved the method based on an interface-atom distance-dependent formalism and showed better prediction power than previous methods . gao and skolnick developed a knowledgebased method, which can perform apo version of dna-binding protein prediction . there are several other methods that have been devised to predict protein-related interactions:developed a structure-base method for the transcription factor binding site prediction, ahmad proposed the usage of moment information in the prediction of dna-binding proteins .applied the clustering method in the analysis of proteindna structural data. however, the underlying principle of proteindna interactions is still largely unknown. previously, some scientists focused on the electrostatics features of the amino acid and some focused on the interatomic distance . although these attempts to predict proteindna interaction provided acceptable results, few paid enough attention to the 3d interface surface characteristics of the proteindna complex which are also direct factors influencing the binding process . in proteindna interaction, the binding surface of the protein should provide certain conditions to adapt to particular dna molecular surfaces. such conditions can be the atom type, surface curvature, accessible surface area, net charge, etc. as more high-resolution 3d structures of biological molecules are becoming available, the surface characteristics of the molecules have become an important research topic . a useful tool for object surface analysis is the 3d alpha shape model. alpha shape has been used for a long time in molecular volume computation, cavities detection and shape representation.) first proposed to use alpha shape modeling to compute the molecular area, volume and detect the inaccessible cavities in proteins.used the edges in alpha shape modeling to represent the protein structure and atom contacts. poupon used voronoi tessellations to compute the protein volume and detect the pockets, cavities and voids on the protein surface . recently, alpha shape has been introduced into the study of molecular surface.applied alpha shape modeling to characterize the surface of the protein and defined the surface residue, and surface patches with some local features. however, most of the work has been done on protein surface analysis and little attention has been paid to the interface surface characteristics of the proteindna complex. in our research, we propose to apply 3d alpha shape modeling to study the interface surface characteristics of the proteindna complex and develop a surface characteristic-based discriminatory function for the prediction of proteindna interaction.in this study, we have constructed an interface-atom curvaturedependent discriminatory function for the prediction of protein dna interaction. a 3d alpha shape model is introduced to represent the surface of the proteindna complex. in this model, solid angle, atom type and residue type are extracted to characterize the interface surface of the proteindna complex. we use the conditional probability to form the discriminatory function. the performance of function is tested by discriminating the native structures from a set of docking decoy structures and the near native decoy structures. the interface-atom curvature-dependent formulation shows better performance than the previous pairwise potential method in terms of native z-scores in the same decoy discrimination test. we reaffirm the importance of the geometric complementarity in determining the structure of a complex and show that interface surface curvature plays an important role in proteindna interaction. we show that our method is also applicable to the prediction of apo version of dna-binding proteins. our work can be extended in several ways. the alpha shape model should also be useful for the analysis of other types of molecular interactions, such as proteinrna, proteinligand and protein protein complexes, and for the study of multiple proteins, multiple binding sites or a specific family of proteins. these problems would require modeling interface surfaces of different characteristics such as different sizes and the compatibility and cooperativity between these surfaces, thus new surface features in addition to the solid angle may be needed. recently, it has been shown that interface cluster patterns found based on multiple sequence alignment and graph models play an important role in molecular interactions. however, currently these cluster patterns can only incorporate limited 3d information and steric compatibility. the alpha shape model discussed in this article is true 3d in nature, thus it can be used to extract 3d interface patterns. this would be an interesting future research direction.  
