databases and ontologies dbsno: a database of cysteine s-nitrosylation s-nitrosylation (sno), a selective and reversible protein post-translational modification that involves the covalent attachment of nitric oxide (no) to the sulfur atom of cysteine, critically regulates protein activity, localization and stability. due to its importance in regulating protein functions and cell signaling, a mass spectrometry-based proteomics method rapidly evolved to increase the dataset of experimentally determined sno sites. however, there is currently no database dedicated to the integration of all experimentally verified s-nitrosylation sites with their structural or functional information. thus, the dbsno database is created to integrate all available data-sets and to provide their structural analysis. up to april 15, 2012, the dbsno has manually accumulated 43000 experimentally verified s-nitrosylated peptides from 219 research articles using a text mining approach. to solve the heterogeneity among the data collected from different sources, the sequence identity of these reported s-nitrosylated peptides are mapped to the uniprotkb protein entries. to delineate the structural correlation and consensus motif of these sno sites, the dbsno database also provides structural and functional analyses, including the motifs of substrate sites, solvent accessibility , protein secondary and tertiary structures, protein domains and gene ontology. availability: the dbsno is now freely accessible via http://dbsno. mbc.nctu.edu.tw. the database content is regularly updated upon collecting new data obtained from continuously surveying research articles. contacts:of the various post-translational modifications (ptms), s-nitrosylation (sno) is reversible and involves the covalent attachment of nitric oxide (no) to the thiol group of cysteine (residues. an increasing number of studies suggest that protein s-nitrosylation plays an important role in the no-related redox pathway, especially in immune, cardiovascular, neuronal and plant systems . the various targets of s-nitrosylation and differential expression of those targets modulate the activity, localization and stability of proteins and further regulate patho-physiological events, such as neurodegenerative diseases and cancers . due to the importance of s-nitrosylation in biological processes, numerous efforts have been directed toward mass spectrometry-based s-nitrosyl-proteomic studies using various biological systems to increase significantly the number of known s-nitrosylated peptides . among these studies, the biotin-switch method is the most commonly adapted method for the site-specific identification of protein s-nitrosylation . as the number of experimentally identified s-nitrosylated peptides grows, a structured database of protein s-nitrosylation is desirable for the further investigation of the biological functions of s-nitrosylated proteins and the substrate specificities of sno sites. although a number of databases have been developed for post-translational modifications, such as dbptm , phospho.elm , phosphosite , o-glycbase , ubiprot , dbogap and pupdb , there is no database dedicated to s-nitrosylated proteins and their corresponding substrate sites. thus, a new database (dbsno) containing the experimentally verified s-nitrosylated peptides from research articles is proposed to facilitate with the functional analysis of s-nitrosylated proteins and assist with the structural investigation of s-nitrosylation sites.the dbsno database is the first public resource to allow efficient access to curated sno sites, functional annotations, structural characteristics and substrate motifs for s-nitrosylated proteins. with regard to the computational prediction of sno sites, dbsno could provide the benchmark dataset for the development and comparison of prediction tools.  
