gene expression dcgl: an r package for identifying differentially coexpressed genes and links from gene expression microarray data gene coexpression analysis was developed to explore gene interconnection at the expression level from a systems perspective, and differential coexpression analysis (dcea), which examines the change in gene expression correlation between two conditions, was accordingly designed as a complementary technique to traditional differential expression analysis (dea). since there is a shortage of dcea tools, we implemented in an r package dcgl five dcea methods for identification of differentially coexpressed genes and differentially coexpressed links, including three currently popular methods and two novel algorithms described in a companion paper. dcgl can serve as an easy-to-use tool to facilitate differential coexpression analyses. contact: yyli@scbit.org and yxli@scbit.orgfrom the perspective of systems biology, gene coexpression analysis is useful for investigating gene interconnection at the expression level. differential coexpression analysis (dcea), which examines the change in expression correlation of gene pairs between two conditions, helps to explore the global transcriptional mechanisms underlying phenotypic changes. compared with traditional differential expression analysis (dea), the development of dcea tools is lagged. in this work, we developed an r package, dcgl, implementing three previously proposed dcea methods and two new algorithms reported in a companion paper (submitted for publication). log ratio of connections (lrc) calculates the logarithm of the ratio of the connectivities of a gene between two conditions . average specific connection (asc) counts the specific connections that exist in only one coexpression network . the weighted genecoexpression network analysis (wgcna) weights links with correlation coefficients and compares the sums of the correlation coefficients of a gene . in contrast, our two methods, differential coexpression profile (dcp) and differential coexpression enrichment (dce), are designed based on the exact coexpression changes of gene pairs, and thus can differentiate significant coexpression changes from relatively trivial ones, and identify coexpression reversal between positive and negative (submitted for publication). all the five methods are able to identify differentially coexpressed genes (dcgs) from microarray datasets, and dce is also able to pick out differentially coexpressed gene pairs or links (dcls).  
