gene expression ddgni: dynamic delay gene-network inference from high-temporal data using gapped local alignment motivation: inferring gene-regulatory networks is very crucial in decoding various complex mechanisms in biological systems. synthesis of a fully functional transcriptional factor/protein from dna involves series of reactions, leading to a delay in gene regulation. the complexity increases with the dynamic delay induced by other small molecules involved in gene regulation, and noisy cellular environment. the dynamic delay in gene regulation is quite evident in high-temporal live cell lineage-imaging data. although a number of gene-network-inference methods are proposed, most of them ignore the associated dynamic time delay. results: here, we propose ddgni (dynamic delay gene-network inference), a novel gene-network-inference algorithm based on the gapped local alignment of gene-expression profiles. the local alignment can detect short-term gene regulations, that are usually overlooked by traditional correlation and mutual information based methods. ddgni uses gaps to handle the dynamic delay and non-uniform sampling frequency in high-temporal data, like live cell imaging data. our algorithm is evaluated on synthetic and yeast cell cycle data, and caenorhabditis elegans live cell imaging data against other prominent methods. the area under the curve of our method is significantly higher when compared to other methods on all three datasets. availability: the program, datasets and supplementary files are available at http://www.jjwanglab.org/ddgni/.biological systems involve collaborations at various levels, from the atomic interactions to more complex ecosystems. network formulation will enable a better understanding of such complex systems. in particular, the interplay between genes and the networks they constitute are of great interest to many biologists. gene networks can help us to comprehend the cause, prognosis and to prioritize drug targets of various diseases . the spatial and temporal dynamics in gene-expression patterns can reveal regulatory pathways (networks) and thereby help us to understand various underlying mechanisms . recent advances in live cell imaging techniques have enabled continuous documentation of cell divisions and quantitative measurement of gene expressions for each cell throughout embryogenesis . inferring regulatory networks from such data will help to decode various regulatory mechanisms involved in tissue differentiation and embryonic development. reconstruction of gene-regulatory networks (grn) accurately from high-temporal data is fundamental but still remains a challenge. gene regulations are not spontaneous ; various processes are involved in producing fully functional and measurable concentrations of transcriptional factors/ proteins. each process takes time, leading to the delay in gene regulation . furthermore, cellular mrna and protein concentrations are substantially influenced by noisy cellular environment and other small molecules involved in gene regulation . these fluctuations (noise) can lead to the dynamic increase or decrease in delay, during transcriptional regulation as illustrated in. the dynamic delay in gene regulation is quite evident in high-temporal live cell lineage-imaging data . quite a number of gene-network-inference methods are proposed. however, their performance varies on different datasets with respective limitations. for instance, correlation based methods perform better in predicting linear relationships whereas, information theoretic (mutual information, mi) based methods are better for non-linear relationships. network topology is also critical, as some methods are more suitable for erdosrenyi random topology and others for standard small world scale free networks . most of the methods perform better on steady state data as compared to temporal data , due to the fluctuations in magnitude and the delay in gene expression. current grn-inference methods mainly focus on transcriptional events. however, most of them ignore the associated dynamic time delay. cross-correlation-based methods can identify to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com delayed correlations. nonetheless, to find the maximal delayed correlation, one needs to compute correlations for all the n-1 possible delays between a regulator and its target, where n is the number of time points in the gene-expression data ; this makes it computationally expensive for hightemporal data. moreover, it cannot be applied for identification of non-linear relationships. on the other hand, although the timedelayed mi based methods can predict non-linear relationships, yet there is a need to compute mi for all the n-1 possible delays. mi assumes long sampling intervals and statistical independence between time points . however, this assumption is not valid for continuous live-cell-imaging data as the expression at time t is dependent on its previous time stamp and it is imperative to consider such dependencies. time delay-aracne is a three-step information-theoretic-based method. starting with the geneexpression change-point analysis, it is followed by network construction and then pruning. however, being an information theoretic method, it inherits limitations such as statistical independence between time points and long sampling intervals . genereg is a regression-based method similar to ordinary differential equations (odes). it uses a linear model with time delay and regulation coefficient as its parameters. this assumes a constant delay between the regulator and its target. in reality however, the delay is dynamic and is influenced by other small molecules involved in gene regulation and noisy cell environment . recently, dynamic time wrapping (dtw) based similarity measures are also used to infer time delay gene networks . dtw measures the similarity between two time series by allowing one of the series (query) to expanse or compress at each time point rather than point to point comparison such that the similarity is maximized. one of the key limitations of dtw is that, it is a global measure, i.e. dtw assumes that the two time series overlap on the edges and expanses one of the series to the length of other series to compute their similarity. however, in reality the gene expression is dynamic and the regulations are active only for a subset of time . this phenomenon is clearly observed in developmental and disease-prognosis networks (pathways) . thus in time-series geneexpression analysis, it is very important to detect local expression similarities to understand the underlying molecular dynamics in biological networks . all these limitations of current methods advocates the need of new gene-network-inference methods, that are least influenced by the dynamic expression delays and the number of time points. here we present a new network inference method based on the gapped local alignment of gene-expression profiles. gapped local alignment was originally used to align two nucleotide or protein sequences and to find the best matched subsequences . gaps induced in the alignment signify the insertions and deletions, and alignment score reflects the similarity between the two aligned sequences. here, we employ gapped local alignment to infer dynamic delay grn. the rationale behind the algorithm is that, if a gene x is regulating gene y, the expression pattern of the target gene y is stimulated by the expression pattern of its regulator x, i.e. they share similar expression pattern with varying expression delay. a regulatory relationship is often a local phenomenon due to the dynamic nature of gene regulation (e.g. different co-factor binding).and c shows the example local expression correlations (shaded). by identifying such common local patterns between a regulator and its target, we can reveal the relationships between them.(d) shows positive regulation between the genes pal-1 and elt-1 in the c lineage of caenorhabditis elegans . it can be observed that the delay is not constant throughout the expression, i.e. d1 6 d2 . insertion of gaps in the alignment will incorporate dummy time points that can account for the variability in delay. instead of mapping the expression values one to one, we stretch the expression values of one gene over other by inserting gaps, such that the similarity between the two expression patterns (regulator and its target) is maximized. a detailed description of the algorithm is given in the methods section.the merit of the current method ddgni is to infer the dynamic time delayed grn. conventionally, multifactorial dream data is used to evaluate the performance of various grninference methods. as the dream data is a steady-state data and does not include any time delay in the gene-expression patterns, it is thus rendered incompatible to illustrate the merits of ddgni on this dataset. therefore, it was considered imperative to simulate data that incorporates time delay in the gene expressions in order to highlight the application of ddgni in handling dynamic time delay. furthermore, to draw parallels with the already existing methods, timedelay-aracne , an information theoretic method, is also evaluated on the same simulated data. the results support the potential of ddgni in inferring time delayed grns (section 3.1). furthermore to demonstrate the applicability on steady-state data, ddgni is also evaluated on multifactorial dream 4 data (with no time delay), against three more prominent network inference methods: maximal information coefficient (mic) , aracne and genie3 . genenetweaver is used to generate the dream 4 multifactorial data. the performance of all four methods is quite comparable as shown in supplementary table s1. to assess the practical application of ddgni, we used the cellcycle time-course data from yeast and real time embryonic gene-expression data from c.elegans , as discussed in section 3.2 and 3.3 respectively. the performance of ddgni is evaluated against tdaracne and dtw. the auc values show a substantially increased performance of ddgni as compared to td-aracne and dtw.although, several methods are proposed to infer regulatory networks from temporal data, their performance is not satisfactory, especially with the dynamic delay associated to the gene regulation. high complexity and limitations of the existing methods in handling varying time delay, advocates the need of effective gene network inference methods that are least influenced by expression delays and number of time points. in this study, weproposed a simple and elegant network inference method based on gapped local alignment of gene expression profiles. by identifying common local patterns between a regulator and its target, we can reveal the regulatory relationship between them. in short, we span the expression values (time points) of the target gene over the expression values of its potential regulator by inserting gaps such that the similarity between the two expression patterns is maximized. the novelty of our method is the use of gaps to handle the dynamic delay in gene regulation and uniformly sampled time points which is quite common in long time series such as cell-lineage data. the order of multiple regulations can be inferred based on the order of aligned coordinates, i.e. earlier the alignment earlier is its regulation. the proposed method is computationally less complex and exercise dynamic programming. we evaluated our performance against prominent network inference methods like td-aracne, dtw, mic, aracne and genie3. the auc values for both real time and simulated time series gene-expression data evince an improved performance by our proposed method in handling the dynamic delay during transcriptional regulation and the evaluation on steady state deram4 data suggests the on-par performance of ddgni with other prominent methods. ddgni is highly suitable for real temporal data with high sampling frequency where delay dynamics is obvious. it is also applicable to short time-series data as suggested by its performance on the yeast cell-cycle data. in addition to the above, its on-par performance on static data advocates a more general applicability. however, as any other pure expression driven method it suffers from spurious relationships, i.e. identified correlations (delayed-similarity) do not represent true causal relationships. this problem can be solved by using chip-seq binding data . however, in this article only expression data is used for network construction. funding: research grants council, hong kong sar, china (grant number 781511m); national natural science foundation of china, china (grant number 91229105). conflict of interest: none declared.  
