data and text mining ddn: a cabig analytical tool for differential network analysis differential dependency network (ddn) is a cabig (cancer biomedical informatics grid) analytical tool for detecting and visualizing statistically significant topological changes in transcriptional networks representing two biological conditions. developed under cabig s in silico research centers of excellence (isrce) program, ddn enables differential network analysis and provides an alternative way for defining network biomarkers predictive of phenotypes. ddn also serves as a useful systems biology tool for users across biomedical research communities to infer how genetic, epigenetic or environment variables may affect biological networks and clinical phenotypes. besides the standalone java application, we have also developed a cytoscape plug-in, cytoddn, to integrate network analysis and visualization seamlessly. availability: the java and matlab source code can be downloaded at the authors web sitegene regulatory networks are context specific and dynamic in nature . under different conditions, different regulatory components and mechanisms are activated, leading to rewired regulatory network and topological changes. accurate detection of the topological changes in transcriptional networks between disease and normal conditions, or under different stages of cell development, would be of great biological importance. for example, a deviation from normal regulatory network topology may reveal the mechanism of pathogenesis , and the genes that undergo the most network topological changes may serve as biomarkers or drug targets. to whom correspondence should be addressed.we developed the differential dependency network (ddn) method to detect statistically significant topological changes in transcriptional networks between two conditions and to infer most likely mechanistic network markers . ddn aims to detect and learn from gene expression data the rewiring of the underlying biological network triggered by outside stimuli or different conditions. we use local dependency models to characterize the regulatory dependencies of genes in the network and represent them as local network structures. local dependency models decompose the entire network into a series of local networks, which serve as the basic elements of the network for statistical testing. unlike other dependency models that consider only pairwise relationships or binding triples , the local dependency models select the number of dependent variables automatically by the lasso method , and thereby learn the local network structures. subsequently, permutation tests are performed on the local dependency models under two conditions and p-values are assigned to each of the local structures. the permutation test on individual local structures assures the statistical significance of the detected network topological changes, so that only genes that exhibit network topological changes between two conditions, above a given significance level, will be identified. lastly, the extracted subnetworks showing significant topological changes are visualized using cytoscape . ddn is an open-source differential network analysis and network marker identification tool developed through the cabig in silico research centers of excellence (isrce) effort and is freely available to the cancer and broader biomedical research communities. as a cabig adopted data analytic tool, ddn will be integrated into georgetown database of cancer (g-doc) and offers users across the cancer and broader biomedical research communities a unique yet effective network analysis tool for differential pathway network inference. to harness the powerful visualization capability of cytoscape , we have also developed a cytoscape plug-in, cytoddn, to streamline the network analysis and visualization. here, we applied ddn and cytoddn to four case studies, specifically selected from diverse biological settings, to demonstrate the effectiveness and applicability  
