genome analysis a distance-based test of association between paired heterogeneous genomic data motivation: due to rapid technological advances, a wide range of different measurements can be obtained from a given biological sample including single nucleotide polymorphisms, copy number variation, gene expression levels, dna methylation and proteomic profiles. each of these distinct measurements provides the means to characterize a certain aspect of biological diversity, and a fundamental problem of broad interest concerns the discovery of shared patterns of variation across different data types. such data types are heterogeneous in the sense that they represent measurements taken at different scales or represented by different data structures. results: we propose a distance-based statistical test, the generalized rv (grv) test, to assess whether there is a common and non-random pattern of variability between paired biological measurements obtained from the same random sample. the measurements enter the test through the use of two distance measures, which can be chosen to capture a particular aspect of the data. an approximate null distribution is proposed to compute p-values in closed-form and without the need to perform costly monte carlo permutation procedures. compared with the classical mantel test for association between distance matrices, the grv test has been found to be more powerful in a number of simulation settings. we also demonstrate how the grv test can be used to detect biological pathways in which genetic variability is associated to variation in gene expression levels in an ovarian cancer sample, and present results obtained from two independent cohorts.a proliferation in the development and application of highthroughput measurement platforms in biological research has resulted in the increasing availability of multiple levels of molecular data available for the same biological sampling units. for a range of human tumour types, for instance, the cancer genome atlas (tcga) consortium have made available genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) genotypes, dna copy number, genome-wide gene (and mrna) expression, dna methylation and proteomic profiles, as well as a range of mutation calls arising from deep sequencing. such comprehensive molecular profiling of biological sampling units provides opportunities for gaining insight into the mechanisms by which different molecular entities interact with one another to influence the overall state of the cell(s) in question. this is possible through comparing the different types of observations on each biological sampling unit, via some means of paired analysis of the individual datasets. a certain degree of complexity is inherent in this type of analysis because the measurements that are being compared are heterogeneous. one well-studied example of the task of analysing paired heterogeneous biological data is gene expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) mapping, which seeks to find associations between snps and transcript expression levels . a particularly interesting application of multivariate eqtl mapping relates to the discovery of association between biomarkers for ovarian cancer, which is treated as a case study in this work. the application of paired analysis of heterogeneous biological data types is not limited to eqtl mapping, and involves the common problem of discovering shared patterns of variation across different biological measurements. other areas that have seen considerable interest include the association of genetic copy number variation with gene expression levels and identification of genes for which dna methylation is associated to gene expression . in these and related studies, the problem of comparing heterogeneous data types can be approached using a notion of distance between pairs of biological samples. distances are scalar-valued measures of dissimilarity between two input observations, with greater values indicating greater dissimilarity between them. for a given application, a suitable semi-metric or metric distance measure can generally be defined depending on the nature of the data and on the specific objectives of the study. such distances computed between all pair-wise combinations of samples are arranged in square symmetric matrices. these matrices then quantify the variability in the random sample according to that particular distance measure, and can be directly compared using an appropriate statistical test. distance-based approaches offer a number of advantages compared with direct comparisons involving the original measurements. firstly, distances can overcome limitations of to whom correspondence should be addressed. traditional multivariate approaches when dealing with highdimensional random vectors observed on a much smaller number of sampling units . secondly, distance measures can be appropriately defined for data generated under different experimental conditions, and are not confined to data types represented only by vectors. a number of distance measures are readily available for several types of biological data, including dna sequences , genetic markers such as snps , gene expression data , longitudinal gene expression data and proteins . moreover, for a specific data type, more than one distance measure can be deployed to capture different aspects of the data. this can ultimately lead to the discovery of different types of associations. it should be noted, however, that in the case of multivariate measurements, interpretation with respect to individual variables is lost. because we are interested in the combined behaviour of all variables comprising such vectorial measurements, we do not consider this issue further. only a handful of statistical procedures are currently available to determine whether there is an association between paired distance matrices, and they all rely on computationally intensive procedures for statistical inference. the most commonly used and well-known procedure is the mantel test , a generalization of pearsons correlation. the test has already been found useful in many applications arising in bioinformatics . this testing procedure, however, has some limitations. firstly, when used to compare paired scalar-valued observations using the euclidean distance, the test exhibits less power than pearsons correlation test , i.e. it is a poor test of the null hypothesis of no correlation between scalar-valued variables. secondly, computationally intensive monte carlo permutations are required to assess significance. this procedure, which assumes exchangeability of the sampling units under the null hypothesis of no association, introduces sampling errors that leads to inaccurate estimation of small p-values. this is especially true when too few permutations are used, generally between o10 3 and o10 5 . for example, to obtain a permutation p-value within 10 5 of a true p-value of 0.001, it has been shown that o10 7 permutations are required, which is computationally infeasible without access to specialized high-performance computational resources. this is the case in all situations where thousands or even millions of tests are required, such as in eqtl mapping studies in which the entire genome is scanned in search of potential associations. in such large-scale applications, it is not uncommon to settle for a much smaller number of monte carlo permutations per test, which in turn can lead to inflated familywise type i error rates . in this article we propose a novel test, the generalized rv (grv) test, to detect association between paired distance matrices. this test is derived as a generalization of the classical multivariate rv test of no correlation between paired random vectors, originally proposed by escoufier (1973). while inference can be performed via computationally intensive monte carlo permutations, we also derive an approximation to the exact null distribution which would be obtained by enumerating all permutations. using the proposed null distribution, approximate p-values can be estimated in closed-form without the need for computationally intensive procedures. the proposed grv test is introduced in section 2. in section 3, we describe power studies showing that the grv test can offer greater statistical power than that achieved by the mantel test even when many millions of monte carlo permutations are performed. section 4 presents an application of the grv test in cancer research, where the interest lies in detecting biological pathways characterized by a non-random association between genetic and gene expression sample variability. concluding remarks are presented in section 5.in this work, we have presented the grv test as a novel procedure to detect association between paired distance matrices, which is applicable in any setting where suitable distance measures can be defined. similarly to the widely used mantel test, the grv test can be directly applied whether the distance measures are metric or semi-metric, but overcomes the limitation of the mantel test that, where paired data is vector-valued, a hypothesis of no correlation between the vectors of interest can be tested. as a further advantage of the grv test over existing distance-based tests, an approximate null distribution is proposed such that inference can be performed without expensive monte carlo permutation procedures. through extensive simulations we have demonstrated that the grv test achieves greater power than the popular mantel test. this greater power is exhibited even when many millions of permutations are used for the mantel test, thus demonstrating its suitability as a tool for use in multiple-testing settings were many tests need to be simultaneously performed. the grv test was applied to paired ovarian cancer datasets in which genome-wide profiles of snp genotypes and gene expression levels were available for each patient across two independent cohorts (n 494 and n 60). the paired datasets were split into subsets in which the features all mapped to the same pathway (using mappings from the consensus pathway db), so that each grv test result would indicate the statistical significance of the similarity between the (tumour-wise) distance matrix derived from the genotype data and the distance matrix derived from the gene expression data. for each cohort a meta-analysis was performed across the grv test results from 40 different combinations of distance measures, and the pathways were ranked according to their significance across all distance measures. permutation-based estimates of the significance of the overlapbetween the ranked lists of pathways from the two independent cohorts revealed a highly significant agreement in the two rankings, indicating a degree of robustness in the results of our analysis. this application of the grv test has demonstrated that the transcriptional activity of a number of pathways seem to be reliably predicted by sequencing a limited set of genetic markers that could be detected in circulating tumour dna obtained from patients serum. this relationship was particularly pronounced for the pathway 5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide biosynthesis, for which the genotypes and the gene expression patterns were strikingly associated in two independent cohorts of patients. the association between genotypes and pathway-level gene expression profile is of particular interest in the case of the platinum response pathway, which is clearly clinically important in eoc given that the only standard treatment involves platinum-based chemotherapy. following further investigation, these observations could potentially lead to development of non-invasive biomarkers that could predict patient response to front-line chemotherapy, and serve to stratify patients for selection into clinical trials involving alternative treatments. as individual distance measures can yield different results in the analysis of associations across gene expression patterns, unless a single distance measure is selected a priori as the most appropriate for each dataset, combining results of multiple tests of association using different distance measures may provide more reliable results than a single test. a key advantage of the grv test in our application to multivariate eqtl mapping of pathways in ovarian cancer is that it enables a meta-analysis of the associations between genetic distance and gene expression distance for different combinations of distance measures. having a test for these associations that does not require expensive permutations enables a fast estimation of the robustness of the genotype-expression pathway level associations against quirks of particular definitions of distance. given the robust associations discovered in this analysis, we suggest that it may be possible to predict the mode of activation of a pathway (in terms of which members are transcriptionally activated) in cancer patients, based on the genotype of the tumours dna across a limited panel of snps.  
