deciphering subcellular processes in live imaging datasets via dynamic probabilistic networks motivation: designing mathematical tools that can formally describe the dynamics of complex intracellular processes remains a challenge. live cell imaging reveals changes in the cellular states, but current simple approaches extract only minimal information of a static snapshot. results: we implemented a novel approach for analyzing organelle behavior in live cell imaging data based on hidden markov models (hmms) and showed that it can determine the number and evolution of distinct cellular states involved in a biological process. we analyzed insulin-mediated exocytosis of single glut4-vesicles, a process critical for blood glucose homeostasis and impaired in type ii diabetes, by using total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (tirfm). hmm analyses of movie sequences of living cells reveal that insulin controls spatial and temporal dynamics of exocytosis via the exocyst, a putative tethering protein complex. our studies have validated the proof-of-principle of hmm for cellular imaging and provided direct evidence for the existence of complex spatial-temporal regulation of exocytosis in non-polarized cells. we independently confirmed insulin-dependent spatial regulation by using static spatial statistics methods. conclusion: we propose that hmm-based approach can be exploited in a wide avenue of cellular processes, especially those where the changes of cellular states in space and time may be highly complex and non-obvious, such as in cell polarization, signaling and developmental processes.both fixed and live cell imaging studies often employ only visual inspection or very limited statistical analysis (such as comparisons of means) based on the expected effects of some treatment. in static imaging, a variable of interest is compared under different conditions at a single or few time points. live fluorescence microscopy has the potential to reveal dynamic changes in a given variable at multiple time points and under different treatments. the resulting temporal sequence of data points extracted from a movie sequence is the starting point for understanding the dynamics of a cellular process. with the advantages of lower background disturbance and higher temporal resolution, total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (tirfm) has been widely used for investigating the dynamics of membrane trafficking events, such as exocytosis of secretory vesicles . during exocytosis, a vesicle generated inside a cell fuses with the plasma membrane. this process is essential for the delivery of membrane receptors and secreted substances to the cell surface and thus critical for normal cellular function in all eukaryotic cells. live cell imaging generates data sequences of such complexity that a precise and meaningful description of a biological process necessitates a dynamic quantitative approach . characterization of organelle behavior by visual inspection is hampered by the lack of unique criteria for (and thus user bias in) defining putative functional cellular states and low sampling. it is common to attempt to formulate these criteria based on measurements of a variable of interest. to illustrate, in live cell imaging one may wish to determine how direction and rate of displacement of an organelle changes over time. a natural approach is to assume that some arbitrary observed rates or directionalities represent real cellular states; e.g. plusend motion of a vesicle along a microtubule corresponding to a kinesin motor and minus-end motion to a dynein. due to an inherent variability in noisy biological systems, a manual assignment of two states will lack flexibility and precision and may fail to characterize unclear patterns, e.g. if an organelle pauses due to competing motors. applying subjective criteria may also result in overlooking important aspects of systems dynamics, which are difficult to observe by naked eye, precluding complete characterization of the underlying molecular mechanisms. robust methods are needed that can deal with data uncertainty, determine correctly the number of states and reveal the timing of state transitions; such methods have the potential to precisely describe spatial and temporal dynamics of biological processes. in our previous work, we focused on the spatial aspect of exocytosis : by using end-point analysis, we were able to obtain a static description of the distribution of exocytic events on the cell  
