systems biology decompositions of large-scale biological systems based on dynamical properties motivation: given a large-scale biological network represented as an influence graph, in this article we investigate possible decompositions of the network aimed at highlighting specific dynamical properties. results: the first decomposition we study consists in finding a maximal directed acyclic subgraph of the network, which dynamically corresponds to searching for a maximal open-loop subsystem of the given system. another dynamical property investigated is strong monotonicity. we propose two methods to deal with this property, both aimed at decomposing the system into strongly monotone subsystems, but with different structural characteristics: one method tends to produce a single large strongly monotone component, while the other typically generates a set of smaller disjoint strongly monotone subsystems.one of the outstanding challenges that systems biology is currently facing is to provide the right tools for the investigation of the dynamical behavior of the large-scale networks used to represent complex biological systems, such as gene regulatory networks, signaling pathways and chains of metabolic reactions. even if our knowledge of the interactions among the molecular species involved in these systems is growing at a fast pace, the details of the dynamics that they describe are seldom available and often unlikely to be obtainable in a near future. what is often more plausible to assume is that only an influence graph is available for these networks . an influence graph is a signed graph where an edge represents the action of a variable on another variable, and the signs may have the meaning of activatory/inhibitory action, or may simply represent the signature of the jacobian linearization of a non-linear vector field which is unknown but sign constant over the entire state space (common forms of the kinetics, such as mass action and michaelismenten, normally obey to this condition). in choosing this level of detail for our networks, we are guided by an abundant literature, see e.g.;; milo to whom correspondence should be addressed;;; thieffry (2007). important dynamical problems that can be investigated on an influence graph include:(1) compute the equilibria of the system (;(2) investigate the stability properties of the dynamics ;(3) identify the largest open-loop subsystem of a given system ;(4) study the monotonicity and strong monotonicity properties of the dynamics ; and(5) select a minimal intervention set for medical treatment (in this article, we are interested in the problems (3) and(4) of the list above. in graph theoretical terms, finding the largest open-loop subsystem corresponds to identifying a maximum-size directed acyclic graph (dag) within a network by dropping all feedback loops. in the computer science literature, this is called the minimum feedback arc set problem, and it is well known to be np-hard . although several heuristic methods are already available for it , the novel algorithm we propose in this article has the advantage that available a priori knowledge on the open-loop part of the system can be easily taken into account when computing a maximal dag. we will show in the large-scale examples of section 6 that the performances of our algorithm are comparable to those of the best heuristics. in a series of papers by e. sontag and colleagues , it was shown that influence graphs can be used to study an important property of dynamical systems, namely monotonicity . monotone systems have nice properties of order in their dynamical behavior. for example, they neither admit stable periodic orbits nor chaotic behavior. moreover, for strongly monotone systems [i.e. monotone systems whose graph is irreducible, see smith (1995);, hirsch theorem states that almost all bounded solutions converge to the set of equilibria . the concept is particularly attracting for biological networks, because it is well known that these systems, though complex, have indeed outstanding stability properties, are largely devoid of spurious sustained oscillations and are definitively not chaotic. hence, the paradigm of monotonicity has gained some momentum in recent years and there is by now a consistent literature on using thesepage: 77 7683  
