abaenrichment: an r package to test for gene set expression enrichment in the adult and developing human brain we present abaenrichment, an r package that tests for expression enrichment in specific brain regions at different developmental stages using expression information gathered from multiple regions of the adult and developing human brain, together with ontologically organized structural information about the brain, both provided by the allen brain atlas. we validate abaenrichment by successfully recovering the origin of gene sets identified in specific brain cell-types and developmental stages. availability and implementation: abaenrichment was implemented as an r package and is available under gpl (2) from the bioconductor websitefunctional enrichment analyses using ontologies such as the gene ontology have been widely used to gain insight into the functions and phenotypes influenced by sets of gene candidates that emerge from various genome-wide screens. patterns of gene expression can be very informative about developmental processes and functions taking place in particular organs or tissues, but this requires extensive expression information, including component tissues and developmental stages, to be available for the organ/tissue of interest. the allen human brain atlas projects have quantified gene expression in multiple regions of the human brain over the course of brain development, and provide a valuable resource that can be used to pinpoint sets of genes that are characteristic of particular brain regions and/or developmental stages (; allen human brain atlas; human.brain-map.org and brainspan atlas of the developing human brain; brainspan.org). to date, the transcriptomes of multiple regions of the brains of adult humans as well as brains from individuals at various developmental stages have been measured (supplementary tables s1s4). none of the tools developed to date (e.g. brain explorer, http://human.brainmap.org/static/brainexplorer) allow for the statistical evaluation of gene candidates in terms of expression enrichment in specific regions or stages using an ontology. here, we demonstrate the utility of a tool to carry out enrichment analyses using the allen brain atlas information.we apply an expression threshold to identify expressed genes in this step. a workflow illustrating the entire data processing and enrichment analyses is shown in supplementary.  
