structural bioinformatics defining and predicting structurally conserved regions in protein superfamilies motivation: the structures of homologous proteins are generally better conserved than their sequences. this phenomenon is demonstrated by the prevalence of structurally conserved regions (scrs) even in highly divergent protein families. defining scrs requires the comparison of two or more homologous structures and is affected by their availability and divergence, and our ability to deduce structurally equivalent positions among them. in the absence of multiple homolo-gous structures, it is necessary to predict scrs of a protein using information from only a set of homologous sequences and (if available) a single structure. accurate scr predictions can benefit homology modelling and sequence alignment. results: using pairwise dalilite alignments among a set of homolo-gous structures, we devised a simple measure of structural conservation , termed structural conservation index (sci). sci was used to distinguish scrs from non-scrs. a database of scrs was compiled from 386 scop superfamilies containing 6489 protein domains. artificial neural networks were then trained to predict scrs with various features deduced from a single structure and homologous sequences. assessment of the predictions via a 5-fold cross-validation method revealed that predictions based on features derived from a single structure perform similarly to ones based on homologous sequences, while combining sequence and structural features was optimal in terms of accuracy (0.755) and matthews correlation coefficient (0.476). these results suggest that even without information from multiple structures, it is still possible to effectively predict scrs for a protein. finally, inspection of the structures with the worst predictions pinpoints difficulties in scr definitions. availability: the scr database and the prediction server can be found at http://prodata.swmed.edu/scr. contact:proteins descending from a common ancestor usually conserve certain features of sequence, structure or function. these features can often be used to assess evolutionary relationships. although it is generally accepted that high sequence similarity implies protein homology, it is not uncommon for homologous proteins to exhibit significant sequence variability , underscoring the need for additional ways to deduce homologous relationships. in these cases, the use of 3-dimensional structures can aid homology inference , as structures tend to be more conserved than sequences . distantly related proteins generally maintain similar structural folds, and as a result, a large fraction of regions (e.g. !50) can be structurally aligned even given very low sequence identity (e.g. 20) . therefore, study of structurally conserved regions (scrs) and structurally variable regions (svrs) can help characterize protein families and is useful in applications that rely on homology, such as structure modelling and sequence alignment . scrs are generally characterized by, but not limited to, a set of key secondary structures arranged in an overall topology shared by most members of a protein family. in practice, scrs are usually deduced by aligning a set of two or more homologous structures and then inspecting which positions were alignable in the majority of the structures . the number and divergence of available homologous structures can affect scr definition, as a positive correlation exists between the fraction of structurally alignable parts and sequence similarity . the exact methodology of aligning structures also affects scr definition. scr definitions have often relied on a structural superposition procedure that aims to optimize scoring functions (e.g. rmsd) based on intermolecular distances of structurally equivalent residues. a fixed distance cut-off is then selected to define all scrs . however, rigid structural alignment methods based on minimizing intermolecular distances might be problematic, because proteins are fairly elastic in evolution and can exhibit significant secondary structure deformations, shifts and rotations when divergent structures are compared. therefore, it has been noted that scrs defined with a fixed cut-off of intermolecular distance tend to underestimate structurally equivalent positions for divergent homologues. extensions of these scrs with other geometric features such as backbone conformations have been shown to improve the performance of comparative modelling . more elastic alignment methods, to whom correspondence should be addressed. such as those based on comparison of intramolecular contacts, emphasize similarities in the local structural environment and allow deducing correspondences even for structural elements with larger deviations . although the number of solved structures is growing rapidly, it still pales in comparison with the amount of available sequence data . there are still quite a number of protein families with few or even no experimental structures. for these cases, it is necessary to rely on predictive methods to identify scrs. a few methods have been developed to predict the conservation of various structural properties similar to scrs with measured success. hydrophobicity plots and wavelet analysis have been used to predict hydrophobic cores, hydrophobic regions that determine the native-like structure of a protein . however, hydrophobic cores do not comprise the entire set of scrs, because not all structurally conserved residues are buried within a hydrophobic environment. in the megamotifbase database, conserved structural motifs were defined based on multiple homologous structures as short isolated fragments that exhibit both high sequence and structural conservation . these structural motifs were subsequently predicted without information about multiple structural homologues by using a neural network ensemble . however, the structural motifs in megamotifbase are different from general scrs, which harbour residues that are not necessarily highly conserved in terms of sequence. in fact, owing to the requirement of both sequence and structural conservation, the fraction of residues in the motifs defined in megamotifbase is quite low ($20), as compared with the fraction of structurally conserved residues (!60) in even highly divergent protein families . to our knowledge, methods for prediction of scrs in absence of multiple structures are currently not available. in this work, we approach the process of scr delineation as two separate challenges. when a given protein family has multiple known structures, scrs can be defined by accurate structural alignments. however, in the absence of structural homologues, scrs can be predicted given information from a single structure and/or homologous sequences. here, based on dalilite alignments of homologous structures, we introduce structural conservation index (sci) as a simple measure of positional structural conservation. using sci, we constructed a database of scrs found in scop superfamilies with five or more non-redundant members. this database was used to develop an scr predictor based on artificial neural networks, with inputs of various features derived in each case from homologous sequences and at most a single structure. we further analysed the results of scr predictions and identified common problems and difficulties in scr definitions.  
