genome analysis defining and providing robust controls for microrna prediction motivation: micrornas are short non-coding rnas that regulate gene expression by inhibiting target mrna genes. next-generation sequencing combined with bioinformatics analyses provide an opportunity to predict numerous novel mirnas. the efficiency of these predictions relies on the set of positive and negative controls used. we demonstrate that commonly used positive and negative controls may be unreliable and provide a rational methodology with which to replace them.micrornas (mirnas) are short, 22 nucleotide long rnas that reduce gene expression, usually by binding to the 3 untranslated region of mrnas. they are involved in many biological processes including cell proliferation and differentiation, development and disease (alvarez). in mammals, the primary mirna transcript is processed by drosha into a precursor (premirna) of 70 nt with a distinctive stem-loop structure. this precursor is exported to the cytoplasm and further processed into a mature mirna by). a plethora of algorithms have been created to predict novel mirnas using the primary sequence and predicted folding structure of pre-mirnas . more recently, predictive algorithms have included next-generation sequencing (ngs) data to discover novel mirnas . these algorithms are crucial for discovering tissueor species-specific mirnas that are not present in widely-used databases. to evaluate these predictive tools and assist the creation of novel algorithms, it is essential to define a high-confidence set of positive and negative controls. these will not only be used to benchmark algorithms but also to identify distinguishing features of mirnas. we suggest that the most commonly used reference set of positive controls, mirbase , requires further refinement to create a high-confidence set appropriate for use as positive controls. in order to improve the dynamic range of the to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. predictions, we introduce a novel method to create a set of robust negative controls. we provide both sets as supplementary material.the recent discovery of numerous small functional rnas through ngs experiments has revitalized the field of mirna gene prediction. the quality of these predictions relies heavily on the positive and negative datasets used to create and test them. we demonstrate that commonly used datasets are heterogeneous and may contain rnas from different families or mirnas with distinct functions. the methods we describe in this article use ngs data to characterize rnas based on their processing patterns and functional evidence taken from the literature. our aim in providing these rigorous positive and negative controls was to improve the predictive accuracy of existing algorithms, leading to their refinement. although this study was performed using murine samples and microrna sequences, the methods described here are applicable to other mammalian species. experimental confirmation of any predicted mirna remains as an important standard in the field.  
