delly: structural variant discovery by integrated paired-end and split-read analysis motivation: the discovery of genomic structural variants (svs) at high sensitivity and specificity is an essential requirement for characterizing naturally occurring variation and for understanding pathological somatic rearrangements in personal genome sequencing data. of particular interest are integrated methods that accurately identify simple and complex rearrangements in heterogeneous sequencing datasets at single-nucleotide resolution, as an optimal basis for investigating the formation mechanisms and functional consequences of svs. results: we have developed an sv discovery method, called delly, that integrates short insert paired-ends, long-range mate-pairs and split-read alignments to accurately delineate genomic rearrangements at single-nucleotide resolution. delly is suitable for detecting copy-number variable deletion and tandem duplication events as well as balanced rearrangements such as inversions or reciprocal translocations. delly, thus, enables to ascertain the full spectrum of genomic rearrangements, including complex events. on simulated data, delly compares favorably to other sv prediction methods across a wide range of sequencing parameters. on real data, delly reliably uncovers svs from the 1000 genomes project and cancer genomes, and validation experiments of randomly selected deletion loci show a high specificity.genomic structural variants (svs), including gains and losses of dna segments and balanced rearrangements, are a major form of variation in the human genome . polymorphic svs are a major contributor to common traits, including common diseases whereas rare svs present in the germline are the cause of many rare genomic disorders . furthermore, somatic structural rearrangements, often highly complex, play a pivotal role in the development of aggressive cancers . a critical first step in associating svs with phenotypes is the discovery and precise mapping of these dna sequence variants. to whom correspondence should be addressed.the introduction of massively parallel sequencing (mps) technologies has led to considerable advances in the discovery and genotyping of structural variants in the germline and in somatic cells . several complementary approaches have been developed to leverage mps data for sv discovery. these include methods using the analysis of abnormally mapping pairs of mps fragments, socalled paired-end mapping methods , read-depth analysis that detects svs by analyzing the read depth-of-coverage , split-read analysis that evaluates gapped sequence alignments to detect svs and sequence assembly that enables the discovery of novel sequence insertions . a recent survey of svs in 185 human genomes by the 1000 genomes projects (1000gp) sv analysis group reported over 28 000 svs based on these four sv discovery approaches in the 1000gp pilot phase . paired-end mapping made the comparably largest contribution to this list of reported svs. however, only approaches that combined two complementary signatures for sv discovery by integrating paired-end mapping and read-depth analysis met the prespecified specificity threshold of a false-discovery rate (fdr) 10 . recently, the parameters at which genomes are sequenced by mps have considerably changed. although most reads in the 1000gp pilot phase had a length of 36 bp, the average read length used in the projects main phase and in current cancer genome projects has increased by 3-fold (105 bp). at the same time, the number of reads is reduced by 3-fold to yield comparable sequence coverage. furthermore, several large-scale genome studies have begun to generate paired-end sequencing libraries with two different insert sizes . one library is usually smaller than 500 bp, and the other, commonly referred to as a mate-pair library, is typically larger than 2 kb and up to 5 kb, to facilitate sensitive sv detection across a widened sv size-spectrum and in repetitive areas of the genome. these changes in sequencing parameters and strategy significantly affect sv discovery. splitread analysis methods should benefit from relatively long reads whereas read counting methods are expected to suffer from a 3-fold reduction in the number of sequenced reads. compared to readdepth and paired-end analysis, split-read analysis has so far been limited to the detection of small svs as well as svs in unique genomic regions, devoid of repeats and segmental duplications . most importantly, certain classesof svs, including tandem duplications, inversions, translocations and particularly highly complex events, are not yet sensitively ascertained in split-read-based analyses. herein, we report a new integrative approach, called delly, that combines short-range and long-range paired-end mapping and splitread analysis for the discoveryat single nucleotide resolutionof balanced and unbalanced forms of structural variation, i.e. deletions, tandem duplications, inversions and translocations, achieving high sensitivity and specificity throughout the genome and for svs falling into a wide size spectrum. thereby, delly has been specifically geared towards enabling sv calling in the presence of different paired-end sequencing libraries with distinct insert sizes . to our knowledge, no single sv detection approach presently offers such integrative sv calling at nucleotide resolution in mps data, which is of relevance for assessing the origin and functional impact of svs in individual genome sequencing efforts focused on germline or somatic genome variation.  
