genetics and population analysis adjustment for local ancestry in genetic association analysis of admixed populations motivation: admixed populations offer a unique opportunity for mapping diseases that have large disease allele frequency differences between ancestral populations. however, association analysis in such populations is challenging because population stratification may lead to association with loci unlinked to the disease locus. methods and results: we show that local ancestry at a test single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) may confound with the association signal and ignoring it can lead to spurious association. we demonstrate theoretically that adjustment for local ancestry at the test snp is sufficient to remove the spurious association regardless of the mechanism of population stratification, whether due to local or global ancestry differences among study subjects; however, global ancestry adjustment procedures may not be effective. we further develop two novel association tests that adjust for local ancestry. our first test is based on a conditional likelihood framework which models the distribution of the test snp given disease status and flanking marker genotypes. a key advantage of this test lies in its ability to incorporate different directions of association in the ancestral populations. our second test, which is computationally simpler, is based on logistic regression, with adjustment for local ancestry proportion. we conducted extensive simulations and found that the type i error rates of our tests are under control; however, the global adjustment procedures yielded inflated type i error rates when stratification is due to local ancestry difference.african americans and hispanic americans represent the two largest racial minority groups in the usa, comprising 28 of to whom correspondence should be addressed. the us population. both groups are recently admixed and have inherited ancestry from more than one ancestral population. such admixed populations offer a unique opportunity for mapping disease genes that have large allele frequency differences between ancestral populations. recently, admixture mapping has become one of the main approaches for gene mapping studies in admixed populations . however, traditional admixture mapping has a substantially lower resolution than association analysis . moreover, admixture mapping cannot identify disease loci that have similar allele frequencies or disease prevalences in the ancestral populations. with the increasing availability of large volumes of high-density snp genotyping data generated in genome-wide association studies (gwas), the analysis of admixed populations is now moving toward snp association. in admixed populations, the proportion of admixture may vary across individuals. this variation can lead to associations of the disease with loci unlinked to the disease locus, a phenomenon well known as population stratification, which can produce both false-positive and false-negative association signals if not appropriately controlled. over the past decade, various methods have been developed to deal with this population stratification effect . in general, these methods can be classified into three categories: (i) genomic control , (ii) structured association and (iii) principal components-based methods . the genomic control approach attempts to correct for population stratification by adjusting association statistics with a single overall inflation factor obtained from a set of random markers that are not associated with the phenotype of interest. in contrast, structured association methods assign the study subjects to estimated discrete subpopulations and then aggregates evidence of association within each subpopulation. the current state-of-the-art approach is the principal component-based approach implemented in eigenstrat , which computes coefficients of principal components using snps across the genome to control for population structure.page: 671 670677we showed that in genetic association analysis of admixed populations, local ancestry difference between study subjects can confound with association signal and lead to spurious associations if not appropriately controlled. we also showed theoretically that to remove the confounding effect of local ancestry, it is sufficient to condition on local ancestry at the test snp, whereas conditioning on global ancestry may be ineffective. to remove the spurious associations due to the confounding effect of local ancestry, we further proposed two novel association tests that adjust for local ancestry at the test snp. we conducted extensive simulations and evaluated the performance of different tests under various settings. our simulation results indicate that regardless of the mechanism of population stratification, whether due to local or global ancestry difference, it is sufficient to control population stratification by conditioning on local ancestry at the test marker. in contrast, global ancestry adjustment procedures such as eigenstrat and logistic-global cannot completely remove the effect of population stratification induced by local ancestry difference. the reason is that global ancestry information as represented by a global ancestry proportion or a few principal components obtained from all markers across the genome cannot accurately reflect the amount of ancestry variation in local regions. we proposed two tests for association analysis in admixed populations. our first test, lrt, is based on a conditional likelihood framework which models the distribution of a test snp given disease status and flanking marker genotypes. this conditional likelihood allows us to explicitly model local ancestry differences among study subjects and thus it eliminates the effect of population stratification at the test snp. our second test, logistic-local, is based on a logistic regression model that adjusts for local ancestry proportion at the test snp. although the lrt approach is computationally more involved than logistic-local, it is more flexible and is particularly useful when the directions of association are different in the ancestral populations. another advantage of the lrt approach is that, in addition to testing the null hypothesis as described in section 2, we can test two other hypotheses h 0 : no diseasesnp association in population x, and h 0 : no diseasesnp association in population y , separately. this can be achieved by testing h 0 :,y , respectively. these tests allow a crossethnicity replication since evidence of disease association in the two ancestral populations can be directly compared . our tests are different from admixture mapping in that we directly assess the correlation between a phenotype and snp genotypes. in contrast, admixture mapping examines the association between a phenotype and local ancestry without fully using the actual genotypes at each snp. therefore, snps falling within the same ancestry block will share similar admixture mapping signal, which explains why admixture mapping has substantially lower resolution than direct snp association analysis. since the association tests we proposed directly compare the allele frequencies between cases and controls, they can serve as a fine-mapping tool for regions identified from admixture mapping studies. as shown in our simulations, another advantage of our tests is that, unlike admixture mapping, which may miss disease variants with similar allele frequencies in the ancestral populations, our tests are able to identify such variants since the allele frequencies between cases and controls are directly compared. therefore, our tests can be used as a general tool for genetic association analysis. our tests rely on the estimates of local ancestry probabilities. it is computationally intensive to estimate these probabilities for gwas datasets. in addition, our lrt test requires the estimation of several parameters, which is computationally more involved than logistic regression; for example, with 1000 cases and 1000 controls, it took the lrt test about 3 days to finish the analysis of 500 000 snps using a single cpu. however, the computations can be parallelized across chromosomes, and thus the computation is tractable even for very large datasets if a computing cluster is available. our methods treat estimated ancestry as plug-in estimates in the likelihood calculation. although simple, such a two-step procedure is not as efficient as approaches that estimate ancestry and disease model parameters simultaneously. another problem is that the disease phenotypes are not used when estimating ancestry. however, near a disease locus, cases are more related in terms of their shared ancestry than controls. ignoring disease status essentially assumes that all individuals are no more related to one another than would be expected by chance, and thus may lead to ancestry estimates that are biased towards the null. how to jointly model local ancestry and disease status would merit further research. our methods share similarity with a recent paper published by, who proposed to correct for population stratification using local principal components (pcs). in principle, this method can be applied to admixed populations as well. however, local pcs can only approximate the local ancestry and require a predefined window size, whereas for admixed populations such as african americans, locus-specific ancestry can be inferred accurately. as noted by, the local pc-based approach will be more appropriate for a population whose substructure is subtle, due to either the lack of information on the ancestral population or when admixture has occurred within similar populations, for example, european americans. in summary, we have proposed two novel association tests for admixed populations. we showed that dependence between local ancestry and disease phenotype can lead to spurious associations.  
