data and text mining dendextend: an r package for visualizing, adjusting and comparing trees of hierarchical clustering dendextend is an r package for creating and comparing visually appealing tree diagrams. dendextend provides utility functions for manipulating dendrogram objects (their color, shape and content) as well as several advanced methods for comparing trees to one another (both statistically and visually). as such, dendextend offers a flexible framework for enhancing rs rich ecosystem of packages for performing hierarchical clustering of items. availability and implementation: the dendextend r package (including detailed introductory vi-gnettes) is available under the gpl-2 open source license and is freely available to download from cran at: (http://cran.r-project.org/packagedendextend)hierarchical cluster analysis (hca) is a widely used family of unsupervised statistical methods for classifying a set of items into some hierarchy of clusters (groups) according to the similarities among the items. the r language (r core)a leading, crossplatform and open source statistical programming environment has many implementations of hca algorithms . the output of these various algorithms is stored in the hclust object class, while the dendrogram class is an alternative object class that is often used as the go-to intermediate representation step for visualizing an hca output. in many r packages, a figure output is adjusted by supplying the plot function with both an object to be plotted and various graphical parameters to be modified (colors, sizes, etc.). however, different behavior happens in the (base r) plot.dendrogram function, in which the function is given a dendrogram object that contains within itself (most of) the graphical parameters to be used when plotting the tree. internally, the dendrogram class is represented as a nested list of lists with attributes for colors, height, etc. (with useful methods from the stats package). until now, no comprehensive framework has been available in r for flexibly controlling the various attributes in dendrograms class objects.the dendextend package aims to fill this gap by providing a significant number of new functions for controlling a dendrograms structure and graphical attributes. it also implements methods for visually and statistically comparing different dendrogram objects. the package is extensively validated through unit-testing , offers a c speed-up for some of the core functions through the dendextendrcpp package, and includes three detailed vignettes. the dendextend package is primarily geared towards hca. for phylogeny analysis, the phylo object class (from the ape package) is recommended (paradis etal., 2004). a comprehensive comparison of dendextend, ape, as well as other software for tree analysis, is available in the supplementary materials.  
