databases and ontologies adme sarfari: comparative genomics of drug metabolizing systems motivation: adme sarfari is a freely available web resource that enables comparative analyses of drug-disposition genes. it does so by integrating a number of publicly available data sources, which have subsequently been used to build data mining services, predictive tools and visualizations for drug metabolism researchers. the data include the interactions of small molecules with adme (ab-sorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion) proteins responsible for the metabolism and transport of molecules; available pharmacokinetic (pk) data; protein sequences of adme-related molecular targets for pre-clinical model species and human; alignments of the orthologues including information on known snps (single nucleotide polymorphism) and information on the tissue distribution of these proteins. in addition, in silico models have been developed, which enable users to predict which adme relevant protein targets a novel compound is likely to interact with.the aim of drug discovery is to design and deliver a potential therapeutic agent, not only efficacious for the chosen disease but also with an acceptable dosage and safety profile. it is important to understand how a drugs disposition and its interaction with drugmetabolizing enzymes and transporters in pre-clinical species are likely to translate to humans. this could contribute to a more refined means of predicting human systemic exposure and any adverse events such as drugdrug interactions or tissue-specific toxicities arising from the species-specific disposition of the drug molecule and/or its metabolites. there are a large number of examples where expensive clinical drug development programs had to be terminated due to an unfavourable pk profile. for example, in the literature, there is evidence on several drug candidates that are metabolized by aldehyde oxidase (aox1) (e.g.) where large species differences in gene structure and regulation have led to wide variance of exposure (and consequently efficacy and safety) between species. currently, identifying and integrating adme (absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion)-related data in a consistent way to aid species pk investigations is not a trivial process. for this reason, we have developed a new computational system called adme sarfari, which integrates, genetic, proteomic, phenotypic and molecule interaction data and offers the potential of becoming a resource for community adme data exchange and re-use. the primary data source for interaction and pharmacokinetic (pk) data is the chembl database . to broaden the scope and analytical power of adme sarfari, we have included data from resources such as pharmaadme (http://www.pharmaadme.the adme sarfari interface presents the user with a series of sections, which correspond to the different datasets parsed and loaded into the adme sarfari system. the different sections are homepage, orthologues, tissues, bioactivities, molecules, pharmacokinetics and about. as well as being able to generate complex workflows, which can help answer adme-related questions, the user is free to browse and export data from the systems various sections, without needing to run a pre-emptive search.  
