de novo motif discovery facilitates identification of interactions between transcription factors in saccharomyces cerevisiae transcriptional regulation plays a key role in gene expression. it typically takes place after the binding of transcription factors (tfs) to specific promoter regions of genes. usually, gene expression is regulated by a group of tfs instead of a single tf. when the influence of one tf on its target genes depends on the presence or absence of another tf, it is said that these two tfs have interactions in gene regulation . this article aims at discovering tftf interactions that happen on the tf binding sites (tfbss) of the target genes the two tfs share. correct predictions of such interactions are important in studying gene regulation. to whom correspondence should be addressed. so far, several types of tftf interactions have been observed and discussed. as exemplified in, two tfs, tf1 and tf2, might form a complex and then bind to a common tfbs, which is often represented by a tf binding motif . alternatively, they might utilize the dna-binding domain of tf1 to bind to dna . in this case, we say that tf2 indirectly binds to the tfbs (piggy back) . in bothand, the two tfs interact with each other through direct proteinprotein interactions (ppis). on the other hand, it is possible that both tf1 and tf2 have their own dna-binding domains and respective tf binding motifs. as exemplified in, tf1 and tf2 may not have direct contact but transcription is affected when either one is absent. in this type of tftf interaction, the tfs regulate expression of the target genes without directly interacting with each other.demonstrates the situation that tf1 and tf2 compete for the same tfbs. furthermore, more complicated situations might exist. for example, in, tf1 and tf2 alternatively cooperate with another tf to regulate genes. correct prediction of tftf interactions is a prerequisite for understanding transcriptional regulation. according to the fact that an interacting tf pair would jointly regulate a set of target genes, it is intuitively considered that the interaction of a tf pair can be detected by exploring the degree of shared target genes . before going into interaction inference, a reliable list of the target genes of a tf should be constructed. recent advances of highthroughput tools provide such valuable information. for example, chromatin immunoprecipitation chip (chip-chip) measures the binding affinity of tfs on specific dna sequences in vivo . two groups previously published considerably large datasets of chip-chip for yeast . these resources have been widely utilized to predict tf binding motifs and discover cooperating tfs in recent years. another useful technique to effectively detect tfdna interactions in vitro is protein binding microarrays (pbms) ., respectively, produced datasets of pbm experiments and discovered yeast tfbss based on the detected dna sequences.in this article, we proposed a new method that incorporates de novo motif discovery in the procedures of analyzing chip-chip data. the discovered motifs were employed to refine the lists of target genes, which further improve the accuracy of predicting interactions between tfs by estimating the degree of target overlap between two tfs more correctly. the evaluation conducted in this study reveals that the proposed method, simtfbs, outperforms three nave methods and two recent studies. the predicted tftf interactions are shown to improve the modularity of the currently annotated interacting network which might be still largely incomplete.  
