phylogenetics densitree: making sense of sets of phylogenetic trees motivation: bayesian analysis through programs like beast (drummond and rumbaut, 2007) and mrbayes (huelsenbeck et al., 2001) provides a powerful method for reconstruction of evolutionary relationships. one of the benefits of bayesian methods is that well-founded estimates of uncertainty in models can be made available. so, for example, not only the mean time of a most recent common ancestor (tmrca) is estimated, but also the spread. this distribution over model space is represented by a set of trees, which can be rather large and difficult to interpret. densitree is a tool that helps navigating these sets of trees. results: the main idea behind densitree is to draw all trees in the set transparently. as a result, areas where a lot of the trees agree in topology and branch lengths show up as highly colored areas, while areas with little agreement show up as webs. this makes it possible to quickly get an impression of properties of the tree set such as well-supported clades, distribution of tmrca and areas of topological uncertainty. thus, densitree provides a quick method for qualitative analysis of tree sets. availability: densitree is freely available from http://compevol .auckland.ac.nz/software/densitree/. the program is licensed under gpl and source code is available. contact:sets of trees appear as the output of phylogenetic explorations through bayesian and bootstrap analysis. the most common approaches to dealing with such sets of trees are to calculate a single summary tree, determine a set of most likely clades, draw neighbor networks or perform multidimensional scaling (mds) . a popular method for analyzing tree sets is to find a single representative phylogeny and label the branches with uncertainty [for instance using the treeannotator in beast (. the benefit of this method is that it is easy to interpret the single hierarchy by visualizing it in a tree drawing program such as figtree (available from http://tree.bio.ed .ac.uk/software/figtree/) and use error bars to indicate uncertainty in branch lengths. unfortunately, it takes some skill to interpret situations where there is uncertainty in the topology. such cases show in the tree as short branches with relatively large error bars. however, this is indistinguishable from the case where a single tree topology dominates but there is large uncertainty due to model and/or data.another method for interpreting tree sets is to find clades (i.e. subtrees) that occur with high frequency, for example, by using the treeloganalyser in beast . the number of relevant clades may become very large, especially with large datasets since the number of possible trees grows exponentially in the number of labels. furthermore, interpreting uncertainty within high-frequency clade may become cumbersome due to the large number of them. tree networks as in splitstree are graphs containing edges wherever such edges appear (possibly at some threshold frequency) in the tree set. tree networks do not allow easy representation of uncertainty and can become unwieldy when large numbers of distinct topologies are present in the tree set. mds as implemented in is a technique that comes closest to our method in that it is qualitative as opposed to the more quantitative annotated summary tree and clade set methods. mds allows identification of tree islands in a compelling way, but uncertainty of node heights is hard to interpret.  
