databases and ontologies deori: a database of eukaryotic dna replication origins dna replication, a central event for cell proliferation, is the basis of biological inheritance. the identification of replication origins helps to reveal the mechanism of the regulation of dna replication. however, only few eukaryotic replication origins were characterized not long ago; nevertheless, recent genome-wide approaches have boosted the number of mapped replication origins. to gain a comprehensive understanding of the nature of eukaryotic replication origins, we have constructed a database of eukaryotic oris (deori), which contains all the eukaryotic ones identified by genome-wide analyses currently available. a total of 16 145 eukaryotic replication origins have been collected from 6 eukaryotic organisms in which genome-wide studies have been performed, the replication-origin numbers being 433, 7489, 1543, 148, 348 and 6184 for humans, mice, arabidopsis thaliana, kluyveromyces lactis, schizosaccharomyces pombe and drosophila melanogaster, respectively. availability: database of eukaryotic oris (deori) can be accessed fromthe initiation of replication is the central event in the cell cycle. in all three domains of life, dna replication begins at specialized loci termed replication origins. in bacteria, replication initiates from a single replication origin, whereas eukaryotic organisms exploit many replication origins . in eukaryotes, the origins of dna replication in the budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae and fission yeast schizosaccharomyces pombe have been well-characterized . recently, a high-resolution genome-wide map of dna replication origins in kluyveromyces lactis has also been generated . however, only few origins were characterized in the genomes of higher eukaryotes not long ago. fortunately, recent development of genome-wide approaches has led to a boost in the number of replication origins that have been mapped in eukaryotic genomes, including those in human , mouse , arabidopsis thaliana and drosophila melanogaster . the availability of increasing origins throughout the genomes has created opportunities for analysis of the origins on a genome scale. up to date, the dna to whom correspondence should be addressed. replication origin database for budding yeast has been built, whereas the database of other eukaryotic origins has not been available. in order to gain a comprehensive understanding of the nature of eukaryotic replication origins, we have constructed a database of eukaryotic oris (deori), which contains all the eukaryotic dna replication origins identified by genome-wide analyses currently available.consequently, we have constructed a database deori, which contains all the eukaryotic dna replication origins identified by genome-wide analyses currently available. with the availability of the origins newly identified by genome-wide analyses, we will update deori constantly to include more entries and integrate more information for each entry. this database will facilitate the comparative genomic analysis of replication origins, and provide some insight into the nature of replication origins on a genome scale. one of the applications is to predict replication origins based on homologous sequence search against the origins of closely related species in deori. for example, if query sequences in the rice genome using blast have homologous origins of a.thaliana in deori, it is likely that the query sequences are also served as origins in the rice genome. another application is to find some principles for specific organisms by the genome-wide characterization of the origins in deori, which will be useful to develop new algorithms to predict replication origins. for example, we can use some tools for motif discovery to find the conserved elements within the origins of a specific organism.  
