designing alternative splicing rna-seq studies. beyond generic guidelines motivation: designing an rna-seq study depends critically on its specific goals, technology and underlying biology, which renders general guidelines inadequate. we propose a bayesian framework to customize experiments so that goals can be attained and resources are not wasted, with a focus on alternative splicing. results: we studied how read length, sequencing depth, library preparation and the number of replicates affects cost-effectiveness of single-sample and group comparison studies. optimal settings varied strongly according to the target organism or tissue (potential 50500 cost cuts) and, interestingly, short reads outperformed long reads for standard analyses. our framework learns key characteristics for study design from the data, and predicts if and how to continue experimentation. these predictions matched several follow-up experimental datasets that were used for validation. we provide default pipelines, but the framework can be combined with other data analysis methods and can help assess their relative merits. availability and implementation: casper package at www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/ html/casper.html, supplementary manual by typing casperdesign at the r prompt. contact:the design of an rna-seq experiment is crucial for its validity and an adequate use of resources but is typically not assessed in detail. general guidelines ignore critical aspects such as the specific research goals or the nature of the studied phenomenon, e.g. encode guidelines recommend 30 million (m) paired-end reads of 30 base pairs (bp) for expression estimation and 200 m read pairs of 76 bp for novel transcript discovery. as we show below the adequacy of such guidelines can change significantly between studies. several experimental design strategies were recently proposed.and li and dewey (2011) developed an rna-seq simulator for single sample studies, considering mapping issues and situations where a reference transcriptome is unavailable, respectively. given a series of experimental protocols, the simulation pipeline ofcan explore the potential effects of various biases and settings.and rossell and m ller (2013) proposed sample size calculations to compare overall gene expression across two groups, where interestingly these can be based on pilot or public data and hence incorporate some of the characteristics of this study. these strategies focus mostly on specific settings such as one sample studies, a given data analysis or technology (e.g. short reads). here we propose a general framework for either single-or multi-sample studies targeting gene or isoform expression that is flexible to accommodate any goal, technology (including long reads) and data analysis. the approach is guided by bayesian decision theory, where v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com key characteristics of the phenomenon under study or the technology are learnt as data become available and, importantly, the uncertainty associated to these unknown characteristics is formally taken into account in a mathematically coherent manner. the goal is to provide recommendations tailored to each study, such as sequencing settings, the potential benefits of conducting further experimentation or the relative merits of different data analysis strategies. additionally, the framework can also pinpoint general principles such as the balance between increasing sample size versus sequencing depth or assess the cost-effectiveness of short reads versus long reads from the latest sequencing technologies.in an era when high-throughput technologies and big data are having a profound impact on biomedical research, experimental design continues to be critical for the validity of science. unfortunately design considerations are often overlooked, perhaps encouraged partly by a naive feeling that with good enough technology design considerations are less important and partly by practical difficulties such as the lack of available tools. to address these challenges, we proposed a general framework for rna-seq experiments firmly grounded in bayesian decision theory and statistical design of experiments. we focused on rna-seq, but the framework can serve as a basis to design other experiments, e.g. proteomics, genome-wide association studies etc. the key components for such extensions are a model that offers a good probabilistic representation of the datagenerating process, a utility function or multiple criteria that assess cost-effectiveness taking into account the characteristics of the problem at hand and a computational strategy that produces answerswithin a practical time frame. although there are other possible routes to specify these components, bayesian models equipped with posterior and posterior predictive sampling algorithms become a convenient choice that allow implementing our framework in a straightforward manner. our results indicate that it is important to go beyond default guidelines to consider each individual study, i.e. to customize the design. by taking into account the target organism or likely expression levels for the tissue of interest one may cut sequencing costs by a factor of 25 and still estimate expression at a good precision. similarly for multisample studies, where the ability to find differential expression depends critically on between-groups differences relative to within-groups variability and other characteristics. for instance, the contrast between gse37704 and gse49712 resembles differences between studies encountered in practice in the underlying biology, technology used or even the target transcriptome that one wishes to make inference for. by adapting to such context-specific characteristics, customized designs are a promising and currently under-explored framework to help researchers decide if and how to conduct high-throughput studies in a statistically principled manner. the associated savings in time and experimentation are not only ethical, but also help focus research efforts where they are more likely to yield useful results.  
