desubs: an r package for flexible identifica-tion of differentially expressed subpathways using rna-seq experiments desubs is a network-based systems biology r package that extracts disease-perturbed subpathways within a pathway network as recorded by rna-seq experiments. it contains an extensive and customized framework with a broad range of operation modes at all stages of the subpath-way analysis, enabling so a case-specific approach. the operation modes include pathway network construction and processing, subpathway extraction, visualization and enrichment analysis with regard to various biological and pharmacological features. its capabilities render it as a tool-guide for both the modeler and experimentalist for the identification of more robust systems-level drug targets and biomarkers for complex diseases. availability and implementation: desubs is implemented as an r package following bioconductor guidelines (permanently available in url: http://biosignal.med.upatras.gr/wordpress/desubs).in the last years, systems-level network-based approaches have gained ground in the research field of systems biology . towards this direction the research community has been focusing on the analysis of subpathways, namely local gene sub-regions within a pathway network . approaches in this direction are essential for identifying more accurate system-level drug targets and biomarkers for complex diseases by monitoring the local functions of networks perturbed by diseases . hence, several subpathway-based tools have been developed recently focusing though predominantly on differentially expressed (de) genes . meanwhile, since the amount of rna-seq transcriptome studies is increasing rapidly year by year, there is high demand for tailored differential expression (de) analysis tools. although most de tools are crucial components in pathway analysis workflows, there is a gap in addressing this issue through an extensive and customized subpathway-based approach using de analysis for rna-seq data. towards this orientation, we developed an r package, called desubs, which extracts differentially expressed subpathways based on rna-seq expression profiles enabling so a customized analysis to the problem under investigation through numerous operation modes. desubs offers a systematic way to uncover the local perturbations within a net  
