genetic and population analysis admix'em: a flexible framework for forward-time simulations of hybrid populations with selection and mate choice we introduce a new forward-time simulator, admixem, that allows for rapid and realistic simulations of admixed populations with selection. complex selection can be achieved through user-defined fitness and mating-preference probability functions. users can specify realistic gen-omic landscapes and model neutral snps in addition to sites under selection. admixem is designed to simulate selection in admixed populations but can also be used as a general population simulator. usage and examples are in the supplement. availability and implementation: c and openmp, supports 64-bit linux/unix-like platforms. https://github.com/melop/admixem.population simulators are invaluable to empiricists, since they can be used to test alternative hypotheses and estimate population parameters (e.g. approximate bayesian computation;). population simulators can also be used to design experiments and estimate power. here, we present a new population simulator called admixem. though primarily designed to simulate selection during admixture, it is also a general-purpose population simulator. admixem differs from similar programs (e.g. simupop, nemo, quantinemo, forsim, ffpopsim) because it allows users to easily simulate complex selection (e.g. epistasis, selection on a phenotype controlled by many loci) and non-random mating (e.g. frequency dependent preferences, sexual imprinting). for comparison to other simulators, see supplementary table s1. to be useful to researchers, population simulators should be fast, easy to use, and able to simulate scenarios of realistic complexity. currently available coalescent simulators are computationally efficient but have limited implementation of selection. for example, coalescent simulators such as ms and macs do not implement selection, while others such as msms only allow for selection at a single locus. in contrast, forward time simulators can simulate more biologically realistic selection scenarios, but are inevitably less efficient. several previously developed forward time simulators allow users to incorporate demographic processes and selection at multiple loci (e.g.). however, existing forward time simulators either offer limited choices of selection scenarios or require further programming by the user (e.g.), reducing usability. in contrast, admixem can simulate complex selection without requiring further programming. for example, admixem can implement sexual selection as a function of social and genetic background (e.g. frequency dependent or learned sexual selection) and allows incorporation of indirect genetic effects . to simulate such scenarios, users need only modify selection functions in a v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com text file (see supplementary materials). though complex selection scenarios require additional computational resources, admixem is easily parallelizable. the program is implemented in c with an object-oriented structure, is easily compiled, self-contained, and includes an interactive interface for simulation setup and scripts to export data. recently, we used admixem to develop a new model of hybrid speciation .  
