detecting differential binding of transcription factors with chip-seq increasing number of chip-seq experiments are investigating transcription factor binding under multiple experimental conditions, for example, various treatment conditions, several distinct time points and different treatment dosage levels. hence, identifying differential binding sites across multiple conditions is of practical importance in biological and medical research. to this end, we have developed a powerful and flexible program, called dbchip, to detect differentially bound sharp binding sites across multiple conditions, with or without matching control samples. by assigning uncertainty measure to the putative differential binding sites, dbchip facilitates downstream analysis. dbchip is implemented in r programming language and can work with a wide range of sequencing file formats.chip-seq (chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing) is widely used in studying proteindna binding on a genomewide scale. after cross-linking, immunoprecipitation and shearing, millions of sequenced dna fragments (reads) are mapped to a reference genome, and sites with over-abundant reads are declared as putative binding sites. we focus on an important class of binding sites that have similar read profiles throughout the genome. specifically, the lengths of the binding sites are similar across the genome, and their centers are well defined. these binding sites tend to have read profiles that look like sharp peaks. this class includes transcription factor binding and some histone modifications measured by chip-seq. most of the available chip-seq peak-finding programs identify transcription factor binding sites in a single chip sample with or without a matching control sample; for a review, see wilbanks and facciotti (2010). an increasing number of experiments are investigating differential binding across two or more experimental conditions, including but not limited to, multiple treatments , series of time points , and multiple cell to whom correspondence should be addressed.lines . since transcription factors regulate gene expression, differential binding across multiple experimental conditions is critical for revealing the function of a transcription factor at each binding site. thus, a program that can detect differential binding of transcription factors across multiple conditions is much needed.in summary, dbchip detects differential binding in a quantitatively principled way by formally testing hypothesis of non-differential binding at each putative binding site. dbchip assigns uncertainty measure (p-values) to each finding, and thus, proper error rate control can be achieved. furthermore, when there are more than two conditions for comparison (k 2), dbchip can be used to detect pairwise differences after the detection of overall differential binding. moreover, dbchip does not rely on a specific sequencing platform and can accommodate data from illumina, solid and other platforms.  
