genome analysis detecting differential peaks in chip-seq signals with odin motivation: detection of changes in deoxyribonucleic acid (dna) protein interactions from chip-seq data is a crucial step in unraveling the regulatory networks behind biological processes. the simplest variation of this problem is the differential peak calling (dpc) problem. here, one has to find genomic regions with chip-seq signal changes between two cellular conditions in the interaction of a protein with dna. the great majority of peak calling methods can only analyze one chip-seq signal at a time and are unable to perform dpc. recently, a few approaches based on the combination of these peak callers with statistical tests for detecting differential digital expression have been proposed. however, these methods fail to detect detailed changes of proteindna interactions. results: we propose an one-stage differential peak caller (odin); an hidden markov model-based approach to detect and analyze differential peaks (dps) in pairs of chip-seq data. odin performs genomic signal processing, peak calling and p-value calculation in an integrated framework. we also propose an evaluation methodology to compare odin with competing methods. the evaluation method is based on the association of dps with expression changes in the same cellular conditions. our empirical study based on several chip-seq experiments from transcription factors, histone modifications and simulated data shows that odin outperforms considered competing methods in most scenarios. availability and implementation: http://costalab.org/wp/odin.transcriptional regulation is dictated by a set of deoxyribonucleic acid (dna) interacting proteins such as histones, which define the chromatin structure, and transcription factors (tfs). these proteins are responsible for recruitment of ribonucleic acid (rna) polymerase and start of transcription . detection of the changes in dnaprotein interactions under distinct cellular conditions is a crucial step in unraveling the regulatory networks behind biological processes such as cell differentiation, the activation of signaling pathways and the onset of diseases . chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by dna sequencing (chip-seq) allows to study the interactions of proteins with dna regions in a genome wide manner . computational methods identify dnaprotein interaction sites from chip-seq (also called peak detection) by detecting regions with a higher number of reads than expected by chance using sophisticated statistical models . with a few exceptions, widely used peak calling methods are based on the analysis of individual chip-seq signals. here, we are interested in comparing chip-seq data from distinct experiments; we want to detect changes, which we call differential peaks (dps), in protein dna interaction of a single protein in a pair of cellular conditions. we will refer to this signal detection challenge as differential peak calling (dpc). seefor examples of putative dps after the induction of tlr4 signaling . initially, dpc was performed by peak calling on individual chip-seq signals. peaks detected in only one of the conditions were then defined as cell-specific peaks . such methods are not able to detect cases where peaks were presented (and called) in both cell types, but exhibit a significant increase (decrease) of the dnaprotein signal in one of the cells. in the example of, based on peaks from peakseq , only dp1 would be detected as cell-specific. moreover, most of single signal peak callers (spcs) provide no functionality to normalize several chip-seq experiments and are likely to show bias in experiments with higher number of reads. a more sophisticated strategy to detect dps is the combination of peaks from spcs with statistical tools. these twostage differential peak callers (dpc) first combine peaks that are called on individual chip-seq conditions using spcs. next, they count the number of reads for each candidate peak, perform signal normalization and apply statistical tests assuming a differential count model like edger or deseq . therefore, they can detect to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2014. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com candidate peaks where the number of read counts is significantly higher/lower in one of the chip-seq conditions. while this approach allows the detection of significant changes in chipseq within candidate peaks, it is highly dependent on the initial peak calling step as well as the strategy used to create the set of candidate peaks. for example, histone modifications associated to active regulatory regions occur in domains spanning several hundreds of base pairs and may have intricate patterns of gain/ loss of chip-seq signals within the same domain. spcs tend to call the domains as single peaks and consequently the differential analysis is only able to evaluate the differential counts of the complete called peaks . a more appropriate framework to analyze dps is the use of segmentation methods like hidden markov models (hmms), which are able to analyze pairs of chip-seq signals and perform dpc in a single step .  
