gene expression detecting differential protein expression in large-scale population proteomics motivation: mass spectrometry (ms)-based high-throughput quantitative proteomics shows great potential in large-scale clinical bio-marker studies, identifying and quantifying thousands of proteins in biological samples. however, there are unique challenges in analyzing the quantitative proteomics data. one issue is that the quantification of a given peptide is often missing in a subset of the experiments, especially for less abundant peptides. another issue is that different ms experiments of the same study have significantly varying numbers of peptides quantified, which can result in more missing peptide abundances in an experiment that has a smaller total number of quantified peptides. to detect as many biomarker proteins as possible, it is necessary to develop bioinformatics methods that appropriately handle these challenges. results: we propose a significance analysis for large-scale proteomics studies (salps) that handles missing peptide intensity values caused by the two mechanisms mentioned above. our model has a robust performance in both simulated data and prote-omics data from a large clinical study. because varying patients sample qualities and deviating instrument performances are not avoidable for clinical studies performed over the course of several years, we believe that our approach will be useful to analyze large-scale clinical proteomics data. availability and implementation: r codes for salps are available atmass spectrometry (ms) in large-scale clinical studies provides new insights into how disease affects our bodies at the molecular level , identifying and quantifying thousands of proteins in patients samples. even though ms is a powerful tool in biomedical research, it is subject to white noise, chemical noise and stochastic variation, needing robust and sophisticated bioinformatics algorithms . one of the challenges in analyzing ms data is the absence of peptide abundance in a subset of the measurements. peptides are often not observed because of their low intensities. and this intensity-dependent missing trend can introduce bias into downstream analyses when it is ignored.suggested a normalization procedure using the top-l ordered statistics of peptide intensities in each sample (l is a user-defined threshold) and proposed an imputation approach.modeled the random missing mechanism and the peptide intensity-dependent missing mechanism assuming that instrument detection thresholds vary from one peptide to the other.carried out an intensity-based analysis and a presence/absence analysis separately and controlled their false discovery rates. in, they argued that logistic regressions were not adequate to analyze presence/absence data when all intensity values were missing for one group. however, it is not a problem of the logistic regression, but rather a problem of the test statistics in the logistic regression. in the situation when all or almost all peptide abundances are missing, wald tests overestimate p-values of the significant tests, but log-likelihood ratio tests do work reliably . thus, using a mixture model approach with proper test statistics instead of fitting two models separately may be better. another challenge in the ms data analysis is that experiments sometimes have different total numbers of quantified peptides. this phenomenon is often observed in ms studies and is inevitable for large-scale clinical studies because the studies are often performed over the course of several years. the quality of patient samples varies because of their different storage time and the performance of the instrument(s) changes due to the tuning of the ms instruments or the degradation of the liquid chromatography (lc) columns over time. varying total numbers of quantified peptides result in unequal numbers of missing peptide values across experiments. an experiment with a smaller total number of quantified peptides has more missing peptide abundances. for example, let us assume that experiment a produced 4000 quantified peptides and experiment b produced only 2000 quantified peptides because the quality of biological sample b was not as good as a. then, experiment b has 2000 missing peptide intensities compared with experiment a. now, to investigate this missing mechanism further, assume that one peptide named x is present in experiment a, but absent in to whom correspondence should be addressed. experiment b. another peptide named y is present in both experiments. the reason why peptide x is absent in experiment b but present in experiment a can be one of the following: (i) peptide x is less abundant in experiment b than in experiment a (intensity-dependent missing mechanism); (ii) peptide x is not abundant enough to be in the top 2000 quantified peptides (total quantification-dependent missing mechanism); or (iii) peptide x is missing at random. here, the total quantification-dependent missing mechanism should not be confused with the intensity-based missing mechanism. the total quantificationdependent missing mechanism implies that peptide x may be less abundant than peptide y that is listed in the top 2000 quantified peptides of experiment b. however, such missing values are not informative because we are not comparing peptide x with peptide y (at least not in this article), but comparing the abundances of the peptide x between the experiment a and b. thus, it would introduce bias if we blindly use the censored approach proposed previously, assuming the missing values are caused by the lower abundance of peptide x in experiment b compared with experiment a. karpievitch et al.are only from the intensity-dependent missing mechanism. the missing values in part b result from both the intensity-and total quantification-dependent missing mechanisms. because the missing values resulting from the varying total quantification are not informative, one way to deal with these missing values is to remove them. in this article, we propose a significance analysis for largescale proteomics studies (salps) that filters the totalquantification-dependent missing values and makes use of the intensity-dependent missing values. using simulated data, we show how salps performs with the missing values generated from the two mechanisms. finally, we demonstrate our model performance using proteomics data of human blood monocytes in a large-scale clinical study of trauma patients.  
