bioinformatics original paper genome analysis detecting genome-wide epistases based on the clustering of relatively frequent items motivation: in genome-wide association studies (gwas), up to millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) are genotyped for thousands of individuals. however, conventional single locus-based approaches are usually unable to detect genegene interactions underlying complex diseases. due to the huge search space for complicated high order interactions, many existing multi-locus approaches are slow and may suffer from low detection power for gwas. results: in this article, we develop a simple, fast and effective algorithm to detect genome-wide multi-locus epistatic interactions based on the clustering of relatively frequent items. extensive experiments on simulated data show that our algorithm is fast and more powerful in general than some recently proposed methods. on a real genome-wide casecontrol dataset for age-related macular degeneration (amd), the algorithm has identified genotype combinations that are significantly enriched in the cases.with recent development in high-throughput single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) genotyping technologies, the number of snps that can be typed simultaneously on a dna chip has grown from 10 000 in 2002 to 1 million in 2007 . genomewide genotype data as well as phenotype information for some common diseases have been accumulated in an accelerated rate for the past 5 years (e.g.). these genome-wide association studies (gwass) have proven to be a powerful approach to reveal susceptibility genes for some complex diseases . nevertheless, the primary analysis paradigm for gwas is dominated by single locus-based statistical approaches . however, epistatic interactions (epistases) among multiple genes play an essential role in the pathogenesis of human complex diseases . many studies have also to whom correspondence should be addressed.demonstrated that epistasis contributes to diseases such as breast cancer , diabetes, obesity and coronary heart disease . single locus-based approaches may not be able to detect all interacting genes, especially for those with small marginal effects. recently, the problem of detecting genome-wide epistases has drawn much attention. many computational algorithms have been proposed . existing approaches for searching genegene or snpsnp interactions can be grouped into four broad categories: exhaustive search, stochastic search, data mining/machine learning approaches and stepwise search. methods based on exhaustive search enumerate all possible combinations of multiple loci and perform desired interaction tests (e.g. 2 or logistic regression) for each combination.proposed a combinatorial partitioning method (cpm), which searches all possible ways of dividing m-locus genotype combinations into k genotypic partitions, and selects the best one to account for quantitative traits. cpm is only computationally feasible for small datasets even for two-locus interactions due to the enormous number of possible partitions. inspired by cpm,proposed a multifactor-dimensionality reduction method (mdr), which partitions the multi-locus genotype space into two classes and exhaustively searches for the best classification model in predicting the disease status. it utilizes repeated crossvalidations and permutation tests to evaluate classification accuracy and significance, respectively. similar to cpm, mdr cannot handle large datasets, even for two-locus interactions . though many extensions of mdr have been proposed recently, including mb-mdr and rmdr , they are unable to tackle large gwas data efficiently. in another attempt,proposed a boolean operationbased screening and testing (boost) method, which can detect two-locus interactions for currently available gwas data. however, because the search space grows exponentially with the number of involved genes/snps, methods based on exhaustive search can hardly be extended to include more than two loci. instead of explicitly enumerating all possible combinations of m-locus, stochastic methods use random sampling procedures to search the space of interactions. among them, bayesian epistasis association mapping (beam) is one of the representatives. beam takes casecontrol genotypes as its input, and iteratively uses the markov chain monte carlo (mcmc)page: 6 512we first discuss the control of false positive rates using simulated background genotype data, then compare the performances of edcf, mb-mdr, boost, snpruler, epimode and chisq on different disease models. at last, we present the results of edcf on a real gwas dataset. the programs of mb-mdr (c++ implementation), boost (64 bit), snpruler and epimode are downloaded from the websites of their authors. recall that mbmdr is a recent extension of mdr, boost is a fast exhaustive search approach to detect two-locus interactions, snpruler uses rule inference and can deal with three-locus and higher order interactions, and epimode is a recent extension of beam using stochasticby partitioning all d-locus genotype combinations into two groups, mdr significantly reduces the dimensionality of the d-locus genotype combination space from 3 d to 2, which potentially improves its detection power. however, the simple partitioning method utilized by mdr may not work well in practice, especially when the case/control ratios of some genotype combinations are close to the overall ratio. mb-mdr and rmdr are two recent extensions of mdr to address this problem. the authors propose to separate all multi-locus genotype combinations into a high-risk group, a lowrisk group and an unknown risk group. to determine which group a genotype combination belongs to, mb-mdr uses the 2 test and rmdr uses fishers exact test. in general, mb-mdr and rmdr outperform mdr, especially in the presence of low minor allele frequencies or genetic heterogeneity. however, fishers exact test for every genotype combination causes rmdr running even slower than mdr. though mb-mdr is faster than mdr, the repeated cross-validations and permutation tests are still time consuming and prevents its usage in large-scale gwas studies. furthermore, the validity of 2 test requires that all cells in the contingency table are not very small . when the minor allele frequency is very low, there are always many empty entries in a multilocus interaction contingency table, and the 2 test based grouping of mb-mdr will be inefficient. edcf clusters the genotype combinations into three groups by assuming that the counts of multi-locus genotype combinations follow binomial distributions. edcfs clustering is more robust than mb-mdrs grouping and much faster than rmdrs grouping. in our experiments, edcf outperforms mb-mdr when f m = 0.1 for models 1 and 3 while in the other cases, edcf has similar performance as mb-mdr. after the clustering, edcf obtains a 32 contingency table and uses the 2 test to evaluate the significance of the interaction. by avoiding the cross-validation step, edcf is much faster than mb-mdr and rmdr. though edcf generally outperforms other algorithms in the simulations, it has some limitations. since edcf separates genotype combinations into g 0 ,g 1 and g 2 based on clustering relatively frequent items, when h 2 is small, the disease-related genotype combinations may be not significant enough to be relatively frequent items. in such a case, all genotype combinations may be clustered into group g 1 , and edcf will lose some power (e.g. in supplementary, on some two-locus models with no marginal effects and low h 2 ). edcf currently cannot directly address the problem of population stratification, which, if exists, may alleviate the type i error of edcf. one should always test for and correct stratification (if it exists) before performing association tests. finally, like many data mining approaches, edcf has some parameters (such as k, f s , s and 0 ) that need to be specified by the user. the choices of these parameters may also affect the efficiency and/or power of edcf. although we have provided some default values in this article based on simulations, it would have been better if the parameters were chosen automatically based on input data. parameter k is the number of interaction modules that one wishes to investigate, and f s controls the buffer size of interaction modules involving a small number of loci. both parameters primarily depend on the available computational resources. obviously, edcf runs faster with a smaller f s , but with the price of possibly missing some real interactions. in our experiments, we chose s and 0 according to simulations. these values might be too conservative for real data analysis (of the same sizes) because of correlations among snps and ld structures in real data. how to choose proper values for s and 0 using real gwas data could be computationally challenging. we will investigate this in our future work. in this work, we have only tested disease models with risk allele frequencies 0.1. detecting rare snps in association studies is a much harder problem, which itself requires special attention and novel algorithms. page: 12 512in this article, we have developed a new algorithm called edcf. based on the clustering of relatively frequent items, edcf groups all d-locus genotype combinations into three groups and uses the 2 statistic to measure significance. to control type i error rate, we have combined bonferroni correction and permutation tests and proposed a fast multi-test correction method. by combining the advantages of the 2 test and mdr, edcf is an effective and efficient algorithm for detecting epistatic effects for gwas. extensive experiments on simulated data illustrate that edcf is more powerful, in general, in finding epistatic interactions than some of the recently proposed algorithms. in terms of efficiency, edcf is comparable to boost in detecting two-locus interaction modules and is much faster than mb-mdr, snpruler and epimode. on a real genome-wide amd dataset, several genotype combinations reported by edcf are significantly enriched in cases, which may imply their involvement and association with amd as interaction modules.  
