detecting genomic indel variants with exact breakpoints in single-and paired-end sequencing data using splazers motivation: the reliable detection of genomic variation in resequencing data is still a major challenge, especially for variants larger than a few base pairs. sequencing reads crossing boundaries of structural variation carry the potential for their identification, but are difficult to map. results: here we present a method for split read mapping, where prefix and suffix match of a read may be interrupted by a longer gap in the read-to-reference alignment. we use this method to accurately detect medium-sized insertions and long deletions with precise breakpoints in genomic resequencing data. compared with alternative split mapping methods, splazers significantly improves sensitivity for detecting large indel events, especially in variant-rich regions. our method is robust in the presence of sequencing errors as well as alignment errors due to genomic mutations/divergence, and can be used on reads of variable lengths. our analysis shows that splazers is a versatile tool applicable to unanchored or single-end as well as anchored paired-end reads. in addition, application of splazers to targeted resequencing data led to the interesting discovery of a complete, possibly functional gene retrocopy variant. availability: splazers is available from http://www.seqan.de/ projects/ splazers.next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies have had huge impact on the study of molecular biology : ultra high-throughput ngs technologies provide excellent means for analyzing rna content of a cell , resequencing whole genomes and detecting, for example, disease-causing variants or investigating the epigenetic state of a cell . there is a long list of biological applications and, accordingly, a high demand for specialized to whom correspondence should be addressed. bioinformatics tools for the analyses. due to the tremendous data yield, this constitutes a great challenge to computational biology. one of the most fundamental tasks is read mapping, i.e. determining the origin of the sequenced reads in a reference genome. all further analysis is based on the mapped reads, e.g. genomic variants are identified or transcript expression is quantified. reads containing more than a few variant base pairs with respect to a reference will be hard to map, and sequencing errors further complicate this task. while a large part of human genomic variation is due to single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), recent years have shown that insertion/deletion (indel) variants dramatically contribute to genomic diversity . furthermore, they have been linked to many diseases , and especially large indels have been shown to have strong structural and functional impact . the first high-throughput method for genome-wide detection of large deletions and duplications was array comparative genomic hybridization (acgh) where sample and reference dna are competitively hybridized on a probe array . given steadily decreasing costs, sequencing approaches are likely to gradually replace acgh methods, since they carry the potential to provide base pair resolution and identify novel insertions while generating less measurement noise. sequencing-based indel detection methods are based on different strategies often utilizing paired-end or mate-pair sequencing data. one conclusion from the 1000 genomes project so far is, that a comprehensive indel detection method needs to make use of different detection strategies as no strategy alone is sufficient . we will briefly introduce the different strategies and point to their strengths and weaknesses. most prominently, strategies based on paired-end or mate-pair data make use of the approximate distance and relative orientation of read pairs. shifts in the mapped distance or changes in relative orientation indicate indel events or also more complex structural variation. examples for popular methods that address indel detection based on abnormal insert sizes are pemer , breakdancer , modil and svdetect . a drawback of these read pair methods is that they require tight insert size distributions for accurate discovery of small-to medium-sized indels and for confident localization of breakpoints . socalled anchored split read mapping addresses this shortcoming byfirst, we will evaluate our methods ability to accurately identify and locate genomic indel variants in paired-end data, comparing splazers with pindel. then we will investigate whether our method is also able to accurately detect indels in the simulated single-end datasets, comparing results with gsnap and bwa. finally, we will demonstrate our methods capabilities on real large-scale single-end data from 248 patients, providing pcr validation for an especially interesting scenario of predicted indels.the availability of various kinds of sequencing data, i.e. derived from different sequencing technologies and protocols, has fueled the development of various computational tools for indel identification [for reviews, see. often the overlap of predicted indels between different computational methods is low , indicating that none of the methods is fully comprehensive and a satisfactory solution is yet to be found. therefore, a comprehensive method is likely to use an integrative approach, combining the strengths of different methods. the split read mapping approach has its strength in the potential to exactly predict indel size and location. early next-generation technologies yielded very short read lengths (36 bp) where only anchored split mapping was feasible, with the mapping search space greatly reduced by a confidently mapped paired end . however, advances in sequencing technology have led to singleend reads long enough to reliably predict long deletions and also medium-sized insertions without anchoring. splazers supports both anchored paired-end split mapping as well as unanchored singleend split mapping, which is a unique feature among split read mapping tools. by adding unmapped paired-end reads and treating them as single-end data, a significant increase in sensitivity could be demonstrated. in our comparisons with pindel , which to our knowledge is the most widely used paired-end split read indel detection method, and with state-of-the-art single-end split read aligners, splazers showed highest ppv and highest sensitivity, especially in variant-rich regions. this strength may prove especially page: 626 619627  
