detection and characterization of novel sequence insertions using paired-end next-generation sequencing motivation: in the past few years, human genome structural variation discovery has enjoyed increased attention from the genomics research community. many studies were published to characterize short insertions, deletions, duplications and inversions, and associate copy number variants (cnvs) with disease. detection of new sequence insertions requires sequence data, however, the detectable sequence length with read-pair analysis is limited by the insert size. thus, longer sequence insertions that contribute to our genetic makeup are not extensively researched. results: we present novelseq: a computational framework to discover the content and location of long novel sequence insertions using paired-end sequencing data generated by the next-generation sequencing platforms. our framework can be built as part of a general sequence analysis pipeline to discover multiple types of genetic variation (snps, structural variation, etc.), thus it requires significantly less-computational resources than de novo sequence assembly. we apply our methods to detect novel sequence insertions in the genome of an anonymous donor and validate our results by comparing with the insertions discovered in the same genome using various sources of sequence data.it is estimated that 1940 mb of human genomic sequence is missing from the human genome reference assembly . although the human genome project (hgp) revolutionized the field of genomics, human sequences that are not represented in the reference genome leads to incomplete genome analyses. the missing sequences can even harbor undiscovered exons or other types of sequences of functional importance. there is a need to discover the loci and content of so-called novel sequence insertions to build a more comprehensive human reference genome to better analyze the genomes of individuals from many different populations. to date, one of the more promising methods to characterize longer dna segments that are not represented in the human reference genome has been building sequence assemblies from unmapped fosmid clone ends sequenced with the traditional sanger-based capillary sequencing and, then, sequencing the entire fosmid clone . however, the higher cost of the capillary sequencing is prohibitive to characterize genomes of thousands of individuals. next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies make sequencing of thousands of genomes possible, and for the first time, they give us the opportunity to discover novel sequences across many human populations in order to build better genome assemblies [or pan genomes (. various computational methods were developed in the recent years to characterize structural variation, including deletions, insertions, inversions and duplications, among human individuals using ngs platforms . characterization of longer novel sequences remained elusive due to the shorter insert size and sequence length associated with the ngs methods. for example, applying the end-sequence profiling approach , one cannot discover insertions 100 bp when 200 bp insert size is used with the illumina platform . currently, the only method applicable for the discovery of long novel insertions using ngs technologies is de novo sequence assembly . however, this approach requires large computational resources and requires further processing to anchor the sequences to the reference genome. here, we present a computational framework to discover the content of novel sequence insertions using the ngs platforms. we test our methods with the high-coverage (42) short-insert sequence library generated from the genome of a yoruba african individual (na18507) sequenced using the illumina platform . we validate the content of the predicted novel sequence insertions by comparing with sequences generated from fosmid end-sequence assembly , full fosmid sequencing and de novo sequence assembly of the same illumina whole-genome shotgun (wgs) library . we show that our methods are reliable, and together with the cost optimizations introduced by the ngs platforms, they can be(a) we start by mapping the paired-end reads to the reference genome and then classify the paired-end reads as oea and orphan reads. (b) we then assemble the orphan paired-end reads using available de novo assembly algorithms and screen the contigs for possible contamination. (c) we cluster the oea reads into groups and find the insertion locus supported by each oea cluster. (d) we assemble the unmapped end-read in each oea cluster (the oea reads with different orientation of mapping should be assembled independently). (e) finally, we merge the orphan and oea contigs to anchor the orphan contigs to the reference genome. efficiently used to characterize the dna sequences missing from the reference assembly to obtain a more complete picture of human genome diversity. a novel sequence insertion refers to an insertion of a sequence into the donor genome where no subsequence with high similarity to the inserted sequence exists in the reference genome. we aim to identify novel sequence insertions in a high-coverage sequenced donor genome through our computational pipeline novelseq. note that the insertions of repeat sequences such as sines and lines, and segmental duplications do not constitute as novel sequence insertions since paralogs of the same repeat sequence exists elsewhere in the reference genome assembly. therefore, the algorithms presented here will not be able to predict such repeat sequence insertions unless the inserted sequence is highly divergent from other existing copies. for algorithms specifically designed for repeat sequence (or more formally, transposon) insertion detection, see the recent paper by. in section 2, we will present the general approach of the novelseq pipeline divided into five different phases. in section 3, we will give the details of our algorithms, and finally in section 4, we will discuss the results of the novelseq pipeline.  
