detection and removal of spatial bias in multiwell assays motivation: multiplex readout assays are now increasingly being performed using microfluidic automation in multiwell format. for instance, the library of integrated network-based cellular signatures (lincs) has produced gene expression measurements for tens of thousands of distinct cell perturbations using a 384-well plate format. this dataset is by far the largest 384-well gene expression measurement assay ever performed. we investigated the gene expression profiles of a million samples from the lincs dataset and found that the vast majority (96) of the tested plates were affected by a significant 2d spatial bias. results: using a novel algorithm combining spatial autocorrelation detection and principal component analysis, we could remove most of the spatial bias from the lincs dataset and show in parallel a dramatic improvement of similarity between biological replicates assayed in different plates. the proposed methodology is fully general and can be applied to any highly multiplexed assay performed in multiwell format.a revolution has occurred in the field of quantitative transcriptomics in the last 15 years, fueled by a significant drop in the cost of technologies for multiple gene expression profiling . such technologies, namely gene microarrays and rnaseq , are now standard procedures in biological and medical research, and they are becoming increasingly more popular as robust research and diagnostic tools in all biological fields, spanning from crop research to drug discovery and from microbiology to personalized medicine . recently, both gene expression assays and other multiplexed readout assays have been implemented in a multiwell format (microplate), lending themselves to significant microfluidic automation and scale-up. this type of experiments lend themselves to detection and normalization of a variety of potential bias sources, including effects representing 2d spatial bias introduced by the specific microfluidics apparatus. for instance, multiplex gene expression has been recently used as a reporter for large-scale cell perturbation assays, allowing for the quantitative characterization of the corresponding perturbagens as inducers of specific transcriptional responses at the molecular level (molecular phenotypes). this new class of studies, named gene expression high throughput screening (ge-hts), promise to have significant impact on biomedical research , and have already shown their potential to accelerate drug discovery for v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 1959doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw092the overarching achievement of transcriptomics is the ability to obtain large quantities of highly reliable gene expression data representing multiple cellular states. thus, as dataset size increases with microfluidic automation, computational approaches for data processing are becoming more and more important. this study shows that 2d spatial bias, likely associated with gradient driven differential conditions affecting the microfluidic setup, is a significant source of error that can be effectively detected and corrected. previous studies have dealt with similar problems in contexts other than that of gene expression measurement; however, these studies simply evaluated the issue without proposing a solution or proposed a solution that involved changing the design layout of the microplates . in other cases, the systematic bias was observed in high-throughput screening technologies with a reduced set of experimental variables . no method to our knowledge addresses the spatial bias problem in the context of multivariate assay scenarios, like the lincs dataset. therefore, we propose here a pure data-driven solution for multivariate gene expression datasets based on reducing the principal components of the variance most associated with spatial bias. we introduce a tunable parameter that can either be set a priori or can be assessed to optimize biological replicate agreement in a largein the upper cluster (b) and in the lower cluster (c) in their respectively most co-segregating pcs multiplate assay. our solution significantly improved replicate similarity in the lincs dataset, an effect that could not be achieved by simply removing equivalent levels of global and non-specific variance from gene expression profiles. the optimal parameters differed between specific portions of the lincs dataset, but every subset analyzed benefited from the bias removal independently of the analyzed cell line. in fact, these results strongly support the incorporation of spatial bias analysis and removal as a critical step in the normalization of all ge-hts assays. while spatial bias can occur both before and after cell lysis and nucleic acids extraction presence of spatial bias in biological process enrichment values on most plates and consistent enrichment of a reduced set of biological processes on the most biased principal components suggests that part of such effects are originated prior to cell lysis. processes most strongly biased on average across all plates in kd, oe, and cpc were associated to homeostasis and apoptosis. our analysis of the principal component coefficients shows differential cell proliferation associated exclusively with the sample positioning on the microplates, a recurring effect that seems to be independent from the microplate or the cell line affected by the bias. this difference in cell proliferation can be caused by differential growth conditions of the plated cells, perhaps due to a gradient in the evaporation of the medium partially connected to the parallel enrichment of potassium channel activity . no matter how carefully monitored and executed, any ge-hts experiment can suffer from such operational bias issues. the proposed method allows for the detection and correction of the most significant location-specific undesired perturbation effects, regardless of the experimental stage at which they were introduced. given that the lincs dataset is the first of its kind, such spatial bias in multivariate gene expression data has never been observed at this scale before. our method is similar to pca-based noise removal techniques since it operates on the principal component space in order to improve the measurement reliability. however, while previous methods remove the low variance components to reduce random noise , our method is the first that specifically captures location-dependent effects, and decreases their contribution to the corrected dataset.  
