genome analysis advanced complex trait analysis motivation: the genome-wide complex trait analysis (gcta) software package can quantify the contribution of genetic variation to phenotypic variation for complex traits. however, as those datasets of interest continue to increase in size, gcta becomes increasingly computationally prohibitive. we present an adapted version, advanced complex trait analysis (acta), demonstrating dramatically improved performance. results: we restructure the genetic relationship matrix (grm) estimation phase of the code and introduce the highly optimized parallel basic linear algebra subprograms (blas) library combined with manual parallelization and optimization. we introduce the linear algebra package (lapack) library into the restricted maximum likelihood (reml) analysis stage. for a test case with 8999 individuals and 279 435 single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), we reduce the total runtime, using a compute node with two multi-core intel nehalem cpus, from $17 h to $11 min. availability and implementation: the source code is fully available under the gnu public license, along with linux binaries. for more information see http://www.epcc.ed.ac.uk/software-products/acta.complex traits are determined by large numbers of genetic and environmental factors as well as their interactions. identifying the contributing genes and quantifying their effects in the context of one or multiple environments is of key importance in the development of improved breeding strategies in livestock, the identification of therapeutic targets for animal and human disease, and the understanding of how natural and artificial selection shape the genomes of animals and humans. genome-wide complex trait analysis (gcta) is a freely available c+ + software package for quantifying the contribution of genetic variation to phenotypic variation for complex traits. this comprises two stages: estimation of the genetic relationship matrix (grm), which contains a measure of genetic correlation between individuals and is calculated using single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) data, and the use of restricted maximum likelihood (reml) to maximize the likelihood of the phenotypes given the grm. the specific algorithmic implementation in gcta is sub-optimal when compiled for modern multi-core processors (which are discussed in the supplementary material). in this article, we present an adapted version of the code, advanced complex trait analysis (acta), which offers dramatic performance improvements. in section 2, we describe the model used by gcta, and present the adaptations performed to the grm estimation and reml analysis stages of the code respectively. in section 3, we evaluate and discuss the effects of these developments.  
