detection of circular permutations within protein structures using ce-cp motivation: circular permutation is an important type of protein rearrangement. natural circular permutations have implications for protein function, stability and evolution. artificial circular permutations have also been used for protein studies. however, such relationships are difficult to detect for many sequence and structure comparison algorithms and require special consideration. results: we developed a new algorithm, called combinatorial extension for circular permutations (ce-cp), which allows the structural comparison of circularly permuted proteins. ce-cp was designed to be user friendly and is integrated into the rcsb protein data bank. it was tested on two collections of circularly permuted proteins. pairwise alignments can be visualized both in a desktop application or on the web using jmol and exported to other programs in a variety of formats. availability and implementation: the ce-cp algorithm can be accessed through the rcsb website atcircular permutation describes a relationship between two proteins where the n-terminal portion of one protein is related to the cterminal portion of the other. while the order of amino acids changes, circularly permuted proteins are generally found to assume the same structure. circular permutation has been documented to naturally occur in a number of protein families, such as lectins and dna methyltransferases . two general mechanisms for the evolution of circularly permuted proteins are known, so detecting such events can shed light on the evolutionary history of protein families . circular permutation can influence protein folding, dynamics and function . synthetic circular permutants have been engineered to alter activity, control regulation and improve stability . natural circular permutants generally have quite low sequence similarity, with previous studies finding 0.32.6 of proteins share 30 identity . thus, including structural information is essential for detecting circular permutations. many structural alignment algorithms are unable to detect rearrangements in sequence, while general sequence-order independent methods lack a clear evolutionary mechanism by which complex rearrangements could occur. therefore, algorithms that specifically search for circular permutations are needed. several existing algorithms have been reported, including sheba and cpsarst . here we describe a method, combinatorial extension with circular permutations (ce-cp), for the identification of circular permutations based on protein structure.  
