detection of micrornas in color space motivation: deep sequencing provides inexpensive opportunities to characterize the transcriptional diversity of known genomes. the ab solid technology generates millions of short sequencing reads in color-space; that is, the raw data is a sequence of colors, where each color represents 2 nt and each nucleotide is represented by two consecutive colors. this strategy is purported to have several advantages, including increased ability to distinguish sequencing errors from polymorphisms. several programs have been developed to map short reads to genomes in color space. however, a number of previously unexplored technical issues arise when using solid technology to characterize micrornas. results: here we explore these technical difficulties. first, since the sequenced reads are longer than the biological sequences, every read is expected to contain linker fragments. the color-calling error rate increases toward the 3 end of the read such that recognizing the linker sequence for removal becomes problematic. second, mapping in color space may lead to the loss of the first nucleotide of each read. we propose a sequential trimming and mapping approach to map small rnas. using our strategy, we reanalyze three published insect small rna deep sequencing datasets and characterize 22 new micrornas. availability and implementation: a bash shell script to perform the sequential trimming and mapping procedure, called seqtrimmap, is available at: http://www.mirbase.org/tools/seqtrimmap/so-called next-generation sequencing technologies, or deep sequencing, permit the fast and comprehensive analysis of genomes and transcriptomes . the short length of the sequence reads produced is compensated by the capacity to produce millions of reads in a single run. thus, new strategies to align and assemble highly redundant short sequence reads have been developed over the last few years . micrornas are endogenous rna molecules, 22 nt in length that repress gene translation . in the past 4 years, the overwhelming majority of novel micrornas have been identified by deep sequencing. reads from deep sequencing experiments may contain sequences of the short dna adapters (termed linkers here) used in the sequencing reaction. characterization of small rnas to whom correspondence should be addressed. from deep sequencing datasets requires the removal of these linker sequences from the 3 ends of reads. illumina/solexa sequencing has been extensively used to detect micrornas and the available data suggest that the 3 linker sequences are easily detected and removed. for instance,detected 3 linker fragments in 82 of the sequenced reads by string matching. the use of ab solid sequencing to characterize micrornas is on the rise . unlike other technologies, solid machines produce sequences in color space, each color representing a dinucleotide. the rationale behind color space is that, since colors are produced for overlapping dinucleotides , each nucleotide is read twice. this is purported to reduce sequencing errors, and to permit better distinction between sequencing errors and polymorphisms . the characterization of micrornas in color space produces two specific issues that have so far been overlooked, one associated with each end of the read. first, the read length is longer than the biological sequence, such that the 3 end of every read derived from a microrna contains linker sequence that must be removed. however, detecting and removing adapter sequences in color space is not as straightforward as in base space, as we explore in this work. second, the first color of each read represents the last base of the adapter and the first of the target sequence. the treatment of this color is controversial since different programs keep or remove it. removal of the first color causes the first base to be lost, whereas retaining the first color may reduce the proportion of reads that map to the genome. the loss of the 5 nt has critical consequences in the characterization of micrornas. in this article, we address the issues of using color space sequences to characterize micrornas and other small rnas, and provide a simple strategy to easily map color space reads from small rna libraries to whole genomes.  
