genome analysis determination of genomic copy number alteration emphasizing a restriction site-based strategy of genome re-sequencing motivation: copy number abbreviation (cna) is one type of genomic aberration that is often induced by genome instability and is associated with diseases such as cancer. determination of the genome-wide cna profile is an important step in identifying the underlying mutation mechanisms. genomic data based on next-generation sequencing technology are particularly suitable for determination of high-quality cna profile. now is an important time to reevaluate the use of sequencing techniques for cna analysis, especially with the rapid growth of the different targeted genome and whole-genome sequencing strategies. results: in this study, we provide a comparison of resequencing strategies , with regard to their utility, applied to the same hepatocellular carcinoma sample for copy number determination. these strategies include whole-genome, exome and restriction site-associated dna (rad) sequencing. the last of these strategies is a targeted sequen-cing technique that involves cutting the genome with a restriction enzyme and isolating the targeted sequences. our data demonstrate that rad sequencing is an efficient and comprehensive strategy that allows the cost-effective determination of cnas. further investigation of rad sequencing data led to the finding that a precise measurement of the allele frequency would be a helpful complement to the read depth for cna analysis for two reasons. first, knowledge of the allele frequency helps to resolve refined calculations of allele-specific copy numbers, which, in turn, identify the functionally important cnas that are under natural selection on the parental alleles. second, this knowledge enables deconvolution of cna patterns in complex genomic regions.genome instability, including nucleotide mutations, chromosomal rearrangements and dna dose aberrations, promotes genetic variation. among these possible genomic aberrations, dna copy numbers are of high diversity in normal human populations and are associated with various human diseases, such as birth defects and neurodegenerative diseases . notably, tumourigenesis involves a process of accumulation of chromosomal mutations that induce the activation of oncogenes, the loss of function of tumour suppressors and cell proliferation. copy number aberrations (cnas), in the form of regions of somatic amplification or deletion, are an important subclass of chromosomal mutation associated with tumourigenesis . investigations of cnas and the biological mechanism through which they occur have shed new light on the human genome variations that exist among individuals with disease or normal phenotypes. many studies have examined the differences in cnas between tumour cells and normal cells and have estimated the rearrangement phylogeny of cancer genomes on the basis of their cnas . cnas and single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) in humans have revealed extensive genetic diversity in populations . a framework based on evolutionary genetics has been adopted to understand the disease-causing deleterious cnas or beneficial cnas present in human populations . the successful characterization of copy number profiles is the first step in pinpointing the cnas that have significant biological roles in disease occurrence and normal phenotypic variation. in the past 15 years, profound advances have been made in the major technologies offering genome-wide scanning of cnas, such as array-based comparative genomic hybridization with high-density oligo probes , snp genotyping arrays and recently developed next-generation sequencing-based approaches to whom correspondence should be addressed.. array-based technologies generate analogue fluorescence signals that are prone to noise , and short-read sequencing platforms provide an effective alternative way of identifying cnas. next-generation sequencing technologies provide high-resolution nucleotide-level digital readouts of the genomic composition of cells . especially because the genomes of more and more species have been sequenced and assembled, resequencing has become increasingly more convenient for cna analysis than the existing array-based technologies, which require significant work to design new sets of probes. resequencing strategies for genomes, including exome sequencing and whole-genome sequencing (wgs), confer benefits in detecting cnas and rearrangements . both the read depth and the minor allele frequencies (mafs) of heterozygous loci estimated from the sequencing data are informative in inferring copy numbers. low mafs have been used, in addition to read depth, to screen for cna segments conferring adaptive advantages and to confirm the breakpoints of cnas . however, sequencing biases can be introduced from many sources and may negatively impact the precise measurement of read depth and allele frequency throughout the genome. uneven sampling in dna fragmentation during library preparation, pcr bias due to the gc-content of fragments and errors in the mapping of reads are all sources of variability in the characterization of genomic regions. in addition to these sources of bias, exome sequencing has an excessive allele bias because of the unbalanced sampling of the two alleles that can result from differences in probe affinity . unlike deep-coverage (420) wgs data, low-coverage (1$3) wgs data fail to provide important information regarding the allele frequencies of heterozygous loci. efforts have been made to overcome these shortcomings in the sequencing data, and both gc correction and hidden markov models have been integrated into the statistical tools used to detect cnas; however, the success of these efforts has been limited . restriction siteassociated dna (rad) sequencing is a targeted sequencing technique that involves cutting genomic dna with at least one restriction enzyme and isolating the target sequences from entire genomes. rad sequencing was developed to efficiently identify snps, map quantitative trait locis (qtls) and measure the genetic structure of natural populations of various non-model organisms . intuitively, the majority of cna segments would be covered by densely packed genome-wide rad reads. hence, the rad sequencing strategy holds promise for cna analysis. herein, we proposed this wet-lab strategy, rad sequencing, to cover $5 of the genome of a hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc) sample for optimal cna analysis. using the same sample, we systematically compared the performance of rad sequencing with that of the most commonly used alternative strategies in constructing the cna profile. from this study, there is sufficient evidence to support the notion that the rad sequencing strategy, which allows a precise measurement of both the read depth and allele frequency, is a comprehensive solution to the problem of cna characterization.  
