data and text mining determining conserved metabolic biomarkers from a million database queries motivation: metabolite databases provide a unique window into metabolome research allowing the most commonly searched biomarkers to be catalogued. omic scale metabolite profiling, or metabolomics, is finding increased utility in biomarker discovery largely driven by improvements in analytical technologies and the concurrent developments in bioinformatics. however, the successful translation of biomarkers into clinical or biologically relevant indicators is limited. results: with the aim of improving the discovery of translatable metabolite biomarkers, we present search analytics for over one million metlin metabolite database queries. the most common me-tabolites found in metlin were cross-correlated against xcms online, the widely used cloud-based data processing and pathway analysis platform. analysis of the metlin and xcms common metabolite data has two primary implications: these metabolites, might indicate a conserved metabolic response to stressors and, this data may be used to gauge the relative uniqueness of potential biomarkers. availability and implementation. metlin can be accessed by logging on to: https://search analytics is now regularly utilized as an unbiased and anonymous method to survey populations. in a sense each query is a report of some circumstance or set of circumstances that has lead the user to carry out a search. for instance the user might be searching a symptom they are experiencing or the search may reflect a personal bias, in either case this information can be informative within the context of a community. recent examples include the use of search data to model influenza outbreaks , and in another case researchers were able to design a rough measure). with this in mind and starting from the premise that the majority of users searching the metlin database are from the population engaged in metabolomic studies we set out to use analytics to survey the broad range of metabolomics research reflected in metlin search data and reveal the most commonly encountered biomarkers. the potential impact of biomarker research is far reaching, involving diagnosis, prognosis, drug efficacy and the development of personalized medicine. one particularly intriguing aspect of biomarker discovery is the prospect of reducing the overall cost of health care by increasing the level of medical care through early diagnosis, or through the development of patient specific therapies . it is therefore understandable that a significant effort has been dedicated to the discovery of unique disease-specific molecules as evidenced by the thousands of biomarker-related papers . the importance of biomarker discovery coupled to the accessibility of new, high sensitivity analytical technology has contributed to this broad interest , however a lack of standard best practices has meant that discoveries often have very little practical value. the thousands of papers that have been published on biomarkers have yielded relatively little success , for example while the number of biomarker publications have increased by over 20 each year, the number of patent applications for clinical biomarkers remains level . metabolomics-based biomarker discovery publications are progressively contributing to this body of work and also show the same trends, with the exception of the robust inborn errors of metabolism screens, there are relatively few new clinical metabolite based tests . metabolomic experiments, whether they are accomplished through the use of traditional gc/ms technologies (first demonstrated in the early 1970s by linus pauling and horning;), or current liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (lc/ms) instrumentation, are well suited for gaining a comprehensive and quantitative view of the metabolome. these approaches have the ability to detect thousands of metabolites from biological samples with high resolution, high sensitivity and a dynamic range typically exceeding four orders of magnitude . as a result, it is possible to quickly generate datasets rich in metabolite information. a typical workflow for metabolomics involves several steps; first, mass spectral data is collected for each sample in each sample group. next the data is analyzed by any number of data processing platforms including metabolic profiler (bruker), simca-p (umetrics), markerlynx (waters), mass profiler pro (agilent), metalign , mzmine , maven , metaboanalyst and xcms online to identify the features that significantly change between sample groups. the significantly dysregulated features are then given a putative identification by searching metabolite databases such as metlin (supplementary). metlin is a highly accessed database used for metabolite identification. since its inception in 2004 metlin has grown to contain over 240 000 metabolites, 13 000 of which also have ms/ms data in both positive and negative ionization modes at four different collision energies (supplementary). more than 10 000 users and over 600 citations of the original publication are indicators of its wide application. in addition, metlin has been integrated with xcms online, providing metabolite identifications for the users of this cloud-based data processing platform.the consistent increase in metlin use (supplementary) is largely due to the wide spread adoption of mass spectrometry as an exploratory tool by biologists and biochemists. this has been facilitated by the increased access to mass spectrometry technologies that are sensitive and easy to use. furthermore, the development of userfriendly bioinformatic platforms and integrated statistical tools (mentioned earlier) has removed a significant technical barrier . technology has also leveled the playing field so that researchers are typically using similar tools, which for the most part are composed of liquid chromatography coupled to an atmospheric pressure ionization source and either time-of-flight (tof), quadrupole timeof-flight (qtof) or quadrupole orbi-trap (q-exactive) mass analyzers with a consistent degree of quantitative and mass accuracy. thus, the masses searched in metlin provide a representation of the discriminatory metabolites from metabolomic experiments. here, in order to gain a perspective on the metabolites being searched, metlin archival data was searched and examined to determine commonly observed metabolites across one million queries.  
