deterministic identification of specific individuals from gwas results motivation: genome-wide association studies (gwass) are commonly applied on human genomic data to understand the causal gene combinations statistically connected to certain diseases. patients involved in these gwass could be re-identified when the studies release statistical information on a large number of single-nucleotide polymorphisms. subsequent work, however, found that such privacy attacks are theoretically possible but unsuccessful and unconvincing in real settings. results: we derive the first practical privacy attack that can successfully identify specific individuals from limited published associations from the wellcome trust case control consortium (wtccc) dataset. for gwas results computed over 25 randomly selected loci, our algorithm always pinpoints at least one patient from the wtccc dataset. moreover, the number of re-identified patients grows rapidly with the number of published genotypes. finally, we discuss prevention methods to disable the attack, thus providing a solution for enhancing patient privacy. availability and implementation: proofs of the theorems and additional experimental results are available in the support online documents. the attack algorithm codes are publicly available at https://sites.google.com/site/zhangzhenjie/gwas_attack.zip. the genomic dataset used in the experiments is available at http://www.wtccc.org.uk/ on request.genome-wide association studies (gwas) are widely used to identify loci in the human genome associated with a specific diseases. the basis of these studies is to associate single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) or genotypes with the disease phenotype in a casecontrol design . although a scientific article may present gwas results at low precision (e.g. correlation between genotypes shown only in a heat map), detailed and accurate results are often available upon request. it is standard to protect the privacy of the participating subjects by keeping patient identities confidential. since gwas results are statistical in nature, until recently most researchers believed that it is safe to share and publish such deidentified results. this belief was challenged by recent bioinformatics), which shows that it is theoretically possible to re-identify individual participants using only aggregate genomic data. notably,describe the first such method based on statistical hypothesis testing. this method requires aggregate information from many genotypes (e.g. tens of thousands) to obtain high confidence regarding an individuals presence in the aggregate. in contrast, a gwas usually publishes statistics for a much smaller number of genotypes. therefore, using the approach suggested by homer et al., access to the whole genotype association dataset would be necessary to accomplish this identification. access to such complete datasets is restricted and limited only to qualified biomedical researchers with proper vetting (e.g. refer to nihs policy for sharing gwas data, http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/not-od07-088.html.).propose a more ambitious approach that aims to find all genotypes for every patient in the gwas. this attack, however, rarely succeeds, because the number of unknowns far exceeds the number of known values. in fact, wang et al. (2009) report only one particular synthetic gwas involving 174 snps and 100 patients on which the attack succeeded. a follow-up study tested this attack with gwas instances from randomly selected sets of snps and did not find any instance on which the attack succeeded. we conclude that none of the existing methods poses a direct threat to gwas participants privacy based on the data that is presented in standard publications. in data security, the development of effective countermeasures requires the identification of a successful attack algorithm. in this article, we devise a strong privacy attack on published gwas results, which successfully identifies specific patients by using a strategy of constructing deterministic proofs of study inclusion.  
