genetics and population analysis dical-ibd: demography-aware inference of identity-by-descent tracts in unrelated individuals we present a tool, dical-ibd, for detecting identity-by-descent (ibd) tracts between pairs of genomic sequences. our method builds on a recent demographic inference method based on the coalescent with recombination, and is able to incorporate demographic information as a prior. simulation study shows that dical-ibd has significantly higher recall and precision than that of existing single-nucleotide polymorphismbased ibd detection methods, while retaining reasonable accuracy for ibd tracts as small as 0.1 cm. availability: http://sourceforge.net/projects/the notion of identity-by-descent (ibd) between distantly related individuals is playing an increasing role in a variety of genetic analyses, including association mapping , inferring past demographic history and detecting signals of natural selection . currently there exist several useful methods for detecting ibd tracts. these methods are based on characterizing similar haplotypes [e.g. germline (or considering patterns of linkage disequilibrium [e.g. fastibd, refined ibd and ibdseq (, b)], but they do not explicitly model genealogical relationships between genomic sequences. here, we present a new ibd detection tool, dical-ibd, which is based on a well-used genealogical process in population genetics, namely, the coalescent with recombination. another feature that distinguishes our method is that we can incorporate demographic information as a prior. there seems to be no universally accepted definition of ibd. the definition we adopt is the same as that inand ralph and coop (2013). specifically, an ibd tract is defined as a maximally contiguous genomic region that is wholly descended from a common ancestor without any recombination occurring within the region. in contrast to other methods, we allow ibd tracts to contain point mutations, which are likely to occur in humans due to comparable mutation and recombination rates. dical-ibd is able to detect ibd tracts with high accuracy in unrelated individuals, between whom the vast majority of shared tracts are 51 cm. single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp)-based methods are successful in detecting tracts 42 cm, but have low power for shorter tracts, whereas sequence-based methdods, such as dical-ibd and ibdseq, maintain reasonable accuracy for tracts as small as 0.1 cm.  
