diggit: a bioconductor package to infer genetic variants driving cellular phenotypes identification of driver mutations in human diseases is often limited by cohort size and availability of appropriate statistical models. we propose a method for the systematic discovery ofidentification of somatic mutations and germline variants associated to cancer and other complex diseases (driver mutations) is mostly performed on a statistical basis . achieving appropriate statistical power, however, requires large effect sizes or large cohorts to control for errors arising from the large number of tested hypothesis . in addition, since statistical approaches do not provide mechanistic insight, many disease risk determinants, such as apolipoprotein e, were discovered long before they were mechanistically elucidated . we have recently developed an approach that boosts the statistical power of gwas by focusing the analysis to genes mechanistically linked to a specific phenotype or cell state, termed master regulators (mr,). driver-gene inference by genetical-genomic information theory (diggit) searches for genetic alterations associated with dysregulation of mr protein activity, reducing the number of hypothesis to test, while providing regulatory clues to help elucidate associated biological mechanisms . we have recently used diggit to identify causal genetic determinants of the mesenchymal subtype of human glioblastoma (gbm,). here, we present the r-system implementation of diggit, which is available as a software package from bioconductor.elucidating the causal genetic determinants of most complex diseases has proven more challenging than expected. due to the large number of candidate loci, it is difficult to achieve enough statistical power to detect all but the most highly penetrant and frequent events. furthermore, classic gwas approaches are based on pure statistical associations, providing no mechanistic insights. diggit aims to address both challenges by relying on context-specific models of cell regulation. it boosts the statistical power by focusing on the regulators mechanistically linked to the phenotype and on their upstream post-translational modulators . the algorithm relies on large (n 100 samples) expression and genetic profiles and requires cell context-specific models of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation. its r implementation, available as an r-system package from bioconductor, has low computational) between genes affected by genetic alterations (rows) and stat3 inferred protein activity, while conditioning on each of the genetically altered genes (columns). the rightmost column indicates the weakest association for each gene requirements, running in most desktop workstations for an average (n 300 samples) dataset.  
