a dynamic data structure for flexible molecular maintenance and informatics motivation: we present the dynamic packing grid (dpg), a neighborhood data structure for maintaining and manipulating flexible molecules and assemblies, for efficient computation of binding affinities in drug design or in molecular dynamics calculations. results: dpg can efficiently maintain the molecular surface using only linear space and supports quasi-constant time insertion, deletion and movement (i.e. updates) of atoms or groups of atoms. dpg also supports constant time neighborhood queries from arbitrary points. our results for maintenance of molecular surface and polarization energy computations using dpg exhibit marked improvement in time and space requirements.many human functional processes are mediated through the interactions among proteins, a major molecular constituent of our anatomical makeup. a computational understanding of these interactions provides important clues for developing therapeutic interventions related to diseases such as cancer and metabolic disorders. computational methods such as automated docking through shape and energetic complementarity scoring aim to gain insight and predict such molecular interactions. docking involves induced complementary fit between flexible protein interfaces. the flexible docking solution space consisting of all relative positions, orientations and conformations of the proteins is searched, and each putative docking is evaluated using combinations of interface complementarity scoring and atomic pairwise charged coulombic interactions. also, since proteins function in predominantly watery (solvent) environment, the protein solvation energy also plays an important role in determining intermolecular binding affinities in vivo for drug screening, as well as in molecular dynamics simulations and in the study of hydrophobicity and protein folding. when computing the solvation energy for molecules, it is crucial to correctly model and sample the molecular surface. the most common model for molecules is a collection of atoms represented by spherical balls, with radii equal to their van der to whom correspondence should be addressed.waals radii . the surface of the union of these spheres is known as the van der waals surface. accessibility to the solvent, namely the solvent accessible surface (sas), can be defined as the locus of the center of a probe sphere as it contacts the molecular surface. usually, the probe is a water molecule modeled as a sphere with radius 1.4 . another definition for molecular surface is as a set of contact and reentrant patches , commonly known as the solvent contact surface (scs), or solvent excluded surface (ses) or simply the molecular surface. while a number of techniques have been devised for the static construction of molecular surfaces (see e.g.for a brief review), not much work has been done on neighborhood data structures for the dynamic maintenance of molecular surfaces under conformational changes and domain movements.considered limited dynamic maintenance of molecular surfaces based on non uniform rational bsplines (nurbs) descriptions for the patches . eyal and halperin presented an algorithm based on dynamic graph connectivity that updates the union of balls molecular surface after a conformational change in o (log 2 n ) amortized time per affected (by this change) atom (, b). in this article, we present the dynamic packing grid (dpg), a space and time efficient neighborhood data structure that maintains a collection of balls (atoms) in 3-space, allowing a range of spherical range queries and updates for rapid scoring of flexible proteinprotein interactions . the efficiency of the data structure results from the assumption that the centers of two different balls in the collection cannot come arbitrarily close to each other, which is a natural property of molecules. a consequence of this assumption is that any ball in the collection can intersect at most a constant number of other balls. on a ram with w-bit words, our dpg data structure can report all balls intersecting a given ball or within o (r max ) distance from a given point in o (loglogw ) time with high probability (w.h.p.), where r max is the radius of the largest ball in the collection. it can also answer whether a given ball is exposed (i.e. lies on the union boundary) or buried within the same time bound. at any time, the entire union boundary can be extracted from the data structure in o (m ) time in the worst case, where m is the number of atoms on the boundary. there are existing techniques like), which can compute/approximate the exposed atoms and the surface area in the same time bound, but do not allow dynamic updates. on the other hand, dpg supports updates (i.e. insertion/deletion/movement of a ball) in o (logw ) time w.h.p. 1 the data structure uses linear space.as we show here, dpgs can be used to maintain both the van der waals surface and the scs of a molecule within the performance bounds mentioned above. dpgs can also be used to enable fast energetics calculation by rapidly locating the atoms close to each sampled integration point of the scs. besides protein docking and molecular dynamics, the neighborhood query and surface maintenance of dpg also has potential applications in interactive computer-aided design (cad) tools developed for de novo drug design, protein folding, n-body simulations, etc. all these applications often need to handle extremely large number of atoms or points.  
