genome analysis dinup: a systematic approach to identify regions of differential nucleosome positioning motivation: with the rapid development of high-throughput sequencing technologies, the genome-wide profiling of nucleosome positioning has become increasingly affordable. many future studies will investigate the dynamic behaviour of nucleosome positioning in cells that have different states or that are exposed to different conditions. however, a robust method to effectively identify the regions of differential nucleosome positioning (rdnps) has not been previously available. results: we describe a novel computational approach, dinup, that compares nucleosome profiles generated by high-throughput sequencing under various conditions. dinup provides a statistical p-value for each identified rdnp based on the difference of read distributions. dinup also empirically estimates the false discovery rate as a cutoff when two samples have different sequencing depths and differentiate reliable rdnps from the background noise. evaluation of dinup showed it to be both sensitive and specific for the detection of changes in nucleosome location, occupancy and fuzziness. rdnps that were identified using publicly available datasets revealed that nucleosome positioning dynamics are closely related to the epigenetic regulation of transcription.as a basic unit of the eukaryotic genome, the nucleosome is formed by an octamer of histones and the surrounding 147 bp of dna . nucleosomes play an important role in the epigenetic regulation of diverse cellular processes through covalent modifications of histone tails and positioning of nucleosomes . although previous studies have focused primarily on the former mechanism, the relative location of the dna and the histone octamer, or the nucleosome positioning, is also a determining mechanism to whom correspondence should be addressed.for epigenetic regulation through controlling the accessibility of transcription factor binding sites . in addition, in the process of gene transcription, the frequency of nucleosome unwrapping and formation can reflect the rate of pol ii elongation . as a result, if genome-wide nucleosome profiles for cells exposed to different conditions are known, then researchers can better understand the dynamic behaviours of the transcriptional machinery. with the rapid development of high-throughput sequencing technologies, genome-wide nucleosome profiles have been generated for several organisms at a single-nucleotide resolution , which provides an opportunity to study nucleosome positioning dynamics in cells that are in different states or that are exposed to different conditions. to identify regions of differential nucleosome positioning (rdnps),introduced the concept of a nucleosome score to indicate the stability of the nucleosome position and then compared scores for yeast samples before and after heat shock. in addition, a fold change calculation can be an intuitive method for identifying regions with sequencing read number changes. however, those approaches have several limitations. first, to the best of our knowledge, none of the previous studies provided a statistical measurement, e.g. a p-value, to evaluate the significance of the difference in the nucleosome positioning changes. second, both the fold change calculation and the nucleosome score comparison are sequencing-depth independent, which would affect the robustness of the results, especially when the sequencing depth is low. to address these limitations, we present a novel method called differential nucleosome positioning (dinup) in this article. dinup takes advantage of the single-nucleotide resolution of nucleosome profiles, and it directly compares the distributions of sequenced nucleosome-dna centres along the genome between different samples to detect genomic regions with differential nucleosome positioning without introducing any intermediate concepts (such as the nucleosome score or the positioned nucleosome). dinup also calculates p-values and empirically estimates the false discovery rate (fdr), to evaluate the statistical significance of the identified difference. moreover, dinup provides various parameters with which to characterize the physical properties of those identified regions. when applied to publicly available nucleosome profiles for yeast , dinup reliably detected differences in nucleosome positioning in a sequencing-depth-dependent manner,when comparing the nucleosome profiles of different samples, it is important to first make the samples comparable to each other. dinup uses the ks test to calculate statistical p-values between sliding windows and estimates the fdr from the background p-value for use as the cutoff to achieve this goal. after reducing the number of potential artifacts, genomic regions with p-values consecutively lower than the cutoff were then identified as rdnps. it is worth noting that, when using different fdrs or minimum length cutoffs, the number of identified rdnps can differ greatly. therefore, the cutoff chosen depends on the features of the identified regions that are preferred by the user. because dinup is designed to capture the most significant read distribution changes, it should strike a balance between the detection of different types of nucleosome positioning changes at a certain fdr cutoff. in the identification of short-range nucleosome occupancy change, although regions with different occupancy levels may have similar read distributions, the ks test can identify the differences in both boundaries around the occupancy change region. after combining the differential signals on the boundary of sharp nucleosome occupancy changes, regions with differential occupancy levels can be identified. however, in terms of long-range nucleosome occupancy change, as the differential signals on the boundaries can be too far away from each other to be combined as an rdnp, our method will have limitations in the accurate identification of regions with long-range occupancy changes. as a result, we implemented the fold change method into the software package of dinup and provided an option to users who are especially interested in detecting occupancy changes. nevertheless, dinup is, in general, an effective and robust method for identifying rdnps. another important factor that influences the detection of differential nucleosome positioning is sequencing depth. to evaluate this effect, we sampled datasets with different levels of genomic coverage and used dinup to detect rdnps. assuming that the results obtained from the datasets with the deepest sequencing depth were the most reliable results, we used these rdnps as a standard to determine the level of consistency between the regions identified using datasets with lower sequencing depths and those identified using the standard dataset (supplementary). with an fdr cutoff of 0.01, the consistency percentage dropped to 60 with a genomic coverage of 50, indicating that the sequencing depth indeed affects the detection of rdnp to a large extent. from this perspective, we argue that a minimum sequencing depth, i.e. a genomic coverage of 20 or 30, is required for the accurate identification of differential nucleosome positioning; otherwise, genomic regions that are identified as different may not be truly different but instead may appear different as a result of random discrepancies or background noise.  
