systems biology direct calculation of elementary flux modes satisfying several biological constraints in genome-scale metabolic networks motivation: the concept of elementary flux mode (efm) has been widely used for the past 20 years. however, its application to genome-scale metabolic networks (gsmns) is still under development because of methodological limitations. therefore, novel approaches are demanded to extend the application of efms. a novel family of methods based on optimization is emerging that provides us with a subset of efms. because the calculation of the whole set of efms goes beyond our capacity, performing a selective search is a proper strategy. results: here, we present a novel mathematical approach calculating efms fulfilling additional linear constraints. we validated our approach based on two metabolic networks in which all the efms can be obtained. finally, we analyzed the performance of our methodology in the gsmn of the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae by calculating efms producing ethanol with a given minimum carbon yield. overall, this new approach opens new avenues for the calculation of efms in gsmns. availability and implementation: matlab code is provided in the supplementary online materials contact: fplanes@ceit.es.from its inception, classical biology has relied on reductionist principles. however, the actual nature of the cell, in which all components interact, demanded switching the previous paradigm to a holistic molecular approach, extending the scope of the analysis. these are the foundations that motivated the development of systems biology in the second half of the twentieth century. in particular, systems biology aims at studying the biological processes in terms of the cellular components and their interactions from a holistic molecular perspective . some of these components interact in the cellular metabolism, which comprises those biochemical reactions consuming and producing the smallest compounds of the cell, typically named metabolites. these reactions are close to be in thermodynamic equilibrium, requiring the presence of catalytic agents so as to achieve the appropriate rate of activity to sustain life. in most metabolic reactions, a set of proteins named enzymes act as catalysts. the conversion rate of the metabolic reactions is termed metabolic fluxes. metabolic reactions are organized into distinct functional modules, forming the so-called metabolic pathways. some of these pathways have been experimentally reported and manually included in different databases , as well as in biochemistry books , e.g. glycolysis, tca cycle. however, metabolic pathways are not independent entities; for example, the same enzyme or metabolite may appear in different pathways. for this reason, a most general analysis of metabolism requires the simultaneous consideration of different metabolic pathways. in the most extreme scenario, when all the known metabolic pathways are considered, the resulting set of enzymes and metabolites is referred to as genome-scale metabolic networks (gsmns). the outbreak of different high-throughput experimental techniques has allowed us to increase the accuracy and size of gsmns, in terms of metabolites, reactions and gene regulation. currently, gsmns for several organisms are publicly available through different online repositories . the inherent complexity of gsmns does not make it possible to perform a manual analysis per se. different computational strategies have been developed . among them, a number of theoretical frameworks have been proposed to extend the concept of metabolic pathways from a network-oriented perspective . one of the most important pathway concepts is that of elementary flux mode (efm) . efms are a minimum set of enzymes necessary to accomplish mass-balance and thermodynamic (irreversibility) conditions . although the mass-balance and thermodynamic constraints are directly imposed by means of two linear constraints, the condition that guarantees that only a minimum number of reactions is active, referred to as the non-decomposability condition (ndc), is more difficult and demands further mathematical considerations. efficient algebraic frameworks can be found in the literature for calculating the whole set of efms of a given metabolic network. these methods are based on an iterative process that has to be completed so as to guarantee that the obtained solutions are efms. however, the number of efms increases exponentially with the number of reactions constituting the network . consequently, applying these methodologies to gsmns goes beyond their scope. because it is not possible to calculate all the efms in gsmns, different mathematical frameworks were later developed to provide a particular to whom correspondence should be addressed. subset of them , most of them based on mixed integer linear programming (milp). these optimization methods typically enumerate efms in an increasing number of reactions and have been proved effective for a number of applications . however, they allow us to add only one biological constraint in the search procedure, e.g. computing the 100 shortest efms producing l-lysine, as stated by. this limitation is due to ndc. in other words, currently in the literature, there is no general methodology for taking into account more than one biological constraint in the efm computation without violating ndc. in this work, we present a novel approach based on milp that is able to calculate a subset of efms fulfilling additional constraints. the framework is illustrated with a toy example and validated with two networks , where all efms can be obtained. subsequently, the scalability of our approach is confirmed by calculating a subset of efms in the genome-scale metabolic network of saccharomyces cerevisiae . here, we investigated efms simultaneously consuming glucose and producing ethanol, guaranteeing that a minimum yield is achieved. we also validated the performance of this new approach when more than two constraints are imposed, particularly by calculating 100 efms activating a random set of five reactions.  
