discovering graphical granger causality using the truncating lasso penalty motivation: components of biological systems interact with each other in order to carry out vital cell functions. such information can be used to improve estimation and inference, and to obtain better insights into the underlying cellular mechanisms. discovering regulatory interactions among genes is therefore an important problem in systems biology. whole-genome expression data over time provides an opportunity to determine how the expression levels of genes are affected by changes in transcription levels of other genes, and can therefore be used to discover regulatory interactions among genes. results: in this article, we propose a novel penalization method, called truncating lasso, for estimation of causal relationships from time-course gene expression data. the proposed penalty can correctly determine the order of the underlying time series, and improves the performance of the lasso-type estimators. moreover, the resulting estimate provides information on the time lag between activation of transcription factors and their effects on regulated genes. we provide an efficient algorithm for estimation of model parameters, and show that the proposed method can consistently discover causal relationships in the large p, small n setting. the performance of the proposed model is evaluated favorably in simulated, as well as real, data examples. availability: the proposed truncating lasso method is implemented in the r-package grangertlasso and is freely available ata critical problem in systems biology is to discover causal relationships among components of biological systems. gene regulatory networks, metabolic networks and cell signalling networks capture causal relationships in cells. discovery of causal relationships may be only possible through carefully designed experiments, which can be challenging. however, gene regulation is carried out by binding of protein products of transcription factors to cis-regulatory elements of genes. such regulatory mechanisms are evident if the expression levels of gene x is affected by changes in expression levels of gene y. therefore, time-course gene expression data can be used to discover causal relationships among genes and construct the gene regulatory network. different methods have been developed to infer causal relationships from time series data, including dynamic bayesian networks and granger causality . in dbns, the state space of bayesian networks is expanded by replicating the set of variables in the network by the number to whom correspondence should be addressed. of time points. cyclic networks are then transformed to directed acyclic graphs (dags) by breaking down cycles into interactions between variables at two different time points.among others have applied dbns to infer causal relationships among components of biological systems. on the other hand, the concept of granger causality states that gene x is granger-causal for gene y if the autoregressive model of y based on past values of both genes is significantly more accurate than the model based on y alone. this implies that changes in expression levels of genes could be explained by expression levels of their transcription factors. therefore, statistical methods can be applied to time-course gene expression observations to estimate granger causality among genes. exploring granger causality is closely related to analysis of vector autoregressive (var) models, which are widely used in econometrics.and opgen-rhein and strimmer (2007) employed var models to learn gene regulatory networks, whileproposed a sparse var model for better performance in cases when the number of genes, p is large compared to the sample size, n. similar sparse models have also been considered by mukhopadhyay and chatterjee (2007). zou andcompared the performance of dbns and granger causality methods for estimation of causal relationships and concluded that the performance of the two approaches depend on the length of the time series as well as the sample size. the findings ofemphasizes the need for sparse models in cases where the sample size is small. in particular, when p n, penalized methods often provide better prediction accuracy.applied the lasso (or 1 ) penalty to discover the structure of graphical models based on the concept of granger causality and studied the relationship between different key performance indicators in analysis of stock prices. asymptotic and empirical performances of the lasso penalty for discovery of graphical models have been studied by many researchers and a number of extensions of the original penalty have been proposed (we refer to these variants of the lasso penalty as lasso-type penalties). in particular, to reduce the bias in the lasso estimates,proposed the adaptive lasso penalty, and showed that for fixed p, if appropriate weights are used, the adaptive lasso penalty can achieve variable selection consistency even if the so-called irrepresentability assumption is violated. in fact, it can also be shown that if initial weights are derived from regular lasso estimates, the adaptive lasso penalty is also consistent for variable selection in high dimensional sparse settings . the lasso estimate of the graphical granger model may result in a model in which x is considered to influence y in a number of different time lags. such a model is hard to interpret and inclusion of additional covariates in the model may result in poor model selection  
