genome analysis discovering novel subsystems using comparative genomics motivation: key problems for computational genomics include discovering novel pathways in genome data, and discovering functional interaction partners for genes to define new members of partially elucidated pathways. results: we propose a novel method for the discovery of subsystems from annotated genomes. for each gene pair, a score measuring the likelihood that the two genes belong to a same subsystem is computed using genome context methods. genes are then grouped based on these scores, and the resulting groups are filtered to keep only high-confidence groups. since the method is based on genome context analysis, it relies solely on structural annotation of the genomes. the method can be used to discover new pathways, find missing genes from a known pathway, find new protein complexes or other kinds of functional groups and assign function to genes. we tested the accuracy of our method in escherichia coli k-12. in one configuration of the system, we find that 31.6 of the candidate groups generated by our method match a known pathway or protein complex closely, and that we rediscover 31.2 of all known pathways and protein complexes of at least 4 genes. we believe that a significant proportion of the candidates that do not match any known group in e.coli k-12 corresponds to novel subsystems that may represent promising leads for future laboratory research. we discuss in-depth examples of these findings. availability: predicted subsystems are available atin the last decade, the use of in silico approaches to aid in the discovery of novel pathways has been facilitated by the advent of high-throughput technology. proteinprotein interactions, genetic interaction, and metabolic networks have all been used individually and in combination to find gene groups that are likely to constitute novel pathways.propose a method that uses networks of physical interactions (proteinprotein, proteindna and metabolic networks) to help interpret a set of genetic interactions. they define a pathway as a densely connected set of proteins in the network of physical interactions and use this definition to whom correspondence should be addressed. to interpret genetic interactions as being between-pathways or within-pathway. they also use the resulting pathways to predict functions of proteins that belong in pathways in which most other proteins have a common functional annotation, and to predict new genetic interactions.proposed a method to find compensatory pathways using synthetic lethal interactions. zhang and ouellette (2010) combine proteinprotein interactions, genetic interactions, domaindomain interactions and the similarity of gene ontology terms into a single network. putative pathways are then generated by searching this network for groups of proteins that share similar neighborhoods. a somewhat more modest goal than discovering completely novel pathways is to find the components of a known pathway in a new organism. several methods have been proposed to this end.present a method for finding pieces of a certain pathway in a new organism by abstracting the known instances of the pathway into functionality templates based on enzyme go functions.compare different machine learning methods for finding known pathways in new organisms based on a large set of features. the features are functions of the pathway that is being searched for as well as of the organism in which the pathways presence is being predicted. some of these features are genome context features that reflect the relative location of the genes involved in each pathway in the target genome. another method that uses genome context information for tasks related to pathway discovery is presented by. they use various genome context methods (gene reaction co-adjacency, gene neighbors, gene clusters, gene fusions and phylogenetic profiles) to identify missing enzymes in predicted metabolic pathways and to predict functional relationships. to our knowledge, all pathway discovery methods in the literature that aim to find novel pathways rely, at least partially, on interaction networks obtained from (mostly high throughput) laboratory experiments . on the other hand, as discussed above, some methods aimed at finding known pathways in new organisms have been proposed that use genome context information, although, in most cases, they also rely on experimental information. furthermore, genome context methods have been used, along with other information, to infer functional associations between proteins (see for example,). nevertheless, no further efforts toward finding pathways or functional groups from this data are made in those cases. in this work, we present a method for discovery of subsystems based on genome context methods. we consider a subsystem to be a set of genes that work together within a biological pathway or a biological process, or that form a multimeric complex.page: 2479 24782485this section presents a set of experimental results obtained by applying our method to identify novel subsystems in e.coli k-12. we used ecocyc version 14.5 which contains 944 protein complexes and 235 metabolic pathways curated from the e.coli k-12 literature, of which we only consider groups of size 3 for a total of 103 and 112 complexes and pathways, respectively. the list of reference organisms is the set of 623 bacterial genomes available in biocyc 14.5 . we show three sets of results. the first two sets evaluate the performance of the pairwise and group scores, and the last result set evaluates the performance of the system as a whole.in applying our method to the biology of e.coli k-12 as it is represented in ecocyc, we have the opportunity to discover known groups, some that are not currently formally represented, and some that are likely to be entirely novel, in addition to rediscovering groups already represented in ecocyc. groups mentioned in the following discussion were obtained with the network with edges = 0.07. the candidate numbers mentioned in this section correspond to those used in the website indicated in the abstract for the corresponding edges. they can all be found in the link corresponding to enr = 0, which is a superset of all the other sets of candidates with larger enr.  
