sequence analysis a dynamic wavelet-based algorithm for pre-processing tandem mass spectrometry data motivation: mass spectrometry (ms)-based proteomics is one of the most commonly used research techniques for identifying and characterizing proteins in biological and medical research. the identification of a protein is the critical first step in elucidating its biological function. successful protein identification depends on various interrelated factors, including effective analysis of ms data generated in a proteomic experiment. this analysis comprises several stages, often combined in a pipeline or workflow. the first component of the analysis is known as spectra pre-processing. in this component, the raw data generated by the mass spectrometer is processed to eliminate noise and identify the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and intensity for the peaks in the spectrum corresponding to the presence of certain peptides or peptide fragments. since all downstream analyses depend on the pre-processed data, effective pre-processing is critical to protein identification and characterization. there is a critical need for more robust pre-processing algorithms that perform well on tandem mass spectra under a variety of different conditions and can be easily integrated into sophisticated data analysis pipelines for practical wet-lab applications. result: we have developed a new pre-processing algorithm. based on wavelet theory, our method uses a dynamic peak model to identify peaks. it is designed to be easily integrated into a complete proteomic analysis workflow. we compared the method with other available algorithms using a reference library of raw ms and tandem ms spectra with known protein composition information. our pre-processing algorithm results in the identification of significantly more peptides and proteins in the downstream analysis for a given false discovery rate.mass spectrometry (ms)-based proteomics enables studies of the complexity and dynamics of proteins in biological systems . it involves the identification and characterization of the entire set to whom correspondence should be addressed.of proteins expressed by the genome as well as understanding changes in protein expression levels and how proteins interact with each other . increasingly, many scientific investigators are using tandem ms (ms/ms) for high-throughput protein identification and quantification. in recent years, there has been rapid development in ms technology. the development of methods, such as isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (itraq) , provides researchers with powerful techniques to determine the relative expression levels of thousands of proteins simultaneously. the precise identification of proteins is crucial in developing new diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic products for the treatment of human diseases such as cancer, asthma and diabetes . furthermore, accurate quantitative protein expression information enables scientists to reliably determine the proteins critical to specific biological functions and provides a powerful mechanism to identify disease biomarkers and to design more effective medicines . however, accurate statistical analysis of raw tandem spectrum data remains a challenging task. current statistical and computational analysis of ms data involves several challenges. after acquiring raw spectra from a mass spectrometer, it is necessary to pass through all components of a complete data analysis workflow in order to obtain the final results. the complete data analysis workflow, as illustrated in, can be sub-divided into several analysis components: spectra pre-processing, peptide and protein identification and protein quantification. the first step in pre-processing involves identifying and locating peaks within raw ms and ms/ms spectra. these peaks (where by peaks we refer to any peak-shaped signals) may correspond to the presence of peptides or peptide fragments in the sample.in this article, we examined the overall proteomic data analysis workflow and demonstrated that our newly proposed dynamic wavelet-based pre-processing algorithm is able to significantly outperform currently available ms/ms pre-processing algorithms by producing more accurate peptide and protein identifications and increasing the spectra snr. these are the key functionalities for a pre-processing algorithm. our experiments demonstrate that mass spectra pre-processing is an important component of the overall ms-based proteomic analysis, greatly affecting the downstream results. considerably more peptides and proteins can be identified with more sophisticated pre-processing algorithms. with powerful spectra pre-processing methods, the accuracy and reliability of ms-based quantitative proteomic analysis, such as isotope-coded affinity tag (icat), stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (siliac) and itraq can also be greatly improved. despite this, pre-processing has attracted less attention than the other aspects of tandem ms data analysis and there is a lack of available, reliable pre-processing algorithms for tandem ms data. therefore, we have developed our new pre-processing algorithm to address this issue. spectrum signal intensity has been the major criterion used in pre-processing (peak picking) tandem ms spectra. consequently, peptide and protein identification has been critically dependent on the spectrum signal intensity. the superior performance of dywave demonstrates that such an approach has its limitations. we have shown that using additional information about signal shape can lead to much more accurate identification and increase identification coverage. this is especially true with low precision mass spectrometers where excessive noise and spurious peaks are expected. even with high precision instruments, it is common for many peaks corresponding to real y-or b-peptide fragment ions to have relatively weak intensity, thus making them difficult to identify. this may be why our method is able to identify more peptides and proteins by taking account of additional signal shape characteristics. assessment results also demonstrate that accurate selection of the wavelet transform scale is crucial. with more accurately selected wavelet transform scales; a dynamic wavelet model can have better performance than a static wavelet method which applies wavelet transform on fixed scales. therefore, the applicability of intensitybased pre-processing becomes difficult in many real applications, and methods having stronger analytical basis, such as wavelet-based approaches, are more reliable. high-throughput tandem ms proteomic analysis is peptidecentric: the identification and quantification of proteins are inferred from the identified peptides giving rise to the observed spectra. in most cases, peptide-level analysis is an intermediate step because the ultimate goal of most experiments is to identify the proteins. however, the ease of protein identification often depends on the number and quality of the identified peptides. in comparing proteinlevel identification and peptide-level identification, the commercial software cannot consistently translate an improvement in peptide identification to an improvement in protein identification although it can identify more peptides than the predominant intensity-based approach from the tpp. our method shows a clear advantage from this perspective. this may be due to larger number of weak peptide fragment signals being identified by our method. this is hard to attain using the static wavelet method. furthermore, these weak peptide signals enable the protein database search engine to successfully assign more protein identifications. thus, we hypothesize that the successful identification of proteins is dependent on two distinct aspects: the identification of peptides from spectra and the peptide to protein assignment. one potential reason for the independence of these two aspects is ambiguities in determining the identities of proteins that share multiple peptides. thus identifying more peptides is not the only benefit we can gain from a dynamic pre-processing algorithm. by successfully recovering the weak peptide fragments from the spectra, we can greatly improve the peptide to protein assignment. as protein identification can be an error-prone exercise, the estimation of the frequency of false identification is important . the target-decoy evaluation strategy has become the most widely used means of estimating the fdr in proteomic research. this approach involves introducing answers that are known a priori to be incorrect, called decoys, to the search space. by making the assumption that incorrect identifications are uniformly distributed in the search space, one can estimate the fdr from the number of decoy hits. existing study has indicated that the target-decoy strategy is prone to underestimate the actual fdr, especially at peptide level . the underestimated fdr suggests the distribution of decoy identifications does not accurately represent the target null distribution. in other words, there is unequal likelihood of selecting an incorrect peptide match from the target database as compared to selecting a match from the reversed decoy database, even if the search algorithm is presented with an equal number of target and decoy peptides. in our comparison studies, we have demonstrated the estimated fdrs in a comparative setting are biased toward underestimating the real fdrs in the identification, even though a reversed sequence database seemingly is the logical choice for a decoy. false positive target hits have been demonstrated to be more likely than decoy hits. therefore, we should keep in mind that the real fdr is likely to be higher than the target-decoy estimated fdr. one difficulty in proteomic research is most software is proprietary and there is a lack of open alternatives. this problem significantly hinders the advance of proteomic research as proprietary software often makes collaborative research difficult. many modern bioinformatics research projects require the joint page: 2249 22422249  
