sequence analysis discretized gaussian mixture for genotyping of microsatellite loci containing homopolymer runs motivation: inferring lengths of inherited microsatellite alleles with single base pair resolution from short sequence reads is challenging due to several sources of noise caused by the repetitive nature of microsatellites and the technologies used to generate raw sequence data. results: we have developed a program, genotan, using a discretized gaussian mixture model combined with a rules-based approach to identify inherited variation of microsatellite loci from short sequence reads without paired-end information. it effectively distinguishes length variants from noise including insertion/deletion errors in homo-polymer runs by addressing the bidirectional aspect of insertion and deletion errors in sequence reads. here we first introduce a homopo-lymer decomposition method which estimates error bias toward insertion or deletion in homopolymer sequence runs. combining these approaches, genotan was able to genotype 94.9 of microsatellite loci accurately from simulated data with 40x sequence coverage quickly while the other programs showed 590 correct calls for the same data and required 5$30 more computational time than genotan. it also showed the highest true-positive rate for real data using mixed sequence data of two drosophila inbred lines, which was a novel validation approach for genotyping. availability: genotan is open-source software available at http://gen otan.sourceforge.net.since many inherited variants of microsatellite loci are known to be associated with several human diseases such as colorectal cancers and various neurological disorders , the variants can act as important biomarkers to identify risk of disease development. the advent of next generation sequencing (ngs) technologies allows for a robust comparison of large numbers of microsatellite loci from several individuals in a quick and cost-effective way which then allows the discovery and use of microsatellites as biomarkers or causative agents of disease. unfortunately, inferring precise lengths of inherited microsatellite alleles with single base-pair resolution from short sequence reads remains a challenge due to the repetitive nature of microsatellites and the technologies used to generate raw sequence data. homopolymer sequences, which are the most dominant class in the microsatellite family, are especially difficult to analyze. in this article, we discovered that 460 of microsatellite loci showing variants in a human genome contain homopolymer sequences (46 bases), which underscores the importance of properly calling the genotype for this class of polymorphism. repetitive sequences often result in insertion/deletion (indel) sequencing errors at homopolymers and incorrect mapping of sequence reads . compounding the issue, biological or technological mutants at microsatellite loci due to individual cell mutation or pcr amplification artifacts are also frequently observed. substitution errors (sequencing or biologically derived) in the repeat sequences themselves also greatly affect the quality of alignment. a few methods such as samtools , gatk and dindel can be used to genotype microsatellite loci with single base-pair resolution without paired-end information, but they have been principally designed to identify short indels in non-repeat sequences. although lobstr has been developed to profile short tandem repeat loci, it is limited to only analyzing 2$6-mer motif repeat loci. recently, repeatseq has been developed to genotype microsatellite loci, but it does not provide a training module to adjust parameters to different sequence data conditions. the genotyping programs, including dindel, employ local alignment-based methods and assume mainly sequencing errors cause the indel errors if the mapping quality is high. however distant variants at microsatellite loci often fool mapping programs into assigning high quality scores to incorrectly mapped reads when the sequence reads from the repeat loci are very different from the reference sequence, which results in incorrect genotyping. especially, accuracies of genotyping programs using a bayesian approach are significantly affected by a few incorrectly mapped reads (supplementary material). individual cell mutations and polymerase chain reaction (pcr) amplification errors also frequently alter lengths of reported microsatellites resulting in falsely calling genotypes different from the inherited alleles. in addition, as homopolymer sequences induce not only indel errors, but also substitution errors during sequencing (supplementary) and indel errors in reads containing homopolymers are to whom correspondence should be addressed. frequently recurrent in other reads mapped to the same locus (supplementary), local alignment-based approaches often fail to correctly identify inherited alleles. further, the programs weight the final call towards the reference sequence, which may result in an artificial selection against novel (non-reference) allele calls since mapping or alignment algorithms are mostly biased to the reference sequence. long homopolymers frequently induce false-positive allele calls and it is challenging to distinguish them from true variants. the reasons for homopolymer error occurrence are different for each sequencing technology. the pyrosequencing technology utilized by 454 life sciences generates high-signal intensity for a repeating sequence of a single-base type then base-calling software estimates the number of bases in the sequence proportional to that intensity (supplementary). as a result, this technology shows a higher rate of indel sequencing errors than other sequencing technologies. sanger sequencing and illumina sequencing technologies employ a dye-terminator-sequencing method which shows a significantly lower indel error rate. however, this sequencing approach also shows increased indel error rate as homopolymer length in sequence reads increases. in sanger sequencing, intensities from repetitive bases often merge to make a continuously high-signal peak or affect intensities of neighborhood peaks, thus the boundaries or heights of peaks for individual bases that compose the repeat become ambiguous (supplementary). base-calling programs for this method use spacing information estimated from unambiguous peaks to identify the number of repetitive bases from the merged intensities and can predict more or fewer bases than the actual number of bases. ilumina sequencing also has been reported to generate homopolymerrelated errors in the study of this article (supplementary) and other studies , and it may be caused by several noise factors such as lagging or leading of nucleotide extension. in this article, we utilize a gaussian distribution to compensate for a common characteristic of several different sequencing technologies, in which indel events at a single nucleotide repeat are caused by incorrect signal intensities and the chances of insertion errors and deletion errors in a repeat are proportional (when the rate of insertion errors increases, deletion errors also increases) (supplementary). bidirectional indels have also been observed from mutations at microsatellite loci caused by polymerase slippage during dna replication . to fully address this issue, we have combined the discretized gaussian mixture model with a rules-based approach to genotype length variation of microsatellites loci from short-sequence reads. the genotyping method is composed of two regression steps (and c) and a homopolymer decomposition step , which effectively filters out noise reads resulting in low false-positive and false-negative rates.our method (genotan) was compared to gatk (v1.6.9 with -t unifiedgenotyper-glm indel), dindel (v1.01 with options in supplementary materials), samtools (v0.1.18 with the varfilter post-filter) and repeaseq (v0.7.2) in genotyping performance using four different test sets including simulated data, mixed sequence data of two drosophila inbred lines, sequence data of a single drosophila inbred line and sequence data of a human sample. for the performance test, we compared indel lengths in microsatellite loci identified by the programs . in simulated datasets, true positive alleles do not have indels at multiple positions in their sequences. partial genotypes called by genotan were counted as the homozygous calls to follow the traditional classification of the other programs. lobstr could not be included in most tests since its target loci were limited (only analyzing 2$6-mer motif repeat loci).  
