systems biology discriminating response groups in metabolic and regulatory pathway networks motivation: analysis of omics experiments generates lists of entities (genes, metabolites, etc.) selected based on specific behavior, such as changes in response to stress or other signals. functional interpretation of these lists often uses category enrichment tests using functional annotations like gene ontology terms and pathway membership. this approach does not consider the connected structure of biochemical pathways or the causal directionality of events. results: the omics response group (org) method, described in this work, interprets omics lists in the context of metabolic pathway and regulatory networks using a statistical model for flow within the networks. statistical results for all response groups are visualized in a novel pathway flow plot. the statistical tests are based on the erlang distribution model under the assumption of independent and identically exponential-distributed random walk flows through pathways. as a proof of concept, we applied our method to an escherichia coli transcriptomics dataset where we confirmed common knowledge of the e.coli transcriptional response to lipid a deprivation. the main response is related to osmotic stress, and we were also able to detect novel responses that are supported by the literature. we also applied our method to an arabidopsis thaliana expression dataset from an abscisic acid study. in both cases, conventional pathway enrichment tests detected nothing, while our approach discovered biological processes beyond the original studies. availability: we created a prototype for an interactive org web tool atanalysis of omics experiments generates lists of entities (genes, metabolites, etc.) selected based on specific behavior. these lists are then analyzed using existing functional knowledge of the entities in a list by further listing the functional annotations assigned to to whom correspondence should be addressed. the members of the list. category enrichment analysis generally refers to testing the null hypothesis that the distribution of functional annotation in the entity list is similar to the distribution of functional annotation for all entities . if the null hypothesis is rejected, one or more of the functional annotations in the entity list is either over-or underrepresented, and a general functional response is inferred for the experimental treatment. most biologists mine a number of sets of genes from results that exhibit an expected behavior of biological interest. these sets are mapped to functional annotation to determine which functions are associated with the behavior in the experiment. for example, a gene expression profiling assay might be conducting on samples for both a stress condition and a control. the genes which are upregulated by a certain fold-change are selected to comprise the gene set of interest and all genes are mapped to zero or more gene ontology terms. the proportion of each term represented in the upregulated gene set is compared with its proportion in the general population of genes . alternative methods compare estimates of the expression distributions across treatments to mine category-related effects . much biological knowledge is represented as networks, whether it is ontological , regulatory (regulondb or metabolic), kegg , pathwaytools/biocyc and plant metabolic network (. this makes functional analysis much more complex than simple set comparisons, requiring more complex tools like mapman , array2kegg or kegg spider to name a few. a main problem is that pathway mining is treated as a category enrichment problem based on pathway membership alone. such an approach fails to consider the interconnectivity and reactive relationships between different entities, reactions and pathways. further, category enrichment cannot directly infer causality; if a functional annotation term is enriched in an entity list, we cannot determine whether the functional process affects the omics entities or the omics entities affect the process. other methods like nayak and de (2007) partition pathway networks, but stop where our method operates: discriminating pathway partitions or response groups. our pathway mining method does not attempt to cluster or partition the networkit assumes it has already by partitioned into response groups. with respect to comparing networks or parts of networks, many stochastic-and flow-based methods for processing networks assumewe took a subset of expression data from work investigating fab genes roles in e.coli cell membrane homeostasis and uncovered new insights supported by the literature. we clearly saw activity relevant to the cells boundary (envelope and periplasm), which is consistent with our understanding of the utility of lipid a. likewise, the set of upregulated a.thaliana genes under aba exposure tested significantly connected to stress-related responses. we compared results to two category enrichment testing methods where pathway membership according to respective biocyc databases was used to assign categories: hypergeometric tests, a simple approach which tests for category overrepresentation in the query list, and the mrpp method which tests multivariate distributions of expression across categories and has been shown to perform better than other methods . our org method detected pathways which fit existing literature while these methods detected none, which illustrates the main problem we set out to ameliorate. category  
