sequence analysis discriminative motif analysis of high-throughput dataset motivation: high-throughput chip-seq studies typically identify thousands of peaks for a single transcription factor (tf). it is common for traditional motif discovery tools to predict motifs that are statistically significant against a navenave background distribution but are of questionable biological relevance. results: we describe a simple yet effective algorithm for discovering differential motifs between two sequence datasets that is effective in eliminating systematic biases and scalable to large datasets. tested on 207 encode chip-seq datasets, our method identifies correct motifs in 78 of the datasets with known motifs, demonstrating improvement in both accuracy and efficiency compared with dreme, another state-of-art discriminative motif discovery tool. more interestingly, on the remaining more challenging datasets, we identify common technical or biological factors that compromise the motif search results and use advanced features of our tool to control for these factors. we also present case studies demonstrating the ability of our method to detect single base pair differences in dna specificity of two similar tfs. lastly, we demonstrate discovery of key tf motifs involved in tissue specification by examination of high-throughput dnase accessibility data. availability: the motifrg package is publically available via the bioconductor repository.the emergence of high-throughput sequencing technology for genome-wide profiling of transcription factor binding sites (tfbs) has made precise categorization of their dna motifs possible. harnessing the power of large quantities of data generated by this technology presents many computational challenges. motif discovery is a classical bioinformatics problem and has been an active area of research for decades. existing tools can be roughly classified as profile-based, such as meme , or pattern-based like consensus [see for a review and performance study of popular motif discovery tools]. most of these tools, however, do not easily scale to large datasets. users typically limit the motif search to top ranking peaks, thus sacrifice the power of the data, which may be critical for accurate modeling of the tfbs and for identification of cofactors. large amounts of data also increase the power to detect various non-random signals, many of which may not be directly related to the problem of interest. the new challenge is to understand the nature of motif signals and determine the relevant ones. we propose to test the motif enrichment in a foreground dataset against an explicitly stated background dataset, rather against a non-informative null distribution. the background dataset should be carefully selected to represent the systematic biases present in the foreground. discriminative motif discovery is not a new approach. pioneering work includes, but is not limited to, dme , dips and deme . these methods find a discriminative position weight matrix (pwm) to optimize an objective function, which for the case of deme and dme, is the likelihood of the data given the model and sequence class. however, the optimization procedures of many of these methods are computationally expensive, making them unsuitable for large datasets. recent works designed for high-throughput datasets use more simplified statistical models. for example, dreme [meme suite (and oligo-diff [rsat suite (use fishers exact test and peakregressor applies a linear regression model to fit peak scores by motif counts. in this study, we propose a new discriminative motif discovery algorithm motifrg that distinguishes two sequence datasets. we measure the discriminative power of a motif by a logistic regression model, which shows some similarity to dreme and peakregressor, but offers a better combination of robustness and flexibility. we also provide an effective and efficient iterative process for motif refinement and extension and apply a bootstrap robustness test to avoid over-fitting in the optimization process. the logistic regression framework offers direct to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com measurement of statistical significance, and we demonstrate by permutation tests that the associated z statistics reflect the probability of occurrence by chance. this framework also provides flexibility to handle existing bias between the two datasets, and to weight the sequences according to their importance, both important features when dealing with some challenging datasets (see section 3 for details). the method is implemented in r (r development core) bioconductor core team, and is publicly available via the bioconductor repository. we applied this method in a comprehensive motif study of 207 encode chip-seq datasets for tfbs. under the default setting, motifrg successfully discovered accurate motifs in 78 of the datasets with known motifs, demonstrating its flexibility in handling diverse applications. in many cases, biologically plausible cofactor motifs are also discovered. compared with dreme, motifrg had comparable performance at identifying the core motif, and generally ran about 40 faster. its advantages over dreme in terms of both accuracy and efficiency are more obvious for longer motifs and motifs with degenerate flanking sequences, probably due to a more effective refinement procedure. by exploring the cases where we fail to detect known motifs, we identify several common factors likely to compromise the motif search results and propose strategies that exploit the flexibility of motifrg to deal with these challenges. using one in-depth case study, we demonstrate the power of discriminative motif analysis for the study of dna binding specificity of similar members of one protein family. we also show that this tool can be applied to dnasei accessibility datasets to identify tfbs that are enriched at cell type specific accessible sites, which may act as key regulators of cell lineage specific chromatin remodeling. our method, and discriminative motif discovery in general, represents powerful tools to exploit various types of high-throughput datasets to answer many fundamental biological questions.the main challenge of traditional motif discovery is to increase signal to noise ratio due to lack of power from small input datasets. high-throughput datasets present different challenges: besides scalability concerns, they are likely to produce large numbers of statistically significant motifs due to the power of the large sample size, many of which are hard to interpret. to effectively use the motif prediction results to guide further study, it is important to understand the nature of these motifs and why they are enriched. it is well understood that genomes are far from random, which presents complicated higher order structure such as dinucleotide sequence preference, repetitive sequences, nucleosome positioning signals and so forth. genomic sequences in promoters, which usually show enrichment of tfbs, also contain different characteristics from other parts of genome such as enrichment of cpg islands, common motifs for housekeeping tfs and so forth. these factors can all cause certain sequence patterns to be enriched in a given dataset. in addition, many chip-seq and dnasei hypersensitivity studies suggest that tfs tend to colocalize on a common set of accessible regions. it is unclear if these tfs collectively determine the accessibility of the given sites or some bind non-specifically at the accessible sites. discriminative motif analysis is a powerful tool to address whether the predicted motifs are truly involved in the biological problem under study by use of a rigorous control group, a methodology frequently used in experimental design. the key to success for this method is proper choice of background, which might not be clear until we have a better understanding of factors that affects binding of tfs. by examination of a large set of chip-seq profiles, we identified some common motifs for tfs in a certain category. for example, tfs that bind predominantly in promoter regions are likely to be associated with ets, sp1 and other gc-rich motifs, and tfs with most of sites in distal regions tend to have enrichment of ap1 sites. to determine if the associated motifs are truly specific to the given tfs, we can iteratively test for potential biases as we find them, each time making the background as similar to the foreground as possible except for the defined difference under study. as accessible regions in the given cell type can be viewed as the union of all tfbs that are associated with active chromatin in that cell type, they present some generic features common to most tfbs and can serve as a good background for comparison with adjustment to other bias. further, downstream analysis can be used to validate predicted motifs. for example, direct tfbs should contain a clear dnasei digital footprinting signature and be close to the centers of chip-seq peaks . we noticed that stronger peaks tend to be associated with stronger motifs, as measured by the pwm scores, particularlythe standard deviation of motif scores for all cagctg 1 extensions based on bootstraps decreases with the proportion of true foreground. y-axis: the standard deviation. x-axis: the proportion of true foreground. (e) when motif enrichment is low, motif scores are more variable. x-axis: all 1 extensions of cagctg. y-axis: motif scores. the 95 confidence intervals are plotted based on bootstrapping mean and variance. upper panel: 160 bootstrap iterations, total sample size 32 000 and 100 of true foreground; lower panel: using 5 bootstrap iterations, total sample size 500 and only 20 of true foreground for tfs with long motifs, which is consistent with the theory that pwm scores roughly reflect the dna/protein binding affinities in vitro . in such cases, including weaker peaks usually results in more permissive motifs, lacking the full dna specificity for the strong peaks. however, recent work suggests that weak sites can be functionally important, e.g. prep1 regulates temporal expression of pax6 via a pair of low affinity dna binding sites during lens formation . our previous work also suggests that although strong peaks are more likely to be associated with gene regulation, the peak strength is not deterministic of function . several rank-based motif prediction methods designed for protein binding microarrays used the binding affinities measured by probe intensities . our method provides support for sequence weighting, with which the users have the flexibility to put more focus on a subset of sequences. these methods including our own, however, still build a single pwm motif to represent all binding sites, whereas some weaker sites are functionally more important than others with similar pwm scores. we think a mixture or higher order model may be more appropriate, a direction for our future investigations. one key feature of our method and other discriminative motif discovery tools is the support for comparison of two similar profiles. by comparison of neurod and myod, two similar bhlh proteins, we have shown that although shared core eboxes are involved in activation of chromatin, specific eboxes are more directly involved in activation of differentiation programs in neurogenesis and myogenesis, respectively . similar studies can be performed systematically to identify delicate specificity for members of other protein families that share almost identical motifs, such as the ets and foxo families. such studies may shed more light of their functional roles and evolution of protein families in general. we have also demonstrated its application to dnasei hypersensitivity data to identify key regulators involved in cell type-specific chromatin reprogramming. we can further zoom in to compare more similar samples, such as two different differentiated epithelial cells, or, before and after a certain treatment. by applying this approach systematically, we can gain deeper understanding about cell lineage restriction and differentiation program.  
