a fast algorithm for exact sequence search in biological sequences using polyphase decomposition motivation: exact sequence search allows a user to search for a specific dna subsequence in a larger dna sequence or database. it serves as a vital block in many areas such as pharmacogenetics, phylogenetics and personal genomics. as sequencing of genomic data becomes increasingly affordable, the amount of sequence data that must be processed will also increase exponentially. in this context, fast sequence search algorithms will play an important role in exploiting the information contained in the newly sequenced data. many existing algorithms do not scale up well for large sequences or databases because of their high-computational costs. this article describes an efficient algorithm for performing fast searches on large dna sequences. it makes use of hash tables of q-grams that are constructed after downsampling the database, to enable efficient search and memory use. time complexity for pattern search is reduced using beam pruning techniques. theoretical complexity calculations and performance figures are presented to indicate the potential of the proposed algorithm.decreasing costs of sequencing personal genome have opened up many avenues of research. several efforts related to personal healthcare and pharmacogenetics are attempting to use the information in an individuals genomic data towards personalization of healthcare. an important component of these solutions is the search for specific subsequences in a given genome. for example, cetuximab an epidermal growth factor receptor (efgr) inhibitor used to treat various types of cancer is ineffective if certain mutations in the kras gene (which lies in exon 2 of chromosome 12) exist. thus, a search for appropriate mutations conducted on genetic data would be vital in prescribing the most effective treatment. exact sequence search also finds application in fields such as evolutionary biology and phylogenetics where certain subsequences of dna are mined from genomic data of various species of organisms to understand their origin, relatedness and descent. in the above context, the challenge is to be able to perform fast pattern searches in whole genomes (a complete human genome contains 3 billion base pairs) and databases spanning giga to tera bytes or more. prevalent search methods use techniques that have proven to be efficient for to whom correspondence should be addressed. existing genomic sequences and databases, but do not scale up well for large datasets such as those of whole human genomes. fast and efficient search methods that scale up well for large databases are therefore of great value. in this article, we address the problem of searching for all occurrences of pattern p in a text t, where t is the reference sequence whose length can vary from several million (in case of individual chromosomes) to several billion (in case of complete genomes) bases. p is the pattern which is a few tens to a few hundred bases in length.in this article, we presented a method for fast exact sequence search that relies on downsampling and polyphase representations to expedite the search process. we also computed the complexity of the algorithm and showed it to be better than existing methods. because the proposed method uses polyphase representations, and because searching for exact matches in multiple polyphases does not have any data or functional inter-dependency, the algorithm can be parallelized. this would further reduce time complexity. implementation of a parallel version of the algorithm will be a topic of further work. the proposed algorithm addresses the problem of finding exact matches to a substring. our future research will extend the utility of this algorithm to finding approximate matches.  
