disgenet: a cytoscape plugin to visualize, integrate, search and analyze gene–disease networks one of the most challenging problems in biomedical research is to understand the underlying mechanisms of human diseases. great effort has been spent on determining genes associated to diseases . however, there is more and more evidence that most human diseases cannot be attributed to single genes but arise due to complex interactions between multiple genetic variants and environmental risk factors . several databases have been developed storing associations between genes and diseases such as online mendelian inheritance in man (omim;). each of these databases focuses on different aspects of phenotype to genotype relationships. for instance, pharmgkb is specialized on how genetic variation is related to drug response , whereas the toxicogenomics database ctd stores information about the effect of environmental chemicals on human health . hence, integration of different databases is needed to allow a comprehensive view of the state of the art knowledge within this research field. it is widely established in bioinformatics to represent associations between biomedical entities as networks and to analyze their topology to get a global understanding of underlying to whom correspondence should be addressed. relationships . cytoscape is a widely used java-based, open-source software for networks visualization and analysis . the cytoscape framework is extendable through the implementation of plugins. up to now, a vast variety of plugins has been developed ranging from advanced network analysis tools to webservices. in the following, we present disgenet, a new cytoscape plugin to query, integrate and visualize networks of human genedisease associations.disgenet is a coherent tool for easy analysis and interpretation of human genedisease networks. it allows user-friendly access to a comprehensive database comprizing genedisease associations for mendelian, complex and environmental diseases. disgenet displays genedisease association networks as bipartite graphs and provides gene centric and disease centric views of the data. it assists the interpretation and exploration of human diseases with respect to their genetic origin. diverse options for generating subnetworks, as well as an advanced search tool, facilitate not only the analysis of single diseases but also the study of sets of diseases or certain disease classes specified through their associated genes. herein, the multicolouring of gene and disease nodes offers a convenient visualization of disease classifications in the networks. we plan regular updates of the underlying genedisease association database as well as the integration of further data sources.  
