disgenet-rdf: harnessing the innovative power of the semantic web to explore the genetic basis of diseases motivation: disgenet-rdf makes available knowledge on the genetic basis of human diseases in the semantic web. gene-disease associations (gdas) and their provenance metadata are published as human-readable and machine-processable web resources. the information on gdas included in disgenet-rdf is interlinked to other biomedical databases to support the development of bioinformatics approaches for translational research through evidence-based exploitation of a rich and fully interconnected linked open data. availability and implementation: http://rdf.disgenet.org/ contact: support@disgenet.orgadvancements in experimental technologies give an unprecedented capacity of description of a patient from a molecular point of view. translational bioinformatics envisions to push forward biomedical discoveries and to enhance healthcare practice by bridging the gap between these two worlds . to create this synergistic translation between molecular data and clinical events, it is crucial a comprehensive understanding of the complex relationships between genotype, phenotype and environment that underlie human diseases. to explore these complex relationships, current biomedical research requires leveraging and linking different types of information such as genetic basis of diseases, disease biomarkers, drug therapeutic applications and side effects, or effects of exposure to environmental factors. but, this integration is challenging as the information is fragmented in resources dispersed and often technology or domainspecific or, importantly, hidden in free text. the emerging semantic web is gaining momentum in life sciences as it provides standards to set a semantic and syntactic interoperable infrastructure for data integration over the web. the increasing publication of open biomedical databases structured and interlinked using the w3c resource description framework (rdf) and web ontology language (owl) technologies through projects such as bio2rdf and the ebi rdf platform paves the way to answer more complex and sophisticated crossdomain questions. in this paper, we present disgenet-rdf a new open resource in the semantic web and a new facet of disgenet . disgenet is one of the most comprehensive databases on gene-disease associations (gdas) for the study of the molecular mechanisms underpinning human diseases. most of the gdas in disgenet (82 in version 3.0) have been identified by text mining the literature using befree , and are integrated with curated gdas from a variety of authoritative sources on human genetics data. each gda is explicitly annotated with its supporting evidence, which makes disgenet a resource of reference for evidence-based knowledge discovery. with the publication of disgenet-rdf, we aim to foster the development of bioinformatic tools to leverage biomedical big data, and to facilitate knowledge navigation and discovery to support translational research.disgenet-rdf is a new open resource to harness the semantic web for new discovery opportunities on the genetic basis of human diseases. the publication of disgenet-rdf and the implementation of an sparql endpoint offer the possibility to integrate disgenet with other lod resources to answer complex biomedical questions. disgenet-rdf web site supplies supporting documentation and query examples to help users getting started. our aim is to make disgenet information more discoverable and to integrate it with the current open life science knowledge in order to support projects on the aetiology of human diseases, drug discovery and toxicological research.  
