dissect: an assignment-free bayesian discovery method for species delimitation under the multispecies coalescent motivation: the multispecies coalescent model provides a formal framework for the assignment of individual organisms to species, where the species are modeled as the branches of the sp tree. none of the available approaches so far have simultaneously co-estimated all the relevant parameters in the model, without restricting the parameter space by requiring a guide tree and/or prior assignment of individuals to clusters or species. results: we present dissect, which explores the full space of possible clusterings of individuals and species tree topologies in a bayesian framework. it uses an approximation to avoid the need for reversible-jump markov chain monte carlo, in the form of a prior that is a modification of the birthdeath prior for the species tree. it incorporates a spike near zero in the density for node heights. the model has two extra parameters: one controls the degree of approximation and the second controls the prior distribution on the numbers of species. it is implemented as part of beast and requires only a few changes from a standard beast analysis. the method is evaluated on simulated data and demonstrated on an empirical dataset. the method is shown to be insensitive to the degree of approximation, but quite sensitive to the second parameter, suggesting that large numbers of sequences are needed to draw firm conclusions. availability and implementation:despite its alleged status as a fundamental concept in biology, the species category has lacked a definition allowing explicit testing of particular species limits (e.g.). in recent years however, several methods have been proposed for the task of delimiting species based on molecular data (see fujita et al.and miralles and vencesfor reviews). multispecies coalescent species delimitation (mscsd) methods make use of multi-locus sequence data to make inferences in the presence of incomplete lineage sorting. all current mscsd methods are either heuristic (e.g. o), dependent on a guide tree (e.g.; note however that a paper by yang and rannalaappeared during the revision of this article, where the requirement of a user-supplied guide tree is eliminated) or are validation methods, which require prior assignment of individuals to clusters or species.devised parametric and non-parametric heuristic methods to simultaneously find an optimal assignment of individuals to species and their tree relationships. yang and) developed the idea in a bayesian framework, in which the gene trees are co-estimated with a constrained species tree. in the simplest option, species are inferred by setting a threshold on the posterior node heights of the species tree, with small heights interpreted as evidence for collapsing a node. this is similar to using beast with each individual in its own species in the xml file, and estimating the actual species afterwards. the dimensionality of the parameter space does not change, and there is no special prior involved. here, we take a bayesian approach, which has the advantage that nuisance parameters can be integrated out, and also that prior taxonomic knowledge can be taken to account. our approach does not require prior assignments of individuals to putative species, and may be viewed as species tree inference while taking uncertainties in mscsd into account. we present division of individuals into species using sequences and epsilon-collapsed trees (dissect) for species delimitation which requires no prior assignment of individuals to clusters or species, but instead explores the full space of possible clusterings and tree topologies. it is along the lines of the method of yang and rannala (2010) which employs a user-supplied guide tree in which some nodes may be collapsed (i.e. all descendants of these nodes assigned to one species). in the most recent version of bp&p , there is no need for the user to supply a guide tree. instead, the guide tree space is explored using nearest-neighbor interchange moves. the two operations of collapsing a node, and of setting its height to zero, have the same effect on the likelihood, since the multispecies coalescent density is the same for a single population and a population which has just split at time 0. when a node is collapsed, the dimensionality of the parameter space changes, so a reversible-jump markov chain monte carlo (rjmcmc) algorithm is needed to sample the species trees. the basic idea behind dissect is to sample trees in which each tip represents a single individual (or a cluster of individuals which definitely belong in one species), but replace the usual prior density on node heights with one which includes a spike near zero. the dimensionality of the parameter space is fixed, but nodes whose heights have a high posterior probability of being within the spike can be interpreted as probably collapsed.results for the first set sim-5x5 are shown in. in general, increasing the number of genes from 3 to 9 increases accuracy, and it is almost perfect for nine genes in the easy cases, where the shortest branches of the species trees are five coalescent units (c in). however, with 27 genes, accuracy goes down at least for the easy case. checking the trace files and effective sample sizes (esss) revealed poor convergence of these runs. the effect of varying the prior for x shows no obvious effect on accuracy, except possibly a small increase in the posterior probability with increasing k (see supplementary data). results for the second set sim-1 are shown in. the point estimates were always correct, except in one replicate with nine genes, medium amount of lineage sorting, and eight individuals. there were no false splits with high posterior probabilities. the posterior probability of the correct clustering increases with g, but shows no clear effect with varying number of individuals i. however, when running the same analyses with x $ beta(n1,1), meaning that the prior probability of one species is 0.5, accuracy increases with the number of individuals (supplementary data).. the boxplots show the values of the error metric over 50 replicates as the number of genes (g 3, 9, or 27), the amount of lineage sorting (shortest branches of species tree a 0.2, b 1.0, c 5.0 coalescent units) and prior on x (b82: beta $ (8,2) hyperprior, k 3, 5 or 8) vary. epsilon is 0.0001, and 50 000 000 mcmc generations for each replicate, with first 50 discarded as burn-in. the boxplots show the values of the error metric over 50 replicates as the number of genes (g), and the number of individuals (i) vary when there is only one species. there is a x $ beta(8,2) hyperprior. epsilon is 0.0001, and 50 000 000 mcmc generations for each replicate, with first 50 discarded as burn-ingiven the intrinsic theoretical and empirical difficulties of the problem, any success would be surprising. (o). we believe that dissect is a useful step forward on the theoretical and computational side. the multispecies coalescent model has assumptions that are likely to be violated and it remains to be seen how important these are for empirical data. we have not formally evaluated the accuracy of the species trees produced by dissect. however, apart from the approximation involving e, and the slightly different prior on the tree root height, the dissect model, when conditioned on a particular clustering z, is equivalent to beast using z to assign individuals to species. this means that dissect can be used as in a regular beast analysis, taking uncertainties in species delimitation into account. the new version of bp&p, which appeared as advance access late in the review process of this article has similar properties, and the accuracy of the two approaches may now be compared.  
