dissect: detection and characterization of novel structural alterations in transcribed sequences motivation: computational identification of genomic structural variants via high-throughput sequencing is an important problem for which a number of highly sophisticated solutions have been recently developed. with the advent of high-throughput transcriptome sequencing (rna-seq), the problem of identifying structural alterations in the transcriptome is now attracting significant attention. in this article, we introduce two novel algorithmic formulations for identifying transcriptomic structural variants through aligning transcripts to the reference genome under the consideration of such variation. the first formulation is based on a nucleotide-level alignment model; a second, potentially faster formulation is based on chaining fragments shared between each transcript and the reference genome. based on these formulations, we introduce a novel transcriptome-to-genome alignment tool, dissect (discovery of structural alteration event containing transcripts), which can identify and characterize transcriptomic events such as duplications, inversions, rearrangements and fusions. dissect is suitable for whole transcriptome structural variation discovery problems involving sufficiently long reads or accurately assembled contigs. results: we tested dissect on simulated transcripts altered via structural events, as well as assembled rna-seq contigs from human prostate cancer cell line c4-2. our results indicate that dissect has high sensitivity and specificity in identifying structural alteration events in simulated transcripts as well as uncovering novel structural alterations in cancer transcriptomes. availability: dissect is available for public use at: http://dissectthe transcriptome refers to the complete collection of rna sequences transcribed from portions of the genome; these include not only mrnas but also non-coding rnas. genomic structural alterations involving transcribed regions of the genome will appear in the associated transcript sequences. although the whole transcriptome is much smaller than the whole genome, in the context of structural alterations, rna-seq data can be more difficult to analyze, partially due to splicing, which can produce several transcripts from the same gene. in comparison to the wildtype transcripts, post-transcriptional processes can also introduce structural alterations into these sequences. to analyze structural variation within transcriptomic highthroughput sequencing (hts) data (a.k.a. rna-seq) one typically needs to find the most likely transcript-to-genome alignment under the possibility of structural alteration events such as: (i) internal duplications, which result in two separate segments in the transcript sequence aligning to the same segment of the genomic sequence; (ii) inversions, which result in a segment of the transcript sequence aligning to the opposite strand of the genome than the rest of the transcript in an inverted fashion; (iii) rearrangements, which result in a change of ordering of the aligned segments; and (iv) fusions, which result in the transcript sequence aligning to two genes that are on two different chromosomes or far apart on the same chromosome . note that an inversion can be of the type (i) suffixinversion (or prefix-inversion), which involve a single breakpoint, where a suffix of the transcript sequence aligns to the strand opposite of that of the corresponding prefix; and (ii) internal-inversion, which involves a pair of breakpoints, where the portion of the inverted transcript sequence aligns to the strand opposite to that of the flanking portions. several studies have detected such transcriptomic structural alterations in eukaryotic species , including mice , rats and humans . these structural alterations are rarely observed in healthy human tissues and their normal roles have not been determined. however, specific instances of transcriptomic structural alterations (which can be a result of genomic alterations or transcriptomic processing) have been correlated with disease states, especially in cancer . several high-throughput methods for detecting structural alterations by analyzing mappings of rna-seq reads have been developed , mostly focusing on fusions, partially due to their abundance in cancer, but also due to the relative ease of identifying them computationally. as hts technologies progress, the length of the read-sequences they produce grows dramatically, and is expected to continue growing to over 1000 bp per read. a longer read has a greater possibilityrepresent the transcript, g and s represent two genomic regions. g is the complementary strand for g. boundaries between red and green blocks indicate event breakpoints; arrows represent corresponding genomic transitions in the alignment. apart from the event types shown in the figure, duplication events can appear as non-tandem and fusions can be between two different strands of containing segments from more than two exons, complicating the process of mapping such a read. existing structural alteration detection tools are limited by their reliance on read-mapping tools designed for the short read-sequences produced by the original hts technologies; they cannot take advantage of increasing read length. furthermore, the increase in read length improves the accuracy of de novo transcriptome assembly tools, leading to opportunities for the analysis of full transcript sequences.we first report the performance of dissect on simulation datasets derived from ncbi refseq transcript sequences and known gene gene structure database , which are subjected to nucleotide-level substitution/indel noise with varying frequencies, novel oligonucleotide sequence insertions, and structural alterations at different length distributions, including exon duplications, inversions, rearrangements and transcripttranscript fusions. to demonstrate the performance of dissect on real human transcriptome data, we report on an rna-seq dataset comprising 50 bp reads from the prostate cancer cell line c4-2, assembled through trans-abyss transcriptome assembler .  
