bioinformatics discovery note systems biology distinction immune genes of hepatitis-induced heptatocellular carcinoma motivation: hepatitis b virus and hepatitis c virus are the two leading causes resulting in hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc). it is observed that hepatitis c virus (hcv) is relatively difficult to induce hcc compared with hepatitis b virus (hbv). this motivates us to reveal the reasons behind this from the viewpoint of immune genes. results: to distinguish the immune genes with low-level expression in hbv-induced hcc, but high-level expression in hcv-induced hcc, the concept of distinction immune gene is proposed. a filter is then designed to screen these genes. by using gene positive network with strong correlations between genes, the genes are further filtered to form the set of key distinction immune genes. the 23 key distinction immune genes are screened, which are divided into four clusters, t cells, b cells, immune signalling and major histocompatibility complex. it is evident that the screened genes are important immune genes, which are activated in hcv-induced hcc, but inactivated in hbv-induced hcc. in hcv-induced hcc, the structures of hcv adaptively update, so that they are difficult to be identified by antigens. therefore, the clinic advice is either to increase the update speed of antigens or reduce the update speed of the viruses during the treatment of hcv-induced hcc. moreover, it is also advised to add t cells or add the expression levels of t cells to strengthen the ability to kill cancer cells. in contrast, hbv updates slowly, but the immunity system in hbv-induced hcc has been damaged seriously. as a result, the clinic advice is to improve the immune ability of patients subjected to hbv-induced hcc, such as increasing immunoglobulin, t cells and b cells and so forth. contact:hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc) accounts for 7085 of primary liver cancers, ranking it at the fifth position among the most common malignancies worldwide and in the third position as a cause of cancer death . hcc is a devastating tumour, with a mean survival of much less than one year if left untreated hcc. more than 500 million people worldwide are persistently infected with the hepatitis b virus (hbv) and/or hepatitis c virus (hcv), who are at a risk of developing chronic liver diseases, cirrhosis and even hcc . increasingly, experimental evidences suggest that viruses, such as hbv and hcv, contribute to hcc by directly modulating pathways that promote the malignant transformation of hepatocytes . hcv infection is one of the major risk factors for hcc. however, cancer arises in only a subset of patients, which takes several years to develop. therefore, the role of hcv in the aetiology of cancer has remained elusive . hcv may activate the immune system, for instance, natural killer cells are activated by the hcv . it is also noticed that hcc may escape adaptive immune responses . in addition, cirrhosis is a transition state from normal liver to tumorigenesis in hcv-induced hcc . there is a strong incentive to seek key immune genes and identify the relationship between these genes and hepatitisinduced hcc. motivated by this, a filter is designed to screen these genes, and experiments are implemented by using the data from the stanford database . according to the experiments results and analyses, clinical recommendations are finally given for the treatments of hcv-induced hcc and hbv-induced hcc. equation-based dynamic network model and graph-based gene community network are usually used to model gene networks. in this study, gene community network will be used to describe gene networks.the main contribution is summarized as follows.  
