disvis: quantifying and visualizing accessible interaction space of distance-restrained biomolecular complexes we present disvis, a python package and command line tool to calculate the reduced accessible interaction space of distance-restrained binary protein complexes, allowing for direct visualization and quantification of the information content of the distance restraints. the approach is general and can also be used as a knowledge-based distance energy term in fft-based docking directly during the sampling stage. availability and implementation: the source code with documentation is freely available from https://github.com/haddocking/disvis.structural characterization of protein complexes is of paramount importance for a fundamental understanding of cellular processes, and with major applications in rational drug design. as the quantity of experimentally determined complexes is only a fraction of their total predicted number, complementary computational techniques have been developed for predicting the structure of complexes from their components . additional low-resolution information in the form of distance restraints can significantly benefit the modeling, with a variety of experimental methods providing such information, such as chemical cross-links detected by mass spectrometry (ms) , and distance measurements from electron paramagnetic resonance (epr) and fret . when two biomolecules are known to interact and no highresolution model is available, the structure of the complex can naively be any one state where the molecules are in contact. we define the accessible interaction space of the complex as the set of all these states. if a distance restraint is imposed on the complex, the accessible interaction space reduces, depending on the information content of the restraint. the interaction space is further reduced if multiple restraints are included. so far, however, no computational method has been reported that quantifies this reduction or allows to visualize this accessible interaction space. to aid in this task, we have developed disvis, a gpu-accelerated python software package and command line tool (disvis) for quantifying and visualizing the accessible interaction space of distancerestrained binary complexes. disvis takes as input two atomic structures and a file with distance restraints, and outputs the sum of complexes complying with a given number of restraints together with a density showing the maximum number of consistent restraints at every position in space. this indicates whether all data are consistent and can be combined without violations, and allows identification of false positives, quantification of the information content of the restraints and visualization of interesting regions in the interaction space. the method is generic and can easily be incorporated into existing fast fourier transform (fft)-accelerated docking programs as a distance-dependent energy function, allowing the marriage made in heaven of direct sampling and scoring of fft-generated docking poses at a small computational cost.  
