dixa: a data infrastructure for chemical safety assessment motivation: the field of toxicogenomics (the application of -omics technologies to risk assessment of compound toxicities) has expanded in the last decade, partly driven by new legislation, aimed at reducing animal testing in chemical risk assessment but mainly as a result of a paradigm change in toxicology towards the use and integration of genome wide data. many research groups worldwide have generated large amounts of such toxicogenomics data. however, there is no centralized repository for archiving and making these data and associated tools for their analysis easily available. results: the data infrastructure for chemical safety assessment (dixa) is a robust and sustainable infrastructure storing toxicogenomics data. a central data warehouse is connected to a portal with links to chemical information and molecular and phenotype data. dixa is publicly available through a user-friendly web interface. new data can be readily deposited into dixa using guidelines and templates available online. analysis descriptions and tools for interrogating the data are available via the dixa portal. availability and implementation: http://www.dixa-fp7.euduring the last decade, technology developments as well as new legislation, ethical considerations and concerns about the reliability and relevance of traditional animal experimentation for toxicity testing, have led to the expansion of the field of toxicogenomics . many projects worldwide have generated large amounts of toxicogenomics data, but so far, there is no centralized repository collecting, curating and maintaining all these data. to make sure data are easily accessible and do not disappear over time, we developed the data infrastructure for chemical safety assessment (dixa), a database and web interface providing access to toxicogenomics datasets and analysis. while several toxicogenomics projects made their data already available via public databases (e.g. arrayexpress, geo, expression atlas), data from other projects are more difficult to access. moreover, toxicogenomics data are generally deposited in isolation, not as structured sets. there are several reasons for this, among others: non comparable experimental designs, different technology platforms and different data (pre)processing steps. furthermore, available metadata for public data sources are often insufficient for data reuse. dixa aims to overcome these drawbacks by defining standard workflows for data (pre)processing and standard formats for metadata annotation. these standards are applied to the dixa data through servicing. moreover, dixa integrates information from toxicology, chemistry and human disease databases alongside the original data, helping interpretation of data analysis results and increasing the relevance for evaluating toxicity. combining data sets from different sources centrally can provide important information about experimental design and mechanistic interpretations. when all relevant data for a study are available in a public repository, a remaining challenge is to integrate these data in order to get a better understanding of the entire biological system . data from different platforms and different technologies are very heterogeneous in terms of experimental conditions, species, noise levels, time scales and linearity of response . as a consequence, integrating data from different sources requires new data analysis methodologies . here we describe dixa, a database providing access to toxicogenomics data from different sources and data analysis tools.  
