dlrs: gene tree evolution in light of a species tree prime-dlrs (or colloquially: delirious) is a phylogenetic software tool to simultaneously infer and reconcile a gene tree given a species tree. it accounts for duplication and loss events, a relaxed molecular clock and is intended for the study of homologous gene families, for example in a comparative genomics setting involving multiple species. prime-dlrs uses a bayesian mcmc framework, where the input is a known species tree with divergence times and a multiple sequence alignment, and the output is a posterior distribution over gene trees and model parameters. availability and implementation: prime-dlrs is available for java se 6 under the new bsd license, and jar files and source code can be downloaded fromthe surge in bayesian phylogenetic methods over the last decade can be attributed to their ability to achieve more realistic models as well as a solid track record for resolving outstanding biological issues . recently, the interplay between gene family evolution and species phylogenies has gained particular attention, partly owing to the information that gene trees may confer on unresolved species relationships and also because it can shed light on orthology and paralogy of genes. with sophisticated conventional phylogenetic models burgeoning, it is therefore not surprising that there is a growing interest to extend them to a setting entailing both gene trees and species trees.by incorporating information on the species tree, prime-dlrs significantly improves on conventional species tree unaware approaches when inferring gene trees . in a kerborg et al., the method was shown to be self-consistent on artificial data generated in accordance with the model. in the same article, the significance of species tree guidance and a relaxed molecular clock was demonstrated on biological data utilizing a predicted whole-genome duplication in yeast. these findings have been further corroborated by the ability to classify syntenic one-to-one orthologs in drosophila (supplementary material). unlike certain similar approaches that take the species tree into consideration (e.g.), prime-dlrs requires no a priori derivation of clock relaxation parameters and can be run on individual gene families. moreover, as demonstrated in the supplementary material, by inferring and , the model can provide estimates of genome-wide evolutionary duplication and loss rates. the bayesian property of yielding a posterior distribution not only implicitly brings forth a confidence measure on gene trees but also provides an important step toward probabilistic orthology analysis when considering the reconciliation of the gene trees with the species tree (and supplementary material).  
