structural bioinformatics dman: a java tool for analysis of multi-well differential scanning fluorimetry experiments differential scanning fluorimetry (dsf) is a rapid technique that can be used in structural biology to study protein ligand interactions. we have developed dman, a novel tool to analyse multi-well plate data obtained in dsf experiments. dman is easy to install and provides a user-friendly interface. multi-well plate layouts can be designed by the user and experimental data can be annotated and analysed by dman according to the specified plate layout. statistical tests for significance are performed automatically, and graphical tools are also provided to assist in data analysis. the modular concept of this software will allow easy development of other multi-well plate analysis applications in the future. availability and implementation: dman is implemented in java to provide a cross-platform compatibility. it is freely available to academic users at http://www.structuralchemistry.org/pcsb/. to download dman, users will be asked for their name, institution and email address. a manual can also be downloaded from this site. contact:assays in multi-well plate formats have become very popular and are frequently employed in laboratories in different disciplines of the life sciences. due to their wide applicability, uv/vis absorbance and fluorescence emission measurements are the most common readouts in such assays. in the area of structural biology, differential scanning fluorimetry (dsf) has established itself as a tool to assess protein stability in the context of structurefunction studies, but most importantly to rapidly identify low molecular weight ligands that bind to the protein of interest . due to the relatively low amounts of sample required, and the parallel measurement of many conditions on one multi-well plate, dsf also lends itself as a first-line screening method for potential small molecule ligands in structure-based drug discovery, including fragment-based drug design. dsf experiments are typically conducted with a real-time polymerase chain reaction (pcr) instrument, where the protein sample is mixed with an additive to be screened and the fluorescence to whom correspondence should be addressed. dye sypro orange that shows enhanced fluorescence emission in hydrophobic environment . the dye binds to the exposed hydrophobic residues of proteins in their unfolded states, and thus serves as a reporter to monitor thermally induced protein unfolding. analysis software for any instrument-acquired data is provided by the manufacturers and shows varying degrees of convenience and user-friendliness. in case of dsf, analysis of data from some instruments requires subsequent application of several different software programs, therefore making the entire process rather cumbersome. we set out to design a simple-to-use and portable java application, dman, which enables analysis of dsf data on multi-well plates with any user-chosen layout of replica. typically, biochemical measurements are done in triplicate. in order to prevent instrument-biased systematic errors due to non-uniform temperature distribution across the pcr block, we prefer to measure replica data on one plate, with the individual replica mixtures spread over the plate. the java application reported here can analyse these repetitions, given the particular plate layout, and perform standard statistical tests.the graphical user interface of the stand-alone java application dman possesses four tabbed panels . on the first panel, input parameters, the user needs to specify the data file and its origin (i.e. instrument type), the plate layout (provided as an ascii text file), the output file, a title and description of the assay, the temperature range of the experiment and the slope threshold. the user can also specify the t m threshold and the outlier cutoff, which are used during analysis to evaluate the  
