a fast and robust statistical test based on likelihood ratio with bartlett correction to identify granger causality between gene sets we propose a likelihood ratio test (lrt) with bartlett correction in order to identify granger causality between sets of time series gene expression data. the performance of the proposed test is compared to a previously published bootstrap-based approach. lrt is shown to be significantly faster and statistically powerful even within non-normal distributions. an r package named ggranger containing an implementation for both granger causality identification tests is also provided.temporal association between genes in time series expression data can be studied through the identification of granger causality . granger causality in time series data was mathematically formalized byand later implemented to a multivariate framework by, allowing the identification of conditional relationships. recently,proposed the application of granger causality to identify relationships between sets of genes, i.e. to identify if a set containing n genes granger causes another set with m genes. their main goal is to create networks representing pathway-level connections that could help the understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying biological processes. in the above-mentioned work, the authors propose a bootstrap procedure to test and identify granger causality. despite the usefulness of the bootstrap method to identify/test granger causality, it to whom correspondence should be addressed. is computationally intensive, becoming particularly slow when accurate p-values are required. to overcome this drawback, here we propose an analytical approach based on likelihood ratio test (lrt). for time series experiments containing less than 100 points, we also propose a bartlett correction in order to improve the asymptotic approximation of the statistics. two simulations were carried out in order to evaluate the performance of the proposed lrt with bartlett correction-based test. first, since the granger causality between sets of gene expression time series data is a generalization of the multivariate version proposed by, it is necessary to know if the proposed lrt is as good as the classic walds test in terms of statistical power in a multivariate context by using the vector autoregressive (var) model (simulation 1). the second simulation consists in comparing the performance of the proposed test with the previously published bootstrap-based method in a context where one would like to identify granger causality between sets of time series data. the results show that: (i) the lrt is equivalent to walds test in the multivariate model in terms of statistical power; (ii) the lrt is much faster and has a higher statistical power than the bootstrap method (when analyzing sets of time series data); and (iii) both the lrt and bootstrap can control the rate of false positives even under non-normal noises. an r package named ggranger containing the identification method for granger causalities, the bootstrap procedure and the lrt with bartlett correction is provided.):  
