genome analysis mirna mosquito supervised machine-learning approaches are frequently applied on biological data to learn a regression or classification model, whether used for prediction, classification or for gaining an understanding on the biological process that has generated the data (larranaga et al., 2006). arguably however, it is sometimes the case that sophisticated and complicated methods are employed , published and advocated as advances without a comparison even against the simplest baseline methods. we consider a baseline method as the simplest method that an expert analyst can conceive within a few minutes of consideration of the problem and does not require any engineering or scientific ingenuity or novelty. a baseline can take the form of comparing against predicting by the mean of the outcome on a known dataset, without use of any special predicting variables, or comparing against random guessing. because of this lack of comparison, the added-value of the sophisticated methodsif anyis not quantified; it remains unknown whether the extra effort for implementing or applying it is worth. a false perception about the difficulty of the problem may be created. we now present an example of the above argument on the problem of identifying the position of mirna mature molecules on their precursor rna molecules, which typically have a hairpin like secondary structure. in the cell, the mirna precursor is first cut into a complex of two substring sequences (strands) with high complementarity called the 5 0-strand and the 3 0-strand. the complex is called the mirna:mirna duplex defined by its four corners denoted as k 55 , k 53 , k 35 and k 33 corresponding to the 5 0-strand 5 0-end, 5 0-strand 3 0-end, 3 0-strand 5 0-end and 3 0-strand 3 0-end positions, respectively (fig.comparing against the simplest possible method as a baseline in data analysis is an important step of the analysis. foregoing this step may result in unnecessary effort and energy spent in code developing, publishing and evaluations by future researchers, unnecessary use of computationally expensive methods and a false impression about their benefits and added value they provide in a given task. as an example we show that using the mean positions in predicting the four corners of a mirna duplex complex outperforms some state-of-the-art methods and is on par with the rest when trying to predict the exact location of the duplex with zero tolerance.  
