systems biology dose: an r/bioconductor package for disease ontology semantic and enrichment analysis disease ontology (do) annotates human genes in the context of disease. do is important annotation in translating molecular findings from high-throughput data to clinical relevance. dose is an r package providing semantic similarity computations among do terms and genes which allows biologists to explore the similarities of diseases and of gene functions in disease perspective. enrichment analyses including hypergeometric model and gene set enrichment analysis are also implemented to support discovering disease associations of high-throughput biological data. this allows biologists to verify disease relevance in a biological experiment and identify unexpected disease associations. comparison among gene clusters is also supported. availability and implementation: dose is released under artistic-2.0 license. the source code and documents are freely available through bioconductorcharacterizing disease-disease relationships and mining gene-disease associations provides insights in analyzing high-throughput data to elucidate molecular mechanisms of complex diseases. understanding similarities among diseases and among genes in disease context helps in early diagnosis, drug repurposing, and new drug development. investigating gene-disease associations with gene lists obtained by high-throughput experiments helps exploring biological questions in disease context and discovering unanticipated functions. disease ontology (do) provides a consistent description of genes in disease perspectives. to provide researchers with more accessible of disease knowledge, the do database supplies a web browser for users to explore do vocabularies while disease and gene annotations database supplies a web interface for mapping genes and diseases. do is organized as a directed acyclic graph, laying the foundation for computation of disease knowledge using semantic similarity algorithms. there are many generic quality tools for computation of semantic measures including sml, simpack, semmf, owlsim and similarity library (http://goo.gl/ 3xcuj6). these generic libraries can be employed to analyze do semantic similarities. dosim was designed specific for do, but the authors fail to maintain the package. functional do (fundo) implemented hypergeometric test to assess significant of do associations with a gene list. however, fundo doesnt allow users to customize the background set of genes and thus may introduce biases in the results. to address the shortcoming of lack of r/bioconductor package that designed for computation of semantic and enrichment analyses based on do, we present dose, that allows measuring semantic similarity among do terms and genes using several information-content and graph-structure based algorithms. for evaluating functional associations with gene lists of highthroughput genomic and proteomic studies, dose supports hypergeometric test and gene set enrichment analysis (gsea), which incorporate expression level measurements to extract disease relevance of biological experiments. more importantly, dose provides several do-specific visualization functions to produce highly customizable, publication-quality figures of similarity and enrichment analyses that are not available elsewhere. with these visualization tools, the results obtained by dose are more interpretable.  
