genome analysis dragon tis spotter: an arabidopsis-derived predictor of translation initiation sites in plants in higher eukaryotes, the identification of translation initiation sites (tiss) has been focused on finding these signals in cdna or mrna sequences. using arabidopsis thaliana (a.t.) information, we developed a prediction tool for signals within genomic sequences of plants that correspond to tiss. our tool requires only genome sequence, not expressed sequences. its sensitivity/specificity is for a.t. (90.75/92.2), for vitis vinifera (66.8/94.4) and for populus trichocarpa (81.6/94.4), which suggests that our tool can be used in annotation of different plant genomes. we provide a list of features used in our model. further study of these features may improve our understanding of mechanisms of the translation initiation. availability and implementation: our tool is implemented as an artificial neural network. it is available as a web-based tool and, together with the source code, the list of features, and data used for model development, is accessible at http://one of the objectives of bioinformatics is to identify important biological signals in genomic sequences. the translation initiation site (tis) is one such signal in mrna that denotes the start codon at which translation initiates. accurate recognition of tis signals can help in discovery of protein-coding genes and improve annotation of gene loci . in genomic dna, signals that correspond to tiss consist of the atg triplet of nucleotides, except for the rare cases of acg or ctg triplets . in this study, we focus solely on the recognition of atg motifs within dna that correspond to genuine tis signals. we will refer to the atg triplets as tis motifs. our study addresses prediction of tis motifs in plant species. recognizing dna motifs in genomic sequences that correspond to genuine tis signals is much more complex than recognizing them in mrna or cdna sequences, which was the main focus so far. pertea and salzberg achieved accuracy of 84 on both arabidopsis thaliana (a.t.) and human genomic sequences . sparks and brendel developed metwamer tools, achieving an accuracy of 85 on a.t. open reading frame sequences . in this study, using a.t. information, we developed a model for predicting tis motifs within plant genomic dna sequences, and we generated a number of features to characterize the genomic surroundings of these motifs. some of these features have already been used for related tasks , but we introduced a number of new features not previously used for tis predictions. out of all the features initially considered, we selected 47 as the best set of features for the tis motif recognition task. our feature selection is based on a wrapper method that uses a genetic algorithm (ga) and an artificial neural network (ann). there are other studies that deal with the generation and selection of features for the tis recognition, for example . to the best of our knowledge, our tis predictor is the only publicly available one for plants. the sensitivity/specificity of our model for a.t. is 90.75/92.2 and is the highest compared with those reported in the literature. the accuracy tests on chromosomes of other plant genomes show sensitivity/specificity for vitis vinifera of 66.8/94.4, and populus trichocarpa of 81.6 / 94.4. the web-based tool that implements our algorithm and our datasets are freely accessible at http://cbrc.kaust.edu.sa/dts.  
