sequence analysis drawþsneakpeek: analysis workflow and quality metric management for dna-seq experiments we report our new drawsneakpeek software for dna-seq analysis. dna resequencing analysis workflow (draw) automates the workflow of processing raw sequence reads including quality control, read alignment and variant calling on high-performance computing facilities such as amazon elastic compute cloud. sneakpeek provides an effective interface for reviewing dozens of quality metrics reported by draw, so users can assess the quality of data and diagnose problems in their sequencing procedures. bothnext-generation sequencing (ngs) has redefined what big data means in biomedical research. advances in quality and capacity have led to a declining cost of implementation, allowing ngs to be used in a wide range of experiments at a variety of scales; from a few samples in small laboratories to thousands of samples from multi-institute collaborations. processing terabytes of data requires a certain level of information technology and bioinformatics expertise, which can be daunting to small laboratories with limited resources. the programs we developed will enable these groups to process dna-seq data and identify singlenucleotide variants and small insertions and deletions (indels). our software suite consists of dna resequencing analysis workflow (draw) and sneakpeek, two independent interoperable components . draw automates the entire workflow of whole-genome/whole-exome dna-seq data processing from mapping sequence reads to calling variants. sneakpeek is a quality metrics management system for reviewing the sequencing quality of multiple samples across different flow cells. it displays dozens of quality metrics per sample collected throughout draw on a dynamic web interface and is a useful diagnostic tool for trouble-shooting unsatisfactory sequencing results. we used drawsneakpeek to process whole-genome sequencing, whole-exome sequencing (wes) and targeted sequencing experiments on traditional high-performance computing clusters as well as on amazon elastic compute cloud (ec2). draw was used to analyze part of the wes data for a multiinstitutional autism study and more than 500 exomes/genomes for human and caenorhabditis elegans in our laboratories. supported by the third-party programs, jobs will be distributed in parallel computing environment to expedite the process. a complete run of draw produces analysis-ready read alignment bam files, annotated variant call variant call format files and a flat file of 36 quality metrics ready for sneakpeek (section 3). should errors occur, the completed steps can be skipped during the re-execution. this modularity reduces potential waste of time and cost on unnecessary repeated jobs.  
