databases and ontologies drophea: drosophila phenotype enrichment analysis for insect functional genomics drophea is a core module of a web application that facilitates research in insect functional genomics through enrichment analysis on mutant phenotypes of fruit fly (drosophila melanogaster). the phenotypes investigated in the analyses can be predefined by flybase or customized by users. drophea allows users to specify mutation or ortholog types, displays enriched term results in a hierarchical structure and supports analyses on gene sets of all insect species with a fully sequenced genome.enrichment analysis is a promising strategy for investigators to biologically interpret gene lists obtained from high-throughput studies in the post-genomic era. among the backend annotations employed in different enrichment tools (see review in), mutant phenotype annotation is unique because it represents the consequence of altering the information output of a gene. therefore, annotations of phenotypes are an ideal means to aid in the understanding of how a set of genes function within the context of the whole organism. studies in fruit-fly biology were first documented in the early 1900s ; over the last century, drosophila has become one of the most widely used model organisms for animal genetics and developmental biology. as an insect species, in addition to basic genetics studies, drosophila has served as a model to assist in agricultural and epidemiological investigations. the richness and comprehensiveness of fly omics data have been invaluable to many fields of biology. currently, the proportion of mutated and phenotyped fly genes (36.9; 5606 of 15 191 genes mapped to the genome) is approaching that of the house mouse (mus musculus) [40 of the genes comprising the mouse genome have been phenotyped;. however, with the exception of the house mouse , an enrichment tool based on mutant phenotypes of another species has never been developed. some bioinformatic tools for insect genomics, such as flymine , to whom correspondence should be addressed. do not implement mutant phenotype data. insects and mammals diverged from each other 900 million years ago . due to the substantial anatomical, physiological, developmental and behavioral differences between insects and mammals, it is challenging to utilize mammalian phenotypes to explore insect functional genomics. we therefore developed drophea (drosophila phenotype enrichment analysis). similar to mamphea, a phenotype enrichment tool for analyses on mammalian genes , drophea provides several useful features. first, drophea allows enrichment analysis not only on phenotypes predefined by flybase (http://flybase.org/), but also on customized phenotypes to study complex traits. second, different types of mutations exhibit distinct impacts on protein function; to remove potential biases caused by the use of data derived from differential mutagenesis approaches , drophea enables users to perform analyses that exclude phenotypes derived from gain-of-function mutations. third, drophea generates graphical and downloadable output displaying the enriched or depleted phenotypes according to the hierarchical structure of the phenotypic classification. finally, due to the paucity of phenotypic data in insect species other than drosophila melanogaster, drophea supports analyses of genes orthologous to d.melanogaster for all insect species with a fully sequenced genome (17 to date). through integration with mamphea, drophea is also capable of analyzing mammalian genes.  
