drugcomboranker: drug combination discovery based on target network analysis motivation: currently there are no curative anticancer drugs, and drug resistance is often acquired after drug treatment. one of the reasons is that cancers are complex diseases, regulated by multiple signaling pathways and cross talks among the pathways. it is expected that drug combinations can reduce drug resistance and improve patients outcomes. in clinical practice, the ideal and feasible drug combinations are combinations of existing food and drug administration-approved drugs or bioactive compounds that are already used on patients or have entered clinical trials and passed safety tests. these drug combinations could directly be used on patients with less concern of toxic effects. however, there is so far no effective computational approach to search effective drug combinations from the enormous number of possibilities. results: in this study, we propose a novel systematic computational tool drugcomboranker to prioritize synergistic drug combinations and uncover their mechanisms of action. we first build a drug functional network based on their genomic profiles, and partition the network into numerous drug network communities by using a bayesian non-negative matrix factorization approach. as drugs within overlapping community share common mechanisms of action, we next uncover potential targets of drugs by applying a recommendation system on drug communities. we meanwhile build disease-specific signaling networks based on patients genomic profiles and interac-tome data. we then identify drug combinations by searching drugs whose targets are enriched in the complementary signaling modules of the disease signaling network. the novel method was evaluated on lung adenocarcinoma and endocrine receptor positive breast cancer, and compared with other drug combination approaches. these case studies discovered a set of effective drug combinations top ranked in our prediction list, and mapped the drug targets on the disease sig-naling network to highlight the mechanisms of action of the drug combinations. availability and implementation: the program is available on request.cancers are complex diseases regulated by interactions of multiple signaling pathways interacting with each other. though there are some anticancer drugs, they are often not curative and associated with acquired drug resistance. it is believed that a single drug can target only one disease signaling module, whereas alternative signaling pathways will be activated to maintain tumor development. for example, in melanoma, the selective braf inhibitor, plx4032, can induce tumor responses in the majority of patients with braf v600e mutant melanoma, but the duration of this response is limited owing to the development of acquired resistance, which may be due to alternative pathways parallel to the braf-mek-erk signaling pathway . to reduce the drug resistance effect, and improve cancer treatment outcomes, drug combinations are considered as an optimal option. the ideal drug combinations expected by clinicians are combinations of food and drug administration (fda)-approved drugs or existing bioactive compounds that have entered clinical trials and passed safety tests. these drug combinations could be used by patients without toxic side effects. drug combination prediction has been a challenging task in computational biology, despite a few studies in the area. the genetic algorithm was, for example, proposed to find the optimal combinations of a small number of drugs based on the experimental results . the method, however, is not able to identify optimal drug combinations from a large set of drugs, as it requires experimental validations in the prediction process. the machine learning-based approach was proposed to classify drugs into combinations based on molecular and pharmacological features of drugs . however, the features of drugs are too general to be informative, and the method does not integrate the rich genomic profiles of drugs and disease into consideration. combinatorial drug assembler (cda) was developed to identify drug combinations based on enrichment analysis of genomic profile data. however, the enrichment analysis implemented in the method is based on differentially expressed genes, disease driver genes are not clearly defined, so that drugs targeting the causal dysfunctional signaling modules of disease maybe missed out . to overcome the aforementioned problems, we propose a novel computational tool, drugcomboranker, for predicting drug combinations targeting multiple signaling modules of cancer-specific networks through integrative analysis of genomic profiles of both drugs and cancers. to whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. the author 2014. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.comwe have applied the bnmfd algorithm to cluster the drug drug network into overlapping drug communities.lists the parameters in the analysis. we set a as one of 10,50,100,150,200,250,300,350,400,450, and b to be equal to a. when a and b are set to be 450, the bnmfd algorithm will converge more quickly. under this setting of a and b, we test the drug network community reconstruction results with different k and , as k = 100,110,120,130,140,150,160,170 and =f1; 2g. when k is 150 and is 1, we get better drug community structures in terms of the following defined community quality measurements. we assign the number from 1 to 150 to each drug community, and obtain the drugtarget networks by connecting the drugs in the same community through their targets. the connected drugtarget networks provide us a useful way to drug discovery.  
