druge-rank: improving drug–target interaction prediction of new candidate drugs or targets by ensemble learning to rank motivation: identifying drugtarget interactions is an important task in drug discovery. to reduce heavy time and financial cost in experimental way, many computational approaches have been proposed. although these approaches have used many different principles, their performance is far from satisfactory, especially in predicting drugtarget interactions of new candidate drugs or targets. methods: approaches based on machine learning for this problem can be divided into two types: feature-based and similarity-based methods. learning to rank is the most powerful technique in the feature-based methods. similarity-based methods are well accepted, due to their idea of connecting the chemical and genomic spaces, represented by drug and target similarities, respectively. we propose a new method, druge-rank, to improve the prediction performance by nicely combining the advantages of the two different types of methods. that is, druge-rank uses ltr, for which multiple well-known similarity-based methods can be used as components of ensemble learning.the identification of drugtarget interactions is a crucial process in drug discovery, which can facilitate the understanding of drug action mechanism, disease pathology and drug side effect . using biochemical experiments to identify these interactions is a reliable, yet expensive and time-consuming approach. in fact, the cost of developing a new fda approved drug has doubled every 9 years since 1950, with only around 20 drugs approved by fda per year . furthermore, there exist a huge number of unexplored compounds and human proteins, which makes it impossible to examine their interactions effectively by experimental approaches. for instance, there are over 35 million chemical compounds in pubchem database, and only less than 7000 have proteinidentifying drugtarget interactions of new, unknown drugs or targets is a very challenging task, where interactions of new drugs or targets are unavailable. previous methods can be divided into two groups, feature-and similarity-based methods. druge-rank incorporates the outputs of similarity-based methods as features to improve the prediction performance. this point has not been considered in any existing work including those using ltr. our experimental results clearly demonstrated that the novel combination of similarity-and feature-based methods such as druge-rank is significantly better than independent approaches. moreover, drugerank provides a robust framework to integrate other types of information to improve the accuracy of drugtarget interaction prediction. compared with drug and target features, pair features from the similarity based component methods are the key to improve the performance of druge-rank. a common assumption behind similaritybased methods is that similar drugs (targets) are likely to interact with similar targets (drugs). we validated this assumption in drugbank data analysis. in addition, we compared the drugs highly predicted by component methods directly, confirming that component methods in druge-rank can provide diverse results and are complement to each other. this must contribute to the performance improvement of druge-rank. currently we select the component methods by considering their accuracy, diversity and efficiency. with the increase of possible component methods, an interesting problem would be how to automatically choose the most suitable component methods. we found that identifying interactions of new drugs is more difficult than the one of new targets, which is consistent with previous study . this suggests that the action mechanism of drug is complicated, where one drug may have multiple types of targets and sometimes similar drugs may have different mechanisms. in this case, druge-rank would be particularly useful since drugerank can integrate the diverse component methods effectively for better performance. in fact, the performance improvement over the component methods by druge-rank for a new drug is much higher than the one for a new target. another interesting discovery is that relative low prediction performance on fda experimental drugs. one main reason is that the ratio of drugtarget interaction for experimental drugs is much lower than the one for fda approved drugs (training data). many non-interaction pairs might be false negatives. druge-rank can be used to predict top drugtarget pairs as the promising candidates for further experimental verification.we have developed druge-rank to improve the performance of predicting drugtarget interactions of new drugs or targets. the idea of druge-rank are three folds: (i) the problem of predicting drugtarget interactions can be modeled as a multilabel classification task; (ii) this problem can be suitably solved by using ltr, a powerful feature-based machine learning approach, which converts multilabel classification to label ranking; (iii) the outputs of cutting-edge similarity-based machine learning methods can be features like drug and target features, all being able to be the input of ltr. druge-rank outperformed all competing methods, in both cross-validation and several independent test scenarios, which demonstrate the predictive advantage of druge-rank. in addition, in contrast to previous studies with a small number of targets, all known interactions in drugbank have been used in this work, indicating the thoroughness and validity of our results. overall we believe that this highperformance software, druge-rank will contribute to the development of pharmaceutical sciences and relevant industry.  
