drug-induced adverse events prediction with the lincs l1000 data motivation: adverse drug reactions (adrs) are a central consideration during drug development. here we present a machine learning classifier to prioritize adrs for approved drugs and pre-clinical small-molecule compounds by combining chemical structure (cs) and gene expression (ge) features. the ge data is from the library of integrated network-based cellular signatures (lincs) l1000 dataset that measured changes in ge before and after treatment of human cells with over 20 000 small-molecule compounds including most of the fda-approved drugs. using various benchmarking methods, we show that the integration of ge data with the cs of the drugs can significantly improve the predictability of adrs. moreover, transforming ge features to enrichment vectors of biological terms further improves the predictive capability of the classifiers. the most predictive biological-term features can assist in understanding the drug mechanisms of action. finally, we applied the classifier to all 20 000 small-molecules profiled, and developed a web portal for browsing and searching predictive small-molecule/adr connections. availability and implementation: the interface for the adverse event predictions for the 20 000 lincs compounds is available at http://maayanlab.net/sep-l1000/.adverse drug reactions (adrs) are harmful or unpleasant unintended side effects resulting from drug intervention . adrs are a major concern for both public health and the drug development process. failure to identify severe adrs in clinical trials can lead to significant morbidity, and drugs withdrawn from the market can carry a substantial negative economic impact . despite such harmful consequences, adrs can provide useful information about drug/humanphenotype relationships . adrs and human diseases can often overlap. for example, common adr phenotypes, such as neuropathy or long-qt syndrome, can manifest as genetically inheritable diseases . therefore, better understanding drug/humanphenotype connections from a network perspective can lead to improved understanding of human diseases. various efforts have been made to predict adrs using the properties/ attributes of drugs. generally, the attributes of drugs used so far to predict adrs can be categorized into two types: (i) those that mostly consider the chemical aspect of the drug, and (ii) those that consider the biological aspects of the drug. once such attributes are organized into attribute tables, a binary classification problem can be established for each adr. initially, chemical features of drugs alone were used to predict the association between drugs and their known adrs under the assumption that adrs may correlate with the chemical fragments of the drugs that induce them . for example, were able to map the chemical substructure of drugs, described by the extended connectivity fingerprints (ecfps), to different system organ classes adrs defined by the medical dictionary for regulatory activities (meddra) .extending this method a step further used the 881-bit pubchem/cactvs (chemical algorithms construction, threading and verification system) chemical fingerprints as drug attributes, and sparse canonical correlation analysis (scca) to improve the predictive classification of adrs. using the biological feature space approach (showed that drugs with similar adr profile tend to share similar protein targets. similarly, gene-adr connections were elucidated through a text-mining effort byplaced targets of drugs in the context of human-curated biological pathways to predict adrs; whereasused drug-induced gene expression (ge) changes in human cell lines from the connectivity map to predict adrs. datasets generated from large-scale nih-funded multi-institute projects such as library of integrated network-based cellular signatures (lincs) and ctd2 produce rich information about the response of different types of human cells to drug and smallmolecule perturbations. for instance, for the lincs project, members of the broad institute utilized the l1000 technology to profile ge changes before and after treating many different types of human cells with a large panel of fda-approved drugs and other smallmolecule compounds. integration of such data to predict adrs can improve the quality of predictions as well as lead to new insights about drug mechanisms of action. the primary aim of this study is to develop an unbiased, high-performance predictive model for adrs that is scalable to thousands of preclinical compounds. to fulfill this aim, we developed a machine learning classifier that primarily utilizes the ge data from the lincs l1000 project to predict adrs. the advantage of using this newly available ge dataset to predict adrs lies in its comprehensiveness, and the void of literature research focus biases that exist for target, pathway, and protein protein interaction (ppi) knowledge. in this way, we can circumvent the limitation of the target-based approach to adr prediction that dominates the field. moreover, our classification model is scalable to predict adrs for all small-molecule compounds that have ge data profiled by applying the small molecules to treat human cells in a dish.drug safety is central to public health and drug development. in this study, we presented a scalable computational approach that improves the prediction of adrs using the newly available lincs l1000 dataset. the classifier we developed only requires the molecular structureand ge profiles for small molecules, so it can be applied to a large panel of investigational drug-like compounds to prioritize their potential adrs. this alleviates the requirement of knowing the targets of the potential drug which are difficult to identify, and when they are known, such knowledge is often partial. therefore, we reason that target-based predictive models are heavily dependent on the size, completeness and quality of drug-target datasets. however, targetbased information may help to alleviate the incapability of ge-based models to predict certain adrs. despite the scalability of the classifiers we developed, we are aware that some adrs cannot be predicted by our model. this can be due to several reasons: the adrs can be a result of a systemic malfunction that cannot manifest at the cellular ge level; the receptors for the drugs are not present in the profiled cell lines, the adrs are highly dose-dependent, and the drug may be processed and metabolized into various forms before inducing its global adr effect. although in our approach we do not predict which individuals may be more susceptible to manifest a side effect for a specific drug, our enrichment vector approach takes a step in this direction. the genes that are differentially expressed by the drugs that have known association with the side effect could contain single nucleotide variants that may predispose individuals to manifest the adrs, or expression signatures from individual patients in their response to drugs can be mapped to predict adrs in individuals. such hypotheses remain to be evaluated once we have sufficient data about associations between individuals, their sequenced dna and rna, and their propensity to manifest adrs for specific drugs. it should be noted that although we used sider and faers as gold standards to predict adrs, such resources are not set in stone and should not be considered as 100 reliable. the classifiers that we developed can potentially systematically fill in the gaps between established drugadr associations and new ones predicted from the data. overall, we have developed a potentially useful resource, and we present ideas on how to link cellular molecular expression signatures with the human phenotype. although we have focused on the prediction of adrs, with some simple modifications, a similar approach can be used to predict novel indications for drug repurposing as well as to identify new drugs and small molecules for the treatment of many diseases.  
