databases and ontologies drugmap central: an on-line query and visualization tool to facilitate drug repositioning studies systematic studies of drug repositioning require the integration of multi-level drug data, including basic chemical information (such as smiles), drug targets, target-related signaling pathways, clinical trial information and food and drug administration (fda)-approval information, to predict new potential indications of existing drugs. currently available databases, however, lack query support for multi-level drug information and thus are not designed to support drug repositioning studies. drugmap central (dmc), an online tool, is developed to help fill the gap. dmc enables the users to integrate, query, visualize, interrogate, and download multi-level data of known drugs or compounds quickly for drug repositioning studies all within one system. availability: dmc is accessible at http://r2d2drug.org/dmc.aspx.drug repositioning has emerged as a cost-effective and timeefficient strategy to find new indications for old drugs . because development of a new drug is time consuming (1215 years), expensive (4$1 billion), and has a low success rate (between 1/10 000 and 1/5000), researchers are applying more systematic approaches to address new treatment opportunities by using the available multi-level data and information of known drugs, including their chemical structures, targets, target-related signaling pathways, clinical trial information and fda-approval information. several available databases have been developed for the aim of supporting drug repositioning research, including pharmdb (http://pharmdb.org), promiscuous (von) and drugpredict . however, clinical trial and fda-approval information as well as signaling pathway information are often missing from these available drug-repositioning databases. it is inconvenient and time-consuming for researchers without any pharmacological background to interrogate and assimilate these multi-level drug data distributed across different data sources for drug repositioning studies. moreover, these data often do not share consistent entry names. when a specific biological question is asked, e.g. which drugs that are not in clinical trial phase ii or later phases target on the her2 pathway, the researcher has to go to different databases to check the data of clinical trials, targets and pathways. in this article, we present a united data source, drugmap central (dmc), with online visualization interfaces to query and search the integrated drug data quickly. furthermore, dmc integrates the standardized disease information from mesh (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/) into clinical trial and fda-approval information to facilitate checking known disease information of drugs or compounds for drug repositioning studies. the unique multi-level drug data with visualization interfaces are available at http://r2d2drug.org/dmc. aspx with testing demos.  
