drug repositioning based on comprehensive similarity measures and bi-random walk algorithm downloaded from motivation: drug repositioning, which aims to identify new indications for existing drugs, offers a promising alternative to reduce the total time and cost of traditional drug development. many computational strategies for drug repositioning have been proposed, which are based on similarities among drugs and diseases. current studies typically use either only drug-related properties (e.g. chemical structures) or only disease-related properties (e.g. phenotypes) to calculate drug or disease similarity, respectively, while not taking into account the influence of known drugdisease association information on the similarity measures. results: in this article, based on the assumption that similar drugs are normally associated with similar diseases and vice versa, we propose a novel computational method named mbirw, which utilizes some comprehensive similarity measures and bi-random walk (birw) algorithm to identify potential novel indications for a given drug. by integrating drug or disease features information with known drugdisease associations, the comprehensive similarity measures are firstly developed to calculate similarity for drugs and diseases. then drug similarity network and disease similarity network are constructed, and they are incorporated into a heterogeneous network with known drugdisease interactions. based on the drugdisease heterogeneous network, birw algorithm is adopted to predict novel potential drugdisease associations. computational experiment results from various datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach has reliable prediction performance and outperforms several recent computational drug repositioning approaches. moreover, case studies of five selected drugs further confirm the superior performance of our method to discover potential indications for drugs practically. availability and implementation: http://github.com//bioinfomaticscsu/mbirw. contact:the last decades have witnessed impressive advances in genomics, life sciences and technology. however, drug discovery process is still time consuming, risky and tremendously expensive . even with the continuously increasing investments of research and development (r&d), the number of new drugs approved by the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) has been declining since the late 1990s . in light of the challenge in traditional drug discovery, identifying new indications for existing drugs, also known as drug repositioning or drug repurposing, has attracted increasing interests from both the pharmaceutical industry and research community . drug repositioning can speed up the process of drug development and reduce risk, as repositioning candidates have already passed all necessary tests common to de novo drug discovery and development. therefore, drug repositioning has consequently become a major strategy and played a key role in drug discovery and development. in addition, several successful repositioned drugs (e.g. sildenafil, thalidomide, raloxifene) have generated historically high revenues for their patent holders or companies . the goal of drug repositioning is to find potential new uses for existing drugs and apply the newly identified drugs to the treatment of diseases other than the drugs originally intended disease . recently, some computational methods have been proposed to predict direct drugdisease associations for drug repositioning. for example, chiang and butte (2009) developed a network-based, guilt-by-association method, to predict potential drugdisease associations. this methodology recommended the novel use of a drug based on the assumption that if two diseases share some similar treatment profiles, then the drugs used for only one of the two diseases could also be used for the other. however, the method is biased toward both older drugs with diverse uses and diseases with diverse treatments.conducted multiple drugdrug and diseasedisease similarity measures to construct discriminate features, and implemented a classification algorithm named predict to predict novel drug indications.constructed a weighted disease and drug heterogeneous network based on known diseasegene and drugtarget relationships, and applied network clustering to identify drug candidates.proposed a novel heterogeneous network model which integrated drug repositioning and target prediction into one unified computational framework. based on the framework, an iterative algorithm was developed to rank candidate drugs for each disease.developed a network-based prioritization method named drugnet, which simultaneously integrated information about diseases, drugs and targets to perform drugdisease and diseasedrug prioritization.formulated drug disease association prediction problem as recommending preferable diseases for drugs and adopted two existing recommendation methods, probs and heats, to infer drugdisease associations directly. most of these approaches usually perform drugdisease prediction by exploiting drug similarity and disease similarity, while similarity measures are often based on some important drug-or disease-related properties. however, previous studies seldom utilized the known drugdisease interaction information of dataset for defining similarity measures, and yet can be exploited to improve similarity measures. in this study, we present a novel prediction method mbirw, which adopts effective mechanism to measure similarity for drugs and diseases, respectively, and applies bi-random walk (birw) algorithm to predict potential indications for existing drugs. in the new similarity measures, similarity calculated based on drug-or disease-related properties is improved in two aspects. first, as previous studies have found that weak similarity provides little information for interaction inference, we adjust those weak similarities which are not informative for drugdisease prediction by correlation analysis. second, two drugs are considered to be more similar if they have common indications, or there exist other drugs which have common indications with them simultaneously. drugs and diseases are clustered based on their shared commons, and similarity for drugs or diseases which belong to the same cluster is adjusted. whats more, as it has been demonstrated better performance than other random-walk methods on disease gene prioritization, birw algorithm is adopted to predict potential associations between drugs and diseases in this study. furthermore, we compare and evaluate the performance of mbirw on various datasets by adopting common metrics. experimental results demonstrate that mbirw has the superior capability to discover potential disease indications for drugs.  
