drug repositioning by integrating target information through a heterogeneous network model motivation: the emergence of network medicine not only offers more opportunities for better and more complete understanding of the molecular complexities of diseases, but also serves as a promising tool for identifying new drug targets and establishing new relationships among diseases that enable drug repositioning. computational approaches for drug repositioning by integrating information from multiple sources and multiple levels have the potential to provide great insights to the complex relationships among drugs, targets, disease genes and diseases at a system level. results: in this article, we have proposed a computational framework based on a heterogeneous network model and applied the approach on drug repositioning by using existing omics data about diseases, drugs and drug targets. the novelty of the framework lies in the fact that the strength between a diseasedrug pair is calculated through an iterative algorithm on the heterogeneous graph that also incorporates drug-target information. comprehensive experimental results show that the proposed approach significantly outperforms several recent approaches. case studies further illustrate its practical usefulness. availability and implementation:traditionally, drug discovery and drug development mainly rely on cell-based or target-based screening of chemical compounds to identify a small subset of hits, properties of which are then studied to further increase their affinity, efficacy and selectivity, before moving forward to animal tests and clinical trials . even with advance in technology and knowledge about the molecular bases of diseases, the whole process of drug development is still lengthy, expensive and with high-failure rates. it is estimated that the cost for developing a new drug is $$1.8 billion dollars, and the average time is $13.5 years . drug repositioning, which aims to identify new indications of existing drugs, offers a promising alternative to reduce the total time and cost because of existing safety, toleration and efficacy data on known drugs . several successfully repositioned drugs (e.g. sildenafil) have generated significant revenues for their patent holders/ companies. the generation of large-scale genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic data and their integration with signaling and metabolimic data in a network framework have provided new insights of molecular basis of complex diseases and have enabled a network-based view of drug discovery and development . the emergence of network medicine not only offers more opportunities for better and more complete understanding of molecular complexities of diseases , but also serves as a promising tool for identifying new drug targets and establishing new relationships among diseases that enable drug repositioning . since these earlier works, many computational approaches have been proposed either for target prediction or drug repositioning , many of which have used network-based algorithms. in many of these studies, drug target prediction and drug repositioning were treated as two separate tasks. we argue that by incorporating target information directly into drug repositioning, we can potentially make more meaningful predictions. the underlying assumption is based on the principle of rational drug design: therapeutic effect of chemical compounds on diseases is through their binding to biological targets that are relevant to diseases themselves. although it is not feasible to fully adopt the rational drug-design strategy in large-scale systematic assessment of relationships among all drugs and all diseases, it is a promising direction to include target information in drug repositioning. this principle has been recognized by many researchers (e.g.). what is lacking is a systematic approach to automatically integrate drugtarget information into drug repositioning. in this article, we propose a novel heterogeneous network model that seamlessly integrates drug repositioning and target prediction into one unified framework. the full heterogeneous graph model consists of three different types of nodes: diseases, drugs and drug targets . diseasedrug relationships and drugtarget relationships are constructed based on prior knowledge from existing databases such as drugbank . diseasedisease, drugdrug and targettarget relationships are constructed based on their similarities. the drug to whom correspondence should be addressed. repositioning is thus formulated as a missing edge prediction problem on this heterogeneous graph. an iterative updating algorithm that propagates information across the network is then developed to solve the missing edge prediction problem. our approach is based on the guilt-by-association principle that has been validated repeatedly in many studies, including studies on drug repositioning . a unique characteristic of our framework is that it automatically incorporates drug-target information into drugdisease association prediction. although the primary goal of this article is to investigate the drug repositioning problem, it is also worth noting that by using the newly proposed heterogeneous model and the iterative updating algorithm, new drugtarget relationships will also be automatically constructed simultaneously. when only diseases and drugs are considered or only drugs and targets are considered, the triple layer model is reduced to a two-layer model. the two-layer model using drugs and targets for target prediction was investigated by our group in a recent paper, and its iterative updating algorithm was termed heterogeneous graph based inference (hgbi) . the same algorithm can also be used for the two-layer model consisting of diseases and drugs for drug repositioning. however, it cannot be directly extended to the tree-layer model, which will be the focus of this study. to evaluate the newly proposed three-layer model (termed tl_hgbi, for triple layer heterogeneous graph based inference) for drug repositioning, we will compare its performance with the performance of the two-layer model consisting of only diseases and drugs by using the hgbi algorithm originally developed for drug target prediction . the evaluation is mainly based on leave-one-out cross-validation (loocv) experiments on large-scale omics data from existing databases [e.g. drugbank, omim (. three additional stateof-the-art approaches, namely, gba , blm and nbi are also included in the comparison. although blm and nbi (hgbi as well) were originally developed for drugtarget association prediction, the algorithms have been used on drug disease association prediction and can naturally be applied on drug repositioning. experimental results show that tl_hgbi performs the best with highest auc (area under the receiver operating characteristic, i.e. roc curve). in particular, when focusing on the top 1 predicted drugdisease associations, tl_hgbi successfully retrieves 304 interactions of 1382 true diseasedrug interactions, whereas hgbi, blm and nbi retrieve 290, 15 and 2 such interactions. furthermore, in a case study of five different diseases, many of the top-ranked drugs are strongly supported by recent literature, knowledge of which was not included in the experiment.in this article, we have proposed a three-layer heterogeneous graph model that captures inter-and intrarelationships among diseases, drugs and targets, with the purpose of novel drug usage prediction. based on this framework, we have developed an iterative algorithm to obtain final proximity scores between diseases and drugs, which can be used to rank candidate drugs for each disease. experimental results on diseases with and without known drugs have shown that tl_hgbi outperforms other three popular methods, as well as the two-layer model proposed earlier by our group. in particular, tl_hgbi is more useful in practice than other approaches tested here because of its topranked drugs consisting of many true drugdisease relationships. a case study on five diseases using all existing data indicates that results obtained by tl_hgbi can be of high importance, supported by existing literature. one should notice that there exist many other types of data (e.g. side effect information of drugs, gene expression data) that can also be used to predict drugdisease/drugtarget associations (e.g.). some existing methods (e.g. predict by) have used different datasets in predicting diseasedrug associations, which makes it impractical to directly compare their performance with the performance of the proposed approach. in addition to datasets, there are different ways in defining relationships among nodes of the same type. for example, connections between targets can be defined based on proteinprotein interaction data or based on protein structural information (e.g. focusing on binding domains). disease relationships can be defined based on ontology. the relative merits using different metrics are worth further investigations. nevertheless, valuable information has been lost for approaches not considering relationships among nodes of the same type . we plan to address both issues in our future work by extending the proposed framework in several possible directions. to include more diverse datasets of different types (other than the three discussed here), one direct extension is to add more layers (and more links) to the system. the key is then how to generalize the iterative updating algorithm to the new multi-layer model. in the case where additional datasets can actually be treated as properties of one of the three entities, another possible extension is to represent drugs/diseases/proteins using feature vectors, the elements of which will be defined based on those additional datasets. for example, to incorporate drug side effect information, each drug will be presented by a feature vector, which may include drug compound structure, drug side effect information and some other properties. for each drug pair, one score is calculated for each feature. scores of all features will be converted into percentile-based scores in a similar way as we did in an earlier study for gene prioritization based on multiple data sources . drugdrug relationships can then be defined based on the most significant score. similarly, gene expression information and protein interaction information can be incorporated into the protein/target layer. essentially, the relationships between the same types of nodes are redefined based on more data sources. another possible direction is to incorporate semantics . finally, both diseases and targets can be separated into different subclasses based on their mechanisms. it will be interesting to see how the performance will change when we only include subsets of data with the same mechanism. eventually, wet lab experimental testing is a necessary step to validate the proposed approach, which cannot be done without collaborations with investigators with expertise in biochemistry and drug development.  
