drug-set enrichment analysis: a novel tool to investigate drug mode of action motivation: automated screening approaches are able to rapidly identify a set of small molecules inducing a desired phenotype from large small-molecule libraries. however, the resulting set of candidate molecules is usually very diverse pharmacologically, thus little insight on the shared mechanism of action (moa) underlying their efficacy can be gained. results: we introduce a computational method (drug-set enrichment analysisdsea) based on drug-induced gene expression profiles, which is able to identify the molecular pathways that are targeted by most of the drugs in the set. by diluting drug-specific effects unrelated to the phenotype of interest, dsea is able to highlight phenotype-specific pathways, thus helping to formulate hypotheses on the moa shared by the drugs in the set. we validated the method by analysing five different drug-sets related to well-known pharmacological classes. we then applied dsea to identify the moa shared by drugs known to be partially effective in rescuing mutant cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (cftr) gene function in cystic fibrosis. availability and implementation: the method is implemented as an online web tool publicly available at http://dsea.tigem.it.large collections of small-molecules can be automatically screened against a desired phenotypic effect. automated experimental screening approaches include high-content screening (hcs) and high-throughput screening (hts) , with different advantages and limitations, and a screening capacity that ranges from thousands to millions of compounds per assay. screening assays can be performed either to identify lead compounds binding a specific molecular target, or inducing a specific phenotype of interest. a common drawback of automated molecular screening is the opacity of the hit compound selection mechanism. indeed, the set of positive hits following an hts or hcs typically includes small-molecules with unknown mode-of-action (moa) or whose moa are so different from each other, that no hint on the shared molecular mechanisms underlying their efficacy can be gained . the difficulty in characterizing a set of screening hits resides in the complexity of their interactions within the cell. molecules binding the same molecular target can induce different phenotypes caused by unknown off-targets. on the contrary, molecules binding different targets can induce the same phenotype, when they act in the same pathway . nonetheless, among the heterogeneous effects induced by the hit compounds in the cell, there could exist a common mechanism responsible for their efficacy in the screening selection. here, we introduce a new method, named drug-set enrichment analysis (dsea), that aims at identifying the mechanism(s) of action shared by a set of compounds in terms of the molecular pathways targeted by all, or most of them.  
