drug target prediction using adverse event report systems: a pharmacogenomic approach motivation: unexpected drug activities derived from off-targets are usually undesired and harmful; however, they can occasionally be beneficial for different therapeutic indications. there are many uncharacterized drugs whose target proteins (including the primary target and off-targets) remain unknown. the identification of all potential drug targets has become an important issue in drug repositioning to reuse known drugs for new therapeutic indications. results: we defined pharmacological similarity for all possible drugs using the us food and drug administrations (fdas) adverse event reporting system (aers) and developed a new method to predict unknown drugtarget interactions on a large scale from the integration of pharmacological similarity of drugs and genomic sequence similarity of target proteins in the framework of a pharmacogenomic approach. the proposed method was applicable to a large number of drugs and it was useful especially for predicting unknown drugtarget interactions that could not be expected from drug chemical structures. we made a comprehensive prediction for potential off-targets of 1874 drugs with known targets and potential target profiles of 2519 drugs without known targets, which suggests many potential drugtarget interactions that were not predicted by previous chemogenomic or pharmacogenomic approaches.most drugs are molecules that interact and interfere with an appropriate protein target implicated in a disease of interest. drugs may also interact with additional proteins (off-targets hereafter) that are not their primary therapeutic targets, resulting in unexpected side effects. drug side effects are complex phenomena attributed to many molecular scenarios (e.g. metabolism disorder, downstream pathway perturbations), among which the interaction with off-target proteins is the most important cause . unexpected drug activities derived from off-targets are usually undesired and harmful; however, they can occasionally be beneficial and lead to different therapeutic indications. for example, sildenafil (viagra) was developed to treat angina, but it is now used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction.there are many drugs whose target proteins (including the primary target and off-targets) have not yet been characterized. the identification of all potential targets for a given drug has become an important issue in drug repositioning to reuse known drugs for new therapeutic indications. experimental testing to identify drugtarget interactions is a very expensive and time-consuming process, and thus there is a strong incentive to develop new in silico prediction methods, which will enable to limit experimental testing. in recent years, the field of chemogenomics has rapidly gained importance, primarily exploring the relationship between the chemical space of possible compounds and the genomic space of possible proteins . a variety of in silico chemogenomic methods have been developed to predict drugtarget or compoundprotein interactions on a genome-wide scale . the underlying idea is that similar ligands are likely to interact with similar proteins, and prediction is performed based on chemical structures of ligand compounds, protein sequences of targets and the currently known compoundprotein interactions. another promising approach is to use pharmacological information such as drug side effects and adverse drug reactions. the use of side effect similarity has been recently proposed to infer whether two drugs share a target . this method requires drug package inserts that describe the detailed side effect information, so it is applicable only to marketed drugs for which side effect information is provided. to overcome this limitation, several methods have been proposed to predict unknown side effects from chemical structures . these methods are useful when chemical structures and side effects are correlated with each other to some extent; however, there are still some drugtarget interactions that cannot be explained or predicted using these methods. recently, the adverse event reporting system (aers) in the us food and drug administration (fda) has been gaining a lot of attentions for computational applications of pharmaceutical analyses. aers is a spontaneous reporting system that routinely collects adverse drug event reports from patients, clinicians and pharmaceutical companies in order to support the fdas postmarketing safety surveillance program for all approved drugs and biological products. one of the advantages of using aers over package inserts is that the users need not wait for the sufficient amount of adverse effect incidents to occur in order to be written on the package inserts. an algorithm has been developed to identify hidden drugdrug interactions (ddis) in adverse eventreports , and the same authors detected ddis between paroxetine and pravastatin which increases blood glucose levels . a data-mining technique has been used to analyze adverse event profiles of platinum agents, and it was observed that acute renal failure was also more predominant forcisplatin, and carboplatin did not increase the blood level of creatinine . these previous works highlight the usefulness of aers for pharmaceutical and clinical research. in this article, we propose pharmacological similarity for all possible drugs using aers and develop a new method to predict unknown drugtarget interactions on a large scale from the integration of pharmacological similarity of drugs and genomic sequence similarity of target proteins in the framework of a pharmacogenomic approach. the advantages of using the aersbased pharmacological similarity stem from the availability of information for a much larger number of drugs, compared with the other more specific resources (e.g. sider and japic) used in the previous works, and unexpected drug targets can be identified only through safety surveillance program and adverse drug events reported in the post-marketing study practice. in the results, we predict drugtarget interactions involved in many protein families, and show the usefulness of our proposed method for predicting unknown drugtarget interactions which cannot be expected from analyzing drug chemical structures. to our knowledge, this is the first report to predict drug targets using aers. a comprehensive prediction of drugtarget interaction networks enables us to suggest new potential drugtarget interactions.  
