dsigdb: drug signatures database for gene set analysis we report the creation of drug signatures database (dsigdb), a new gene set resource that relates drugs/compounds and their target genes, for gene set enrichment analysis (gsea). dsigdb currently holds 22 527 gene sets, consists of 17 389 unique compounds covering 19 531 genes. we also developed an online dsigdb resource that allows users to search, view and down-load drugs/compounds and gene sets. dsigdb gene sets provide seamless integration to gsea software for linking gene expressions with drugs/compounds for drug repurposing and transla-tional research. availability and implementation: dsigdb is freely available for non-commercial use at http://tan lab.ucdenver.edu/dsigdb.high-throughput genomic technologies enable researchers to analyze tens of thousands of omic data points within biological systems. typically, long lists of interesting candidate genes were generated from these analyses. however, interpreting these gene lists remains a challenge for biomedical researchers. recognizing that genes act in concert to drive various biological processes, gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) was introduced to summarize genomics data using a priori defined gene sets . this seminal article has revolutionized genomic data analyses and interpretation, influenced the development of other analytical enrichment tools. the critical components of these tools are the annotated databases used as the gene sets for summarizing high-level biological processes. the popular molecular signatures database , which provides the gene sets for gsea, currently contains positional, curated, gene ontology, motif and computational gene sets. it also contains specialized gene sets for oncogenic and immunologic signatures that were extracted from literatures. genesigdb , a database of gene signatures extracted and manually curated from the published literature, is another resource for analytical enrichment tools. here, we introduce drug signatures database (dsigdb), a collection of drug and small molecule-related gene sets based on quantitative inhibition and/or drug-induced gene expression changes data (see supplementary). dsigdb differs from the existing resources in the following aspects: (i) dsigdb gene sets were extracted and compiled from quantitative inhibition data of drugs/ compounds from a variety of databases and publications. these genes represent the direct targets of the drugs/compounds. (ii) dsigdb gene sets are acquired through both automatic computational methods and manual curation. (iii) gene sets from dsigdb are explicitly designed to provide seamless integration to gsea software (see supplementary. here, we will describe the gene set collections of dsigdb, the accompanying online resource, and provide an example illustrating the utility of dsigdb gene sets for gsea software.  
