gene expression affyrnadegradation: control and correction of rna quality effects in genechip expression data motivation: gene expression experiments aim to accurately quantify thousands of transcripts in parallel. factors posterior to rna extraction can, however, impair their accurate representation. rna degradation and differences in the efficiency of amplification affect raw intensity measurements using affymetrix expression arrays. the pos-itional intensity decay of specifically hybridized probes along the transcript they intend to interrogate is used to estimate the rna quality in a sample and to correct probe intensities for the degradation bias. this functionality, for which no previous software solution is available, is implemented in the r/bioconductor package affyrnadegradation presented here. availability: the package is available via bioconductor at the urla basic assumption in gene expression experiments is that the obtained data represent a snapshot of transcript abundances within the original sample. however, several effects can distort the amount of rna during sample extraction and preparation, and thereby impair the reliability of those measurements. rnases introduced by improper purification or incautious sample handling can degrade the rather unstable rnas during storage . also, the amplification of rna mandatory to most rna analytics differs in its efficiency and can therefore lead to variation in transcript yield and lengths . gene expression experiments are frequently conducted using high-density microarrays. because of the importance of rna quality for the reliability of the results, it is advised to check the integrity of the rna before hybridization to the array. rna integrity (rin) values that are determined on the basis of an electropherogram trace have become the standard measure of rna quality. samples with rin values 47 should be discarded. researchers increasingly conduct large-scale meta-analysis on the plethora of publicly available microarray data. for these data, rna quality measures are mostly not available. however, it is strongly advised to identify and to remove low rna-quality experiments, as they can lead to erroneous results. methods to estimate rna quality directly from microarray data are thus required. existing options are the use of 3 0 /5 0 intensity ratios of control probe sets included on the microarray, as well as 3 0 /5 0-summary degradation measures as provided by software tools such as the affy package . both methods have been shown to have drawbacks under circumstances that are relevant in large-scale studies . particularly, 3 0 /5 0 control probes might be affected by saturation, whereas affyslope estimates are affected by background hybridization. both methods are prone to systematically overestimating rna quality. beyond strict quality control and the removal of bad-quality samples, the continuous levels of rna quality transform into a gray area of biased expression results with questionable reliability. it has been previously found that, although moderate levels of rna degradation are tolerated by differential expression analysis, especially long targets provide erroneous results. in this work, we present an r package that assesses rna quality of affymetrix expression data. it provides a rna quality measure that overcomes the drawbacks of existing methods by strictly referring to specific hybridization. furthermore, it enables correction of the 3 0 probe intensity bias for improved downstream analysis. for illustration, we here use data from an experiment done bywhere the same cell extract has been used for multiple microarray hybridizations, however, either prepared with rneasy to remove rna degrading enzymes, or not.  
