dynamic changes of rna-sequencing expression for precision medicine: n-of-1-pathways mahalanobis distance within pathways of single subjects predicts breast cancer survival motivation: the conventional approach to personalized medicine relies on molecular data ana-lytics across multiple patients. the path to precision medicine lies with molecular data analytics that can discover interpretable single-subject signals (n-of-1). we developed a global framework, n-of-1-pathways, for a mechanistic-anchored approach to single-subject gene expression data analysis. we previously employed a metric that could prioritize the statistical significance of a deregulated pathway in single subjects, however, it lacked in quantitative interpretability (e.g. the equivalent to a gene expression fold-change). results: in this study, we extend our previous approach with the application of statistical mahalanobis distance (md) to quantify personal pathway-level deregulation. we demonstrate that this approach, n-of-1-pathways paired samples md (n-of-1-pathways-md), detects deregulated pathways (empirical simulations), while not inflating false-positive rate using a study with biological replicates. finally, we establish that n-of-1-pathways-md scores are, biologically significant , clinically relevant and are predictive of breast cancer survival (p 0.05, n 80 invasive car-cinoma; tcga rna-sequences). conclusion: n-of-1-pathways md provides a practical approach towards precision medicine. the method generates the magnitude and the biological significance of personal deregulated pathways results derived solely from the patients transcriptome. these pathways offer the opportunities for deriving clinically actionable decisions that have the potential to complement the clinical interpret-ability of personal polymorphisms obtained from dna acquired or inherited polymorphisms and mutations. in addition, it offers an opportunity for applicability to diseases in which dna changes may not be relevant, and thus expand the interpretable omics of single subjects (e.g. personalome).through the incorporation of molecular data into the patient care process, personalized medicine is drastically changing the healthcare landscape; however, truly precise medicine has not been obtained. since completion of the human genome in 2003, the inclusion of molecular data in medicine has improved our ability to make accurate diagnoses, prognoses and treatment plans. relying on large cohorts limits the application of many of these techniques, however. while inherited or acquired dna polymorphisms provide powerful insight in the pathogenicity of many mendelian diseases and in cancer, a single-subject interpretation of the transcriptome may provide insight and could be deployed in diseases incurred by other insults than dna damage or inheritable defects. conventional transcriptome analyses rely on multiple patient data that can mask idiosyncratic signals from a single patient, and these approaches may lead to treatments only effective for the average patient. gene-level expression signatures found in cross patient studies do not adequately inform treatment plans for all cancer patients; therefore, there is a need for better methods to understand the biological underpinning at the single patient level. in response to these issues, we developed a global computational framework: n-of-1-pathways. n-of-1-pathways is founded upon three principles: (1) single patient data represent the entire statistical universe, (2) significance and interpretation are derived from genesets (pathways), and (3) pathway level information is used to answer questions of clinical importance. principle 1 allows for detection of individual signals that traditional cohort-level studies can overlook. principle 2 anchors the results in mechanism and this affords dimension reduction and interpretation. principle 3 provides quantitative and qualitative measures to address questions relating to patient care. the first application of the n-of-1-pathways framework, the n-of-1-pathways-wilcoxon method , successfully predicted lung adenocarcinoma patient outcomes using paired (normal and tumor) rna-seq samples from a single subject. a follow-up study established it could accurately identify experimentally deregulated pathway in ovarian and breast cancer cell lines . while the n-of-1-pathways-wilcoxon identified deregulated pathways with a statistical relevant, it did not quantify the magnitude of deregulation. in this study, we extend and refine the n-of-1-pathways framework by developing a novel application of mahalanobis distance (md) to create a clinical relevance metric, (crm) providing insight on the magnitude of the deregulation in addition to the biological significance. the design of n-of-1-pathways md eliminates the formers reliance on ranks (e.g. wilcoxon test), while producing a measure of effect that is interpretable on the biological scale. we employ breast cancer gene expression data to show increased sensitivity while not increasing false positives in comparison to the wilcoxon approach. finally, we utilize the crm to predict breast cancer survival.rank-based, nonparametric approaches can suffer a decreased efficiency compared to appropriately implemented bootstrap, randomization, and t-test procedures . further, the wilcoxon procedure we previously utilized assumes that the pairs are chosen randomly and independently from a population. it is presumable that gene expression values do not satisfy this assumption. we aimed to address these concerns via an evolution of our approach into the n-of-1-pathways md method. results from our exploration of tcga breast cancer data show n-of-1-pathways md improves upon our earlier n-of-1-pathways wilcoxon approach. the success of the n-of-1-pathways framework for breast cancer builds upon the insights developed in our previous investigation of tcga lung adenocarcinoma data , as tcga data share similarity in data generation, storage, and format, as well as other aspects. n-of-1-pathways md continues to maintain the practicality of self-contained geneset testing . additionally, the method provides a pathwaylevel deregulation clinically relevant metric that is predictive of clinical endpoints. our simulation study of the methods ability to detect synthetically deregulated pathways indicates that n-of-1-pathways md outperforms n-of-1-pathways wilcoxon. its ability to identify entire mechanistically interpretable pathways deregulated from subtly degs is very powerful. this feature provides a strategy to assess the notion that complex diseases may derive from multiple changes of small effect that lead to larger phenotypic outcomes. furthermore, we note the signed nature of the n-of-1-pathways md score that the method cannot detect deregulated pathways that are not primarily up-or downregulated. in other words, if a pathway has approximately equal numbers of genes above and below the line of equal expression, n-of-1-pathways md would likely not identify the pathway as deregulated. it is debatable whether such a specific form of departure reflects true deregulation or simply a highly variable pathway.notes: using the diametric extreme phenotypes , we produced all 45 possible pairs of dfs 4 years patients (dfs, n 9) with dod 2.5 years patients (dod, n 5). within these pairs of diametrically opposed patients, the gene-level log 2 fold change centered around zero, indicating no systematic shift in expression. we applied the n-of-1-pathways framework to these pairs in pursuit of phenotypically deregulated pathways. displayed are the pathways detected most often (found deregulated at least 25 times) in the 45 pairs that also share functional information similarity with an independent gold standard (gs) of 11 go-bp terms (section 2.11, . every patient studied was deregulation in this pathway (i.e. not just a few patients causing deregulation in pairs). note that deg geneset enrichment and gsea using all 14 diametric extreme patients detected 18 and 4 pathways, respectively (fdr 25); none of these pathways were functionally related to the gs.our biological replicate analysis indicates n-of-1-pathways md produces slightly fewer false positives than wilcoxon. there may be some concern over the somewhat inflated rate of false positives for certain samples. this might be attributed to true pathway deregulation explained by measurement variability or some aspect of the replication that led to unequal distribution of mrna molecules. we note that this analysis is highly contingent on proper preprocessing and normalization. normalization is particularly problematic in rna-seq as many normalization techniques fail to compensate for library size, gene length and guaninecytosine content . notably, n-of-1-pathways did not exhibit a bias towards longer median length of their genes (supplementary, a), nor higher gene intensities within the pathway (supplementary, b). however, there is a bias towards detecting larger pathways as deregulated (supplementary, cd). applying n-of-1-pathways md to breast cancer data results in the discovery of sensible deregulated pathways and produces metrics predictive of survival. this aspect validates the notion that n-of-1pathways md not only provides a metric interpretable at the pathway level, but also is related to important clinical endpoints. the most commonly deregulated pathways are associated with the hallmarks of cancer, including deregulation in dna replication and cell cycle. we also utilized the principal components of the md crms (section 2.6) to identify clinical subtypes such as estrogen receptor (er) and clinical metastatic stage. the former is not significant (wilcoxon p 0.08; pc1, data not shown); the latter is significant (wilcoxon p 0.05; pc1, data not shown). additionally, the breast cancer findings strengthen our previous indication that nof-1-pathways was predictive of lung adenocarcinoma survival, demonstrating the robustness of our techniques for different cancer types. survival prediction is possible from tumor gene expression alone (supplementary), but the gene signatures may lack interpretability and clinically actionable targets. n-of-1-pathways is designed to first discover deregulated pathways at the individual subject level followed by learning classifiers cross-subjects. in contrast, gene expression classifiers work directly on gene expression, which may not be functionally deregulated at the individual subject level as pointed out by simon (2005). n-of-1-pathways also allows for more power in discovering group comparisons at the pathway level that traditional differential mrna expression followed by enrichment studies as summarized by. n-of-1-pathways md refines our wilcoxon approach. we acknowledged in our previous work that independence assumptions of the n-of-1-pathways wilcoxon signed-rank test were not met. however, the fact that a predictive and interpretable signal was captured gave credibility to the n-of-1-pathways approach. n-of-1pathways md improves over our previous work as it does not violate any such statistical foundations. careful readers may note that we have avoided the notions of hypothesis testing and prefer the term identified pathways to significantly deregulated pathways. the md-deregulation criterion outlined in section 2.4.3 provides a metric to identify an up-or downregulated pathway, but does not rely on the notion of a p value. we do retain the p values and associated multiplicity corrections for the wilcoxon approach, in order to faithfully replicate that methodology. further study is required to create a statistically complete approach. the introduction of n-of-1-pathways md provides many avenues for extension. the method can be adapted to more than paired samples. multiple samples could be obtained from within a tumor and the pathway scores would measure intratumor heterogeneity. along the same vein, multiple samples could be obtained from a patient over time. thus, the geneset scores would measure longitudinal change in key pathways to predict response to therapy or to make timely prescriptive decisions. additionally, the n-of-1-pathways framework could potentially provide a basis for improved small sample normalization techniques. or, additional ontological information could be employed to weight genes within a pathway and reflect gene importance in biochemical dynamics. it remains to be shown whether the patient-specific deregulated pathway(s) identified in the current study can be predictive and it will be addressed in future studies. n-of-1-pathways can also be applied to various scales of biology, e.g. dna, methylation patterns, or microrna expression.we hypothesized that creating a biologically relevant pathway-level measure of effect will improve interpretability and detection while maintaining statistical precision. we have established a novel application of statistical md, n-of-1-pathways md, to quantify geneset deregulation using gene expression data from paired samples derived from a single subject. this study further validated our n-of1-pathway framework by predicting breast cancer survival from the pathway-level metric of deregulation. we evaluated the precision and accuracy of n-of-1-pathways md and compared it to our existing wilcoxon approach. we found improvement in geneset deregulation detection while not suffering increased false-positive rates. the modification of our approach is a pathway-level approach to produce a crm in single subjects and quantifying the deregulation induced under the disease condition (e.g. tumor sample) for each pathway . in addition, we are currently evaluating prospectively the method to predict future hospitalization in a clinical trial. n-of-1-pathways md provides a practical approach towards precision medicine. the method gives clinically actionable results derived solely from the patient. the entire transcriptome does not need to be measured, allowing for targeted experiments across multiple gene expression platforms, reducing cost and providing flexibility. the method generates the magnitude and the biological significance of personal deregulated pathways results derived solely from the patients transcriptome. these pathways offer an opportunity for applicability to diseases in which dna changes may not be relevant, and thus expand the interpretable omics of single subjects (e.g. personalome).  
