dynet: visualization and analysis of dynamic molecular interaction networks the ability to experimentally determine molecular interactions on an almost proteome-wide scale under different conditions is enabling researchers to move from static to dynamic network analysis, uncovering new insights into how interaction networks are physically rewired in response to different stimuli and in disease. dynamic interaction data presents a special challenge in network biology. here, we present dynet, a cytoscape application that provides a range of func-tionalities for the visualization, real-time synchronization and analysis of large multi-state dynamic molecular interaction networks enabling users to quickly identify and analyze the most rewired nodes across many network states. availability and implementation: dynet is available at the cytoscape (3.2) app store (http://apps. cytoscape.org/apps/dynet).network biology is a rapidly developing area of research, which recognizes that cellular processes are controlled and coordinated at multiple different levels by tightly regulated molecular networks. this cellular interactome is a highly dynamic entity, dependent on an array of temporal, spatial, cellular and environmental signals . understanding how molecular interaction networks change in their composition and connectivity in response to these cellular cues is crucial to understanding complex emergent phenotypes in health and disease ., for example have shown that two thirds of disease-associated alleles perturb proteinprotein interactions (ppis). until recently, most studies investigating the dynamics of ppi networks inferred dynamic network states through the integration of static maps of the interactome with state-specific information, such as gene expression or genetic interaction data . fortunately, advances in mass spectrometry are now enabling high-throughput studies that directly investigate ppi network dynamics . recently, for example researchers have mapped the hippo signaling pathway ppi network and revealed how changes in protein phosphorylation result in a significant rewiring of the interactions between members of this pathway . dynamic interaction data presents a special challenge in network visualization and current software tools are limited in their ability to visualize and analyze this type of data. the dynnetwork cytoscape application (http://apps.cytoscape.org/ apps/dynnetwork), for example uses animation to visualize changes in networks over time/conditions. while fun, this approach is of limited practical utility especially for larger or highly dynamic networks and the user can quickly lose track of the nodes/edges of interest. this approach also lacks statistical measures to support the detection and quantification of network rewiring. the kddn approach is more advanced statistically but lacks integration with advanced network visualization tools and is limited to the comparative analysis of only two network states. here, we present dynet, a cytoscape application that provides a range of functionalities for the visualization and analysis of large multi-state dynamic molecular interaction networks and the identification of the most rewired nodes.dynet introduces several tools and metrics for visualizing and analyzing node and edge rewiring within large-scale, many-state, dynamic molecular interaction networks. we believe dynet will be invaluable to researchers as they continue to generate large-scale contextual interaction data and delve into the rewiring of the cells dynamic interactome.  
