a folding algorithm for extended rna secondary structures motivation: rna secondary structure contains many non-canonical base pairs of different pair families. successful prediction of these structural features leads to improved secondary structures with applications in tertiary structure prediction and simultaneous folding and alignment. results: we present a theoretical model capturing both rna pair families and extended secondary structure motifs with shared nucleotides using 2-diagrams. we accompany this model with a number of programs for parameter optimization and structure prediction. availability: all sources (optimization routines, rna folding, rna evaluation, extended secondary structure visualization) are published under the gplv3 and available at www.tbi.univie.ac.at/software/ rnawolf/.the classical rna secondary structure model considers only the watsoncrick au and gc base pairs as well as the gu wobble pair. a detailed analysis of rna 3d structures, however, reveals that there are 12 basic families of interactions between the bases, all of which appear in nature . moreover, virtually all known rna tertiary structures contain the socalled non-watsoncrick base pairs. this has led to the development of an extended presentation of rna contact structures with edges labeled by their pairing type (an example can be seen in). this extended description of base pairing is commonly termed after its inventors the leontiswesthof (lw) representation. the lw representation has proved to be a particularly useful means of analyzing 3d structures of rna as determined by xray crystallography and nmr spectroscopy . in particular, it has led to the discovery of recurrent structural motifs, such as kink-turns and c-loops, that act as distinctive building blocks of 3d structures. the sequence variation in these structural motifs follows combinatorial rules that can be understood by the necessity to maintain the overall geometry when base pairs are exchanged. these isostericity rules are discussed in detail by. as a new level of rna structure description, the ability to predict non-standard base pairs can be expected to improve the performance of rna structure prediction. furthermore, information about evolutionary to whom correspondence should be addressed.37) of the pdb structure 1dul is shown in a 3d representation and as a 2d structure plot displaying the non-standard base pairs in lw representation. the four bases highlighted in the 3d structure form the two base triplets that can be seen in the upper part of the interior loop in the 2d structure. conservation of the isostericity classes of these non-standard base pairs will improve consensus structure-prediction and structuredependent rna gene finding. since many additional interactions beyond the standard base pairs are represented in the lw formalism, what was considered to be a loop in classical secondary structures can now appear as complex structures of non-standard base pairs. these non-standard base pairs effectively divide the long classical loops into much shorter ones.proposed a model that contains loops with no more than four unpaired bases. for unbranched structures, the model is scored using a statistical potential estimated from the available 3d structures by counting the relative frequencies of base pairs, short unbranched loops of particular shapes in dependence of their sequences and combinations of loops with a common base pair. an accompanying folding procedure, mc-fold , which exhaustively enumerates stemloop components, is available and has been used very successfully as a first step toward the de novo prediction of rna 3d structures  
