sequence analysis dysc: software for greedy clustering of 16s rrna reads pyrosequencing technologies are frequently used for sequencing the 16s ribosomal rna marker gene for profiling microbial communities. clustering of the produced reads is an important but time-consuming task. we present dynamic seed-based clustering (dysc), a new tool based on the greedy clustering approach that uses a dynamic seeding strategy. evaluations based on the normalized mutual information (nmi) criterion show that dysc produces higher quality clusters than uclust and cd-hit at a comparable runtime. availability and implementation: dysc, implemented in c, is available atpyrosequencing technologies are frequently used for microbial sequencing studies based on sequencing of hyper-variable regions of the 16s ribosomal rna (rrna) marker gene (e.g.) typical dataset sizes range from a few tens of thousands up to several million reads. the taxonomy-independent approach to their computational analysis typically performs a hierarchical clustering and then bins the reads into operational taxonomic units (otus) based on a distance threshold . clustering is usually computed on a pairwise distance matrix that is derived either from an all-against-all read alignment or a (profilebased) multiple sequence alignment . however, this approach has a high complexity in terms of both time and space and thus does not scale up to several million reads. the classical greedy sequence clustering method builds up clusters in an iterative incremental fashion. each cluster is represented by one sequence (called seed). an unseen read is then aligned to all seeds. if all alignments return distances above a given threshold, the read is used as the seed of a new cluster. otherwise, the read is added to one of the clusters for which the distance is within the threshold. examples of existing software used for read clustering based on the greedy approach are cd-hit and uclust although this approach is scalable and efficient it generally produces clusters of lower quality than hierarchical clustering . in this article, we present a new tool called dynamic seed-based clustering (dysc) that uses a dynamic seeding to whom correspondence should be addressed.. pending cluster conversion example using two neighboring clusters reaching the threshold size max_pending = 5 (left). fixed seeds and the fixed cluster members are determined (center and right). after optimization, the seed of the cluster can be shifted to another member of the original pending cluster (see arrows) strategy to achieve higher accuracy while preserving scalability and efficiency.  
