structural bioinformatics e23d: database and visualization of a-to-i rna editing sites mapped to 3d protein structures e23d, a database of a-to-i rna editing sites from human, mouse and fly mapped to evolutionary related protein 3d structures, is presented. genomic coordinates of a-to-i rna editing sites are converted to protein coordinates and mapped onto 3d structures from pdb or theoretical models from modbase. e23d allows visualization of the protein structure, modeling of recoding events and orientation of the editing with respect to nearby genomic functional sites from databases of disease causing mutations and genomic polymorphism.a-to-i rna editing, the deamination of adenosine to inosine by adar family of enzymes, is the most widespread modification in the human transcriptome . most of the rna editing sites are located in non-coding regions such as introns and 3utrs. still, several rna editing sites are found in coding regions and likely change amino-acid sequence, as inosine is identified as guanosine by the translation machinery . these recoding sites were proved to be important for normal development. adar2 knock-out mice suffered from epileptic seizures and died at a very early age as a result of lack in editing, specifically at the q-to-r site in gria2. changes in editing level at recoding sites in the serotonin receptor 2c (htr2c) were found to be related to depression, schizophrenia and suicide . recoding event from s-to-g at azin1 was found to result in hepatocellular carcinoma . recently, it was found that most of the non-synonymous editing sites in human seem to have a deleterious effect . most edited sites tend to have strong destabilization effect on the protein structure . still, some coding rna editing sites have a functional rule, are edited in a significant level and located at critical sites of the protein structure. several comprehensive databases which gather genomic data, evolutionary context, expression data and editing level for editing sites were recently developed. these include darned , radar and inosinome atlas . still, there is a need for computational tools for convenient intersection of rna editing information with protein structural and functional information. the current gap impedes most biologists working in rna editing field from inferring the functional significance of editing event in the context of protein 3d structural data. here, we present e23d, a tool which is intended to bridge this gap, and provide the community with user-friendly database and web interface to spot and visualize protein modifications resulted from a-to-i rna editing events. regarding editing sites in human, mouse and fly (2,576,459 human sites, 8823 mouse sites and 5025 fly sites). human rna editing sites were also downloaded from the inosinome atlas (2,999,833 human sites). the entire information is stored as a rational database on mysql server. for each organism (human, mouse and fly) a table with all editing sites, their read coverage, editing level and additional information is maintained. this data architecture allows relatively quick searches and is used for initial query of editing site information in the e23d front page. as shown in, ucsc gene annotations are used to connect the stored genomic coordinates with transcripts and protein coordinates. protein sequences are aligned to pdb sequences using blast. s2c (http://dunbrack.fccc.edu/guoli/ s2c/) is used to convert seqres with atom coordinates in the pdb files. e23d will be updated routinely following updates of the source editing sites databases.  
