data and text mining early immunologic correlates of hiv protection can be identified from computational analysis of complex multivariate t-cell flow cytometry assays * motivation: polychromatic flow cytometry (pfc), has enormous power as a tool to dissect complex immune responses (such as those observed in hiv disease) at a single cell level. however, analysis tools are severely lacking. although high-throughput systems allow rapid data collection from large cohorts, manual data analysis can take months. moreover, identification of cell populations can be subjective and analysts rarely examine the entirety of the multidimensional dataset (focusing instead on a limited number of subsets, the biology of which has usually already been well-described). thus, the value of pfc as a discovery tool is largely wasted. results: to address this problem, we developed a computational approach that automatically reveals all possible cell subsets. from tens of thousands of subsets, those that correlate strongly with clinical outcome are selected and grouped. within each group, markers that have minimal relevance to the biological outcome are removed, thereby distilling the complex dataset into the simplest, most clinically relevant subsets. this allows complex information from pfc studies to be translated into clinical or resource-poor settings, where multiparametric analysis is less feasible. we demonstrate the utility of this approach in a large (n = 466), retrospective, 14-parameter pfc study of early hiv infection, where we identify three t-cell subsets that strongly predict progression to aids (only one of which was identified by an initial manual analysis).the immune response to infection, vaccination or malignancy can be characterized by examining changes in the expression of a wide array of proteins expressed on leukocytes (either generally or on antigenspecific b-or t-cells). these proteins identify an enormous variety of cell types, and it is often not known which subsets of cells are clinically relevant. in some settings, the immunologically-relevant cell subset represents a small minority of the bulk cell population. therefore, gross measurements taken from heterogeneous samples (as generally done with microarrays) may mask immunologically or clinically significant signals. this limitation can be overcome with polychromatic (5 color) flow cytometry (pfc), where protein expression can be assessed among a large number of cell subsets, at the single cell level . the need for pfc is particularly apparent in studies of hiv, were the strongest cellular correlate of clinical outcome (cd4+ t-cell count) provides little help in identifying those individuals who would benefit from early initiation of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (haart) . recent studies of simian immunodeficiency virus (siv) infection of non-human primates provide some guidance, demonstrating that the level of central memory t-cells may be a relevant predictor of the need for early therapy . similarly, our recent study of early hiv infection suggests the presence of long-lived t-cells during early infection correlateswe described a computational approach to analyze a highdimensional clinical flow cytometry dataset that was previously investigated through laborious manual inspection. the findings from our analysis both replicate and extend the original analysis by human experts, revealing the t cell subsets and markers most highly correlated with hiv progression. the pipeline consists of five steps:(i) automated identification of positive and negative populations for each marker; (ii) quantification of subsets defined by every combination of markers; (iii) identification of those cell subsets whose frequency is most highly associated with clinical outcome; (iv) calculation of the impact of each individual marker; and (v)  
