easyfig: a genome comparison visualizer easyfig is a python application for creating linear comparison figures of multiple genomic loci with an easy-to-use graphical user interface. blast comparisons between multiple genomic regions, ranging from single genes to whole prokaryote chromosomes, can be generated, visualized and interactively coloured, enabling a rapid transition between analysis and the preparation of publication quality figures. availability: easyfig is freely available (under a gpl license) for download (for mac os x, unix and microsoft windows) from the sourceforge web site: http://easyfig.sourceforge.net/.comparative genomics involves the comparison of sequenced genomes, particularly for the identification of insertions, deletions and variation in syntenic regions. visualizing alignments between specific regions of multiple genomes is a critical step in identifying genotypic differences that underlie phenotypic changes between strains or species. for example, comparisons between related prokaryote genomes can highlight mobile elements such as integrons, prophage or pathogenicity islands. preparation of clear and accurate images based on these genomic comparisons is typically accomplished ad hoc by tedious manual compilation (e.g.) or using screensnapshots from analysis tools (e.g.). artemis comparison tool (act;) and mauve are both examples of excellent comparative genome analysis tools that are widely used to generate figures for publication, but are not designed for this purpose and generally lose clarity when displaying several regions at once. recently, an elegant visualization tool was developed ; however, its dependence on r makes it difficult for users unfamiliar with scripting languages. here, we describe easyfig, a python application for plotting comparison figures of multiple genomes or genomic regions from annotation files (e.g. genbank and embl) and tabular comparison files [e.g. blast (. easyfig has been designed to enable any biologist to visualize comparisons between multiple genomes or genomic regions and produce clear, publication quality images quickly and easily. to whom the correspondence should be addressed.  
