easyfrap: an interactive, easy-to-use tool for qualitative and quantitative analysis of frap data we present easyfrap, a versatile tool that assists quantitative and qualitative analysis of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (frap) data.functional live cell imaging techniques, such as fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (frap), exploit the properties of fluorescent proteins coupled with modern microscopy systems and are increasingly used to visualize, track and quantify molecules in living cells. like all photobleaching methods, frap involves the irreversible bleaching of emitted light from molecules tagged with a fluorescent protein. during a typical frap experiment, a defined region of interest (roi) is bleached by a short laser pulse and the fluorescence recovery in the roi is then monitored by time-lapse microscopy. analysis of frap data provides information on the kinetic behavior of the studied molecules, such as diffusion and macromolecular interactions . a typical frap data set consists of a number of noisy images acquired before, during and after photobleaching. these raw experimental data must be carefully processed to permit biologically significant conclusions to be drawn. frap data analysis consists of multiple steps. following quantification of fluorescence intensity in the various rois, intensity values are processed to remove noise, systematic bias and artifacts (referred to as normalization), raw to whom correspondence should be addressed. and normalized single-cell curves are visually inspected for quality assessment and mean values from multiple cells are plotted for qualitative analysis. curve fitting and parameter extraction permits quantitative analysis . this process is usually performed manually using common spreadsheet software packages and is time-consuming and prone to errors. the need for automated analysis has led to the development of new software, such as frapcalc (http://cmci.embl.de/downloads/frap_analysis), virtualfrap and frapanalyser (http://actinsim. uni.lu/eng/downloads/frapanalyser). however, as functional live cell imaging becomes wide-spread in biology laboratories, there is a lack of fast, interactive and easy-to-use tools that do not require access to commercially licensed software and are not computationally intensive.  
