easy retrieval of single amino-acid polymorphisms and phenotype information using swissvar the swissvar portal provides access to a comprehensive collection of single amino acid polymorphisms and diseases in the uniprotkb/swiss-prot database via a unique search engine. in particular, it gives direct access to the newly improved swiss-prot variant pages. the key strength of this portal is that it provides a possibility to query for similar diseases, as well as the underlying protein products and the molecular details of each variant. in the context of the recently proposed molecular view on diseases, the swissvar portal should be in a unique position to provide valuable information for researchers and to advance research in this area. availability: the swissvar portal is available at www.expasy.org/swissvarhuman variation data is one of the most valuable information originating from the human genome project (hgp). the current challenge is how to optimally exploit this data to better understand disease association and accelerate the pace towards personalized treatments. indeed, there are still numerous unanswered questions on the exact relationship between genetic variations, phenotypes and diseases. a plethora of databases or prediction tools exist . among the databases, only few are central databases covering mutations on all genes. they are mostly genecentric, with little information related to the proteome. the disease and phenotype information are also currently unstructured, making specific queries difficult. this is a pity, particularly in the context of the recently proposed molecular view on diseases, which emphasizes the relationship between the disease/phenotypic networks and the underlying protein interaction or functional networks . indeed, the possibility to query for similar diseases, as well as the underlying protein products and the molecular details of each variant might prove extremely useful for researchers to study a particular family of disorders or to formulate hypotheses for further research. to whom correspondence should be addressed.in this article, we present the swissvar portal (www.expasy.org/ swissvar), which provides access to a comprehensive collection of single amino acid polymorphisms (saps) and diseases in the uniprotkb/swiss-prot knowledgebase via a unique search engine. this represents nearly 3300 diseases and 60 000 human protein variations (release 57.10) . in addition, swissvar gives direct access to the newly improved swiss-prot variant pages that are widely cited by the community but can not be queried, up to now.with the completion of the human proteome, the uniprotkb/swissprot database has a complete collection of 20 330 human proteins with increasingly detailed functional annotation . the swissvar portal gives access to this wealth of data by further providing the possibility to gather proteins/variants related to similar diseases, and allowing queries on variants using a range of sequence and structural parameters. further improvement of the portal and the information content is planned. first, data coverage: the current saps coverage is clearly not exhaustive. however, as a partner of the gen2phen consortium (www.gen2phen.org), it is anticipated that data related to saps from consortium members will be made visible via uniprotkb and the swiss-prot variants pages. as such, the swissvar portal will continue to gain its value as the amount of data grows. second, disease terminology/phenotype information: the portal currently relies on mesh classification that offers a reasonably broad coverage of diseases including genetic diseases. the classification is nevertheless not entirely based on phenotypic similarities. incorporating comprehensive structured phenotype information could enhance the disease query. new resources, such as human phenotype ontology , are currently being studied for this purpose. finally, it is planned that pathway information will be incorporated in the near future to allow seamless integration and search between diseases, phenotypes, pathways and detailed sequence and structural information of the variants.in summary, the swissvar portal provides a unique environment and search facility to investigate the relationship between human variants and phenotypes, with a particular focus on human proteome. to the knowledge of the authors, no online servers offer this kind of search possibilities that directly link molecular details of saps to disease classification. the current application also illustrates our ongoing effort in bridging biological and medical information. the swissvar portal can be accessed via www.expasy.org/swissvar.  
