gene expression easyrnaseq: a bioconductor package for processing rna-seq data motivation: rna sequencing is becoming a standard for expression profiling experiments and many tools have been developed in the past few years to analyze rna-seq data. numerous bioconductor packages are available for next-generation sequencing data loading in r, e.g. shortread and rsamtools as well as to perform differential gene expression analyses, e.g. deseq and edger. however, the processing tasks lying in between these require the precise interplay of many bioconductor packages, e.g. biostrings, iranges or external solutions are to be sought. results: we developed easyrnaseq, an r package that simplifies the processing of rna sequencing data, hiding the complex interplay of the required packages behind a single functionality. availability: the package is implemented in r (as of version 2.15) and is available from bioconductor (as of version 2.10) at thesince the extensive utilization of rna sequencing for expression profiling (rna), numerous tools have been developed, as part of the r/bioconductor project, to load rna-seq data in r. the first: shortread parses manufacturer-specific formats. it gave way to the rsamtools package, as the sam/bam format became a de facto standard for reporting next-generation sequencing (ngs) alignment data. in parallel, analysis packages were adapted (edger,) or newly developed (deseq,) to accommodate for ngs specificities. recently, the bioconductor core team released several packages to connect these parts of the process: e.g. genomicranges, genomicfeatures; however, combining them appropriately requires a good understanding of their functionalities, and depending on the data, different combinations of these packages have to be used, implying a long learning curve for rna-seq neophytes. in parallel to these aspects, the sequencers yield increase resulted in the generalization of protocols that allow several samples to be run in a single lane, a process called multiplexing . de-multiplexing the obtained data is a processing step that no r package currently addresses. here, we describe easyrnaseq, an r package that eases rna-seq processing by combining the necessary packages in a single wrapper that ensures the pertinence of the provided data and information and helps users circumnavigate rna-seq processing pitfalls. in addition, it introduces functionalities to handle data produced by recent ngs protocols.  
