sequence analysis ebardenovo: highly accurate de novo assembly of rna-seq with efficient chimera-detection motivation: high-accuracy de novo assembly of the short sequencing reads from rna-seq technology is very challenging. we introduce a de novo assembly algorithm, ebardenovo, which stands for extension, bridging and repeat-sensing denovo. this algorithm uses an efficient chimera-detection function to abrogate the effect of aberrant chimeric reads in rna-seq data. results: ebardenovo resolves the complications of rna-seq assembly arising from sequencing errors, repetitive sequences and aberrant chimeric amplicons. in a series of assembly experiments, our algorithm is the most accurate among the examined programs, including de bruijn graph assemblers, trinity and oases. availability and implementation: ebardenovo is available at http:// ebardenovo.sourceforge.net/. this software package (with patent pending) is free of charge for academic use only.rna-seq technology has revolutionized transcriptomic studies in recent years. in comparison with microarrays, this highthroughput sequencing technology allows the detection of novel transcripts. it also has a wider dynamic range in detecting transcript abundance than tiling arrays , serial analysis of gene expression and cap analysis of gene expression . rna-seq is especially important for studying organisms without reference genomes. with reference genomes, accurate reads can be identified and mapped to the reference for accurate and sensitive quantification of even lowly expressed transcripts. however, for organisms without reference genomes, the short reads from rna-seq have to be assembled into contigs representing the transcripts before the expression level can be determined from the read coverage. in this case, sequencing errors may cause mis-assembly, create artificial contigs and consequently produce inaccurate interpretation of transcript abundance . de novo assembly of short reads faces computational challenges from classical sequencing problems such as sequence repeats, homologous genes and artificial chimeric reads . most de novo rna-seq assemblers, including trans-abyss , oases and trinity , are de bruijn graph based methods. in de bruijn graphs, reads are either represented as k-mer nodes or as k-mer edges, and eulerian paths between end nodes are examined for assembling sequences . both sequence repeats and artificial chimeric reads will cause erroneous k-mer nodes. most of de bruijn genome assemblers, such as velvet and allpaths , filter out low-frequency k-mer nodes to improve accuracy, as low-frequency k-mer nodes are more likely to be sequencing artifacts. however, de novo assembly of rna-seq data is more difficult because the abundance of rna transcripts varies significantly . although de bruijnbased algorithms have been successfully used to construct many transcriptomes using rna-seq data, it has always been difficult to keep the assembly both accurate and sensitive. low-frequency k-mer nodes are important for discovering low-abundance transcripts. for sensitive detection of novel transcripts, rna-seq assemblers usually do not eliminate low-frequency k-mer nodes. unfortunately, retaining low-frequency k-mer nodes would reduce assembly accuracy. in this study, we introduce an efficient algorithm for rna-seq assembly, with special emphasize on detecting chimeric reads and to whom correspondence should be addressed. assembly errors. we showed that our new de novo assembly algorithm, designated ebardenovo, has enhanced accuracy, while it still maintains high sensitivity in determining transcript abundance.  
