genetics and population analysis ebglmnet: a comprehensive r package for sparse generalized linear regression models ebglmnet is an r package implementing empirical bayesian method with both lasso (eblasso) and elastic net (eben) priors for generalized linear models. in our previous studies, both eblasso and eben outperformed other state-of-the-art methods such as lasso and elastic net in inferring sparse genotype and phenotype associations, in which the number of covariates is typically much larger than the sample size. while high density genetic markers can be easily obtained nowadays in genetics and population analysis thanks to the advancements in molecular high throughput technologies, ebglmnet will be a very useful tool for statistical modeling in this area. availability and implementation: ebglmnet package is freely available from the r archive cran (http://cran.r-project.org/).in areas such as multiple quantitative trait locus (qtl) mapping and pathway-based genome-wide association studies (gwas), high density gnomic markers can be obtained easily as technologies advanced in molecular genotyping. including all marker effects in a single regression model leads to a large number of model variables, typically much larger than the sample size. traditional regression methods failed when p ) n, where p is the number of model variables, and n is the sample size. we recently developed an efficient empirical bayesian method with lasso (eblasso) and elastic net (eben) priors for variable selection and effect estimation. eblasso has two sets of hierarchical priors (eblasso-ne: normal and exponential hierarchical prior; eblasso-neg: normal, exponential and gamma hierarchical prior) enforcing different levels of shrinkage to produce a sparse model; and eben encourages a grouping effect while inferring a sparse model, which is able to select a group of highly correlated variables when eblasso fails. comprehensive simulation and real data analysis in qtl mapping and pathway-based gwas demonstrated that eblasso and eben outperformed other state-ofthe-art algorithms such as lasso and elastic net in term of power of detecting true effects (pd), false discovery rate (fdr), as well as detecting a group of highly correlated effects. the aforementioned studies implemented those methods separately either in matlab or r, and were not available for different generalized linear regression models (glms). in this paper, we developed a cross-platform software package ebglmnet, with implementation of both gaussian and binomial models for all methods. core algorithms in the software are programmed in efficient c/c with user-friendly r interface. comparing to the original implementation, computational speed via ebglmnet is very fast thanks to the basic linear algebra subprograms (blas) and linear algebra package (lapack) utilized by the package.  
