data and text mining ebimage—an r package for image processing with applications to cellular phenotypes ebimage provides general purpose functionality for reading, writing, processing and analysis of images. furthermore, in the context of microscopy-based cellular assays, ebimage offers tools to segment cells and extract quantitative cellular descriptors. this allows the automation of such tasks using the r programming language and use of existing tools in the r environment for signal processing, statistical modeling, machine learning and data visualization. availability: ebimage is free and open source, released under the lgpl license and available from the bioconductor projectimaging cells labeled with specific markers is a powerful method to localize cellular structures and proteins, and to characterize cell morphological changes during population progression or induced by perturbing agents. automated phenotyping from such images generates quantitative descriptors of cellular phenotypes, which are computationally analysed to infer biological roles or functional relationships. recent examples include characterization of genes involved in cell division by analysing time-lapse image sequences of human cells , estimation of drug effects based on phenotypic changes measured in human hela cells and identification of genes involved in cell morphology in drosophila using rna interference (rnai) . cell segmentation and feature extraction are well-established steps, realized by dedicated software such as cellprofiler or generic image processing platforms like matlab, labview or imagej. however, the analysis and interpretation of multi-parametric cellular descriptors is a more challenging task. it requires powerful statistical and machine learning methods and can be facilitated by the possibility of producing visualizations of intermediate results, by the automation of complex workflows such as cross-validation or parameter searches, and by easy access to biological metadata and genomic databases. these points motivate the use of bioconductor , a software project to whom correspondence should be addressed. based on the feature-rich r programming language, providing tools for the analysis and comprehension of genomic data. several r packages provide some level of functionality for processing and analysing images. rimage offers diverse filtering functions but supports only the jpeg format and cannot save images. the package ripa is dedicated to the analysis of hyperspectral images but does not provide for image segmentation. biops offers a wide range of image filters, but only supports the jpeg and tiff formats and lacks a fast interactive display interface. the recent packageautomated phenotyping of cells promises to be useful in many fields of biology. it relies on imaging, cell segmentation, feature extraction and statistical analysis. ebimage offers the essential functionality for performing these tasks. future improvements are expected to include handling large multi-dimensional objects using netcdf format, 3d objects (segmentation and reconstruction) and time-lapse image sequences (cell tracking and extraction of spatio-temporal features).  
