eccb 2012: the 11 th european conference on computational biology served as the 10th [bc] 2 basel computational biology conference, the annual meeting of the swiss computational biology community. it was preceded by two satellite meetings, six workshops and five tutorials. details of the conference are available through the conference website (http://www.eccb12.org) and will later be archived at eccb.iscb.org/2012/. eccb is the top european conference in computational biology and bioinformatics, and together with ismb and recomb one of the major international conference series in computational biology. the conference brings together scientists working in a broad range of disciplines, including bioinformatics, computational and molecular biology, medicine and systems biology. it covers computational methods for analysis of the tremendously growing amount of data in the life sciences, and approaches for modeling and simulation of increasingly complex systems in molecular biology, medicine and pharmaceutical research. the scope of the conference evolves each year to address the latest developments in biological applications of mathematical modeling and computational methods. eccb is held in a different country or region each year, and incorporates the annual national or regional meeting where it is held. every other year, it is held jointly with the intelligent systems in molecular biology (ismb). past editions of eccb have been held in vienna (at) (with ismb), ghent (be), stockholm (se) (joint with ismb), cagliari (it), vienna (at) (with ismb), eilat (il), madrid (es), glasgow (uk) (with ismb), paris (fr) and saarbrcken (de). the eccb 2012 conference featured keynote lectures by distinguished speakers: the opening keynote lecture was delivered by nobel price laureate aaron ciechanover (technion-israel institute of technology), followed by barry honig (columbia university, new york), laurent keller (university of lausanne), gene myers (mpi of molecular cell biology and genetics, dresden), mihaela zavolan (biozentrum university of basel & sib) and the embo keynote lecture by sren brunak (technical university of denmark). the conference topics span all areas of methodological developments for computational biology and innovative applications of computational methods to molecular biology. this year, the conference was organized in 11 topic areas: applied  
