systems biology a framework for installable external tools in skyline skyline is a windows client application for targeted proteomics method creation and quantitative data analysis. the skyline document model contains extensive mass spectrometry data from targeted proteomics experiments performed using selected reaction monitoring, parallel reaction monitoring and data-independent and data-dependent acquisition methods. researchers have developed software tools that perform statistical analysis of the experimental data contained within skyline documents. the new external tools framework allows researchers to integrate their tools into skyline without modifying the skyline codebase. installed tools provide point-and-click access to downstream statistical analysis of data processed in skyline. the framework also specifies a uniform interface to format tools for installation into skyline. tool developers can now easily share their tools with proteomics researchers using skyline. availability and implementation: skyline is available as a single-click self-updating web installation at http://skyline.maccosslab.org. this web site also provides access to installable external tools and documentation.the skyline software for quantitative targeted proteomics has become increasingly popular since its original publication , with 43000 registered users and 46000 instances started most weeks. the rich skyline document schema contains extensive data generated from targeted proteomics experiments. this combination has motivated researchers and instrument vendors developing software tools with applications in targeted quantitative proteomics to seek seamless integration with skyline. the raw material for this integration has long been available through custom reports, designed inside skyline and exported to comma-separated value files for further analysis. the impact of third-party tools created to analyze these reports, however, has been limited by the difficulty with which they could be shared among researchers. existing tools have been developed outside of skyline in r, python and java or exist as web sites (r ost et al., 2012). without detailed and specific knowledge of these tools and their running environments outside skyline, researchers using skyline have found them difficult to install and use. the skyline external tools framework was designed to address these issues by providing a mechanism for researchers to create extensible, shareable and user-friendly tools for use with skyline.  
