editing, validating and translating of sbgn maps motivation: the recently proposed systems biology graphical notation (sbgn) provides a standard for the visual representation of biochemical and cellular processes. it aims to support more efficient and accurate communication of biological knowledge between different research communities in the life sciences. however, to increase the use of sbgn, tools for editing, validating and translating sbgn maps are desirable. results: we present sbgn-ed, a tool which allows the creation of all three types of sbgn maps from scratch or the editing of existing maps, the validation of these maps for syntactical and semantical correctness, the translation of networks from the kegg and metacrop databases into sbgn and the export of sbgn maps into several file and image formats. availability: sbgn-ed is freely available from http://vanted.ipk-gatersleben.de/addons/sbgn-ed. the web site contains also tutorials and example files.the systems biology graphical notation (sbgn; http://sbgn.org) is an emerging standard for the visual representation of biological networks. this standardization aims to improve information exchange and to support the collaborative creation of large maps based on individual modules. such unified graphical representation should overcome the current situation in which many different styles of networks are used in biochemical, biological and medical books, articles and online resources. especially in the growing field of systems biology, where increasingly complex and large networks have to be investigated, sbgn offers a promising approach for creating more intuitive and unambiguous visualizations. three different views of biological processes cover different levels of detail:(1) process description (pd), which shows the temporal dependencies of biological interactions in a network in detail;(2) entity relationship (er), which displays the relationships in which a given entity participates in a network (without consideration of temporal aspects); and(3) activity flow (af), which shows the flow of information between biological entities in a network in an abstract way. to whom correspondence should be addressed.drawing large interaction maps is a time-consuming task. to enhance the usability of sbgn, tool support for creating, editing and validating such maps is required. currently, several tools support or have started to consider sbgn, for an overview see http://sbgn.org/sbgn_software. here we present sbgn-ed, a vanted add-on for editing, validating and translating of sbgn maps. sbgn-ed contains a unique combination of features from sbgn map creation and editing to syntactic and semantic validation of sbgn maps, to automatic translation of existing non-sbgn networks from kegg and metacrop into sbgn, and to the export of sbgn maps in different file and image formats. furthermore, all methods of the vanted system for integration and network-based analysis of high-throughput data, data visualization and network layout as well as constraint-based model simulation are fully accessible to the sbgn maps. the vanted system and the sbgn-ed add-on form a comprehensive platform for sbgn-supported analysis and visualization of biological networks.  
