structural bioinformatics e-drug3d: 3d structure collections dedicated to drug repurposing and fragment-based drug design motivation: in the drug discovery field, new uses for old drugs, selective optimization of side activities and fragment-based drug design (fbdd) have proved to be successful alternatives to high-throughput screening. e-drug3d is a database of 3d chemical structures of drugs that provides several collections of ready-to-screen sd files of drugs and commercial drug fragments. they are natural inputs in studies dedicated to drug repurposing and fbdd. availability: e-drug3d collections are freely available at http://chemoinfo.ipmc.cnrs.fr/e-drug3d.html either for download or for direct in silico web-based screenings.approved drugs represent very attractive and valuable starting point for drug discovery. studies of drugs entering the market show that most of their drug progenitors (or lead structures) were known drugs or clinical candidates . the rationale is that a drug usually acts on more than one target and may exhibit previously unknown functions due to promiscuous off-target interactions explaining efficacy and/or side-effects . examples of new therapeutic indications for old drugs include the anti-emetic and hypnotic thalidomide originally withdrawn as a leprostatic agent or the anti-neoplastic finasteride for the treatment of hair loss (approved in 1997). over the years, an increasing number of pharmaceutical companies have been interested in drug repurposing in order to reduce the risk and cost of the development of new chemical entities . the fragment-based drug design (fbdd) approach represents another validated alternative to high-throughput screening . it consists of identifying low molecular weight molecules that are able to interact with a defined binding site. hits are then combined or grown into high-affinity ligands. over the past decade, fbdd has become established as an effective approach and has led to the discovery of high-affinity bioactive molecules, some of which are in clinical development. the rule of three provides a useful guideline when designing the fragment to whom correspondence should be addressed. screening collection , but the selection criteria may also include privileged structures that are commonly found in known drug molecules . this strategy is based on the assumption that molecules resembling existing drugs are more likely to possess appropriate admet properties than random molecules. e-drug3d has been purposely designed to provide free and ready-to-screen virtual collections of approved drugs and of their commercially available substructures (fragments). these collections of compounds are natural inputs for various cheminformatic and virtual screening applications.  
