genetics and population analysis efficient algorithms for tandem copy number variation reconstruction in repeat-rich regions motivation: structural variations and in particular copy number variations (cnvs) have dramatic effects of disease and traits. technologies for identifying cnvs have been an active area of research for over 10 years. the current generation of high-throughput sequencing techniques presents new opportunities for identification of cnvs. methods that utilize these technologies map sequencing reads to a reference genome and look for signatures which might indicate the presence of a cnv. these methods work well when cnvs lie within unique genomic regions. however, the problem of cnv identification and reconstruction becomes much more challenging when cnvs are in repeat-rich regions, due to the multiple mapping positions of the reads. results: in this study, we propose an efficient algorithm to handle these multi-mapping reads such that the cnvs can be reconstructed with high accuracy even for repeat-rich regions. to our knowledge, this is the first attempt to both identify and reconstruct cnvs in repeat-rich regions. our experiments show that our method is not only computationally efficient but also accurate. contact:structural variations and in particular copy number variations (cnvs), in which certain regions of the genome appear in multiple copies in different individuals, have been shown to affect gene expression, cause disease and alter an organisms phenotype . in order to detect cnvs, a genome of interest (donor genome) is compared with a known reference genome. many methods based on microarray technologies and comparative genomic hybridization (cgh) have been proposed, in which a donor genome along with a reference genome is hybridized to a tiling array. the ratio of intensities (donor/reference) is used to determine the presence of structural variation which may be a cnv. when a donor genome has higher intensity at a particular array location, it implies that a cnv may be present. although able to accurately estimate the number of copies for a given region, these array-based methods are unable to identify the boundaries of cnvs with high resolution and to whom correspondence should be addressed. furthermore are not at all able to identify the boundaries of junctions between cnv copies. high-throughput sequencing (hts) technology presents new opportunities to detect cnvs using paired-end sequencing. the idea behind these methods is that two reads are generated from a donor sequence which are known to occur a certain distance apart. if the two sequences have a different distance when mapped to the reference, this indicates the presence of a cnv. a few recent studies have proposed methods to detect cnvs using datasets generated by hts technologies .divided the genome into 1 kb windows and counted the number of reads mapped to each window (depth of coverage). furthermore, they used a set of fixed regions which are unique among all primates as control windows and calculated the average depth of coverage for those regions. then they scaled the results to predict the copy number of other windows., using sequence data generated with inbred mouse strains, attempted to predict occurrences of cnvs by using a hidden markov model. their method breaks the genome into a series of windows and determines the copy number state at each window. adjacent windows that have the same copy number state are combined to determine the full region of the cnv. unfortunately, the boundary resolution for this method is limited by the size of the window, which is typically at least 1 kb.used a sliding window approach in order to identify genomic regions that are suspected to contain cnvs and to estimate the location of their breakpoints. this method is able to predict the breakpoints with greater resolution, because it is not limited by the choice of window size. both of these methods have successfully identified true cnvs. however, their focus has been primarily on predicting the genomic sequence that exist in variable copies. more recent methods are based on the discordant paired-end reads, which are the reads mapped to the reference genome in an unexpected way. discordant reads may indicate the occurrence of cnvs.proposed a method to use discordant paired-end reads to identify structural variations. in this work, they identify discordant reads, which indicate different types of structural variations, for example, insertion, deletion or translocation. these discordant reads are clustered to provide high confidence for the occurrence of a structural variation.proposed an elegant method to detect copy number variations using paired-end reads. similar to the work in, they first cluster discordant paired-end reads to identify cnv boundaries. next they build a donor graph, in which the genome is represented as a setpage: 1514 15131520  
