a framework for oligonucleotide microarray preprocessing motivation: the availability of flexible open source software for the analysis of gene expression raw level data has greatly facilitated the development of widely used preprocessing methods for these technologies. however, the expansion of microarray applications has exposed the limitation of existing tools. results: we developed the oligo package to provide a more general solution that supports a wide range of applications. the package is based on the bioconductor principles of transparency, reproducibility and efficiency of development. it extends the existing tools and leverages existing code for visualization, accessing data and widely used preprocessing routines. the oligo package implements a unified paradigm for preprocessing data and interfaces with other bioconductor tools for downstream analysis. our infrastructure is general and can be used by other bioconductor packages. availability: the oligo package is freely available through bioconductor, http://www.bioconductor.org. contact:open source software significantly simplified the development and distribution of preprocessing methods for gene expression microarrays. the bioconductor project is one hub of tools for the analysis of genomic data and distributes, among others, the affy package , the most used tool for analysis of affymetrix gene expression arrays. in addition to affymetrix, other manufacturers (e.g. illumina, nimblegen and agilent) also commercialize microarray solutions, increasing the number of applications of the technology. with different microarray applications, the investigator can analyze genomic data from different perspectives:use tiling arrays to identify, at high resolution, regions of dna and histone modifications; the international hapmapuses genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) and copy number variant (cnv) arrays to obtain: (i) genotype calls, later used in association studies; and (ii) extract copy number estimates to assess chromosomal aberrations;use exon arrays to analyze alternative splicing. as new applications to whom correspondence should be addressed. became available and designs by other manufacturers became more popular (see supplementary material), users developed suboptimal solutions to allow the use of the existing code in affy on these new arrays. this strategy did not succeed because the new designs did not share the structure used by the affymetrix gene expression arrays, such as density and array annotation standards. based on the bioconductor principles of transparency, reproducibility and efficiency of development, we developed the oligo package. its infrastructure, presented in section 2, is general and can be used by other bioconductor packages. the package natively supports feature-level data for different applications and manufacturers, as shown in section 3. it implements a unified framework for preprocessing microarray data and interfaces with other bioconductor tools for downstream analysis.the integration of data management, visualization and analysis is essential in current research. weaknesses in existing tools are more evident today that more applications and array manufacturers are available. to overcome the deficiencies introduced by suboptimal solutions and improve the delivery of original strategies, we developed the oligo package. it uses the commonalities of oligonucleotide microarray designs and applications to provide an open-source solution that centralizes the preprocessing tasks under a solid framework that can be reused by other developers, improving the consistency between packages within the bioconductor project. the structure used by oligo is flexible and its objects inherit the properties of biobase objects, using the standards set by the bioconductor project. because it is implemented in r, every feature of this statistical software is at the researchers disposal. this simplifies the interface with many other packages from both projects (r and bioconductor), widening the options during analysis. classes used by its companion, the pdinfobuilder package, are based on a broader class, offering inheritability properties and transparency to the user, who benefits from the fact that annotation packages use sql databases to minimize their memory footprint. the oligo and affy packages are closely related: the former uses the knowledge acquired by the latter to provide solutions for limitations found so far. the main improvements offered by oligo are: (i) support to multiple vendors and platforms; (ii) efficient storage and access schemes for annotation of current high-throughput arrays, whose metadata have become significantly large; and (iii) native support to manufacturer files. using oligo, one can handle data from different applications (expression, tiling, snp/cnv, exon and gene) of two manufacturers (affymetrix and nimblegen), using their native file schemes, avoiding potential problems introduced by conversion tools. we demonstrated how one can use our package to preprocess and visualize oligonucleotide microarray data. we show how the package can serve as an interface between the data files and methodologies implemented by other bioconductor packages. these features define a unified framework that allows the efficient use of the environment set by both r and bioconductor projects and increase the productivity of novel methods and algorithms.  
