genome analysis efficient change point detection for genomic sequences of continuous measurements motivation: knowing the exact locations of multiple change points in genomic sequences serves several biological needs, for instance when data represent acgh profiles and it is of interest to identify possibly damaged genes involved in cancer and other diseases. only a few of the currently available methods deal explicitly with estimation of the number and location of change points, and moreover these methods may be somewhat vulnerable to deviations of model assumptions usually employed. results: we present a computationally efficient method to obtain estimates of the number and location of the change points. the method is based on a simple transformation of data and it provides results quite robust to model misspecifications. the efficiency of the method guarantees moderate computational times regardless of the series length and the number of change points. availability: the methods described in this article are implemented in the new r package cumseg available from the comprehensive r archive network at http://cran.r-project.org/package=cumseg.statistical analysis in biological research is often faced with outcomes expressed by specific measurements for the gene expression levels. when these observed responses are ordered by their location on the genome, the values form clouds with different observed means, supposedly reflecting different mean levels. by exploiting differences in the observed responses, the statistical analysis of these sequences aims at identifying chromosomal regions with abnormal (increased or decreased) mean levels; changes in the mean level at a particular genome location may be interesting for certain goals, such as assessing the status not only of specific loci (like tumor suppressors and oncogenes) but also any structural genomic alteration, resulting in genomic imbalances, involved in pathogenesis or in various observed abnormal phenotypes. for instance, detecting chromosomal aberrations is crucial for the diagnosis of some diseases, including mental retardation and cancer (e.g.; to whom correspondence should be addressed.) often associated to aneuploidies, deletions, duplications and/or amplifications. in this respect, the output of the array comparative genomic hybridization (acgh) experiment is a fluorescence color ratio understood to represent the dna copy numbers of the actual tumor cells plus noise generated by the normal cells and by the experiment; acgh analysis aims at finding abrupt changes in the mean of the fluorescence color ratios (or usually their logarithms) to detect chromosomal aberrations. the analysis of acgh data concerns one of the most important applications involving change point detection, but more generally the analysis of genomic sequences to detect abrupt changes is an important step in several areas of the biological research: recombination of viruses , characterization of complete transcriptomes via high-density dna tiling microarrays or investigation of dna sequences in general, see karkin and, for a wider discussion. several authors have addressed the problem using different approaches within a likelihood-based or bayesian paradigms. algorithms based on segmentation techniques include works by,; hidden markov models have been presented in. when mean levels are of main interest, rather than the change points, bayesian approaches have been discussed in. although comprehensive reviews and comparisons of some of the aforementioned methods are given byand willenbrock and, the focus of the aforementioned procedures is into calling gains and losses, namely classification into damaged and non-damaged genes. in general, little emphasis is given to the problem of estimating number and locations of the change points, especially when the stochastic terms are not simple gaussian independent identically distributed (iid). typical statistical analyses assume iid gaussian noise, but there is no guarantee that this is always true. in this article, we present a new approach to detect and estimate change points in genomic sequences. while associated mean levels can be obtained, we are specifically interested in the change points. the main goal is to provide a procedure which works adequately well in different and real scenarios where the true error structure is usually unknown. the method is conceptually simple and it appears to be quite robust to departures from standard model assumptions, such as autocorrelation, non-normality and heteroscedasticity. moreover,page: 162 161166  
