efficient genome ancestry inference in complex pedigrees with inbreeding motivation: high-density snp data of model animal resources provides opportunities for fine-resolution genetic variation studies. these genetic resources are generated through a variety of breeding schemes that involve multiple generations of matings derived from a set of founder animals. in this article, we investigate the problem of inferring the most probable ancestry of resulting genotypes, given a set of founder genotypes. due to computational difficulty, existing methods either handle only small pedigree data or disregard the pedigree structure. however, large pedigrees of model animal resources often contain repetitive substructures that can be utilized in accelerating computation. results: we present an accurate and efficient method that can accept complex pedigrees with inbreeding in inferring genome ancestry. inbreeding is a commonly used process in generating genetically diverse and reproducible animals. it is often carried out for many generations and can account for most of the computational complexity in real-world model animal pedigrees. our method builds a hidden markov model that derives the ancestry probabilities through inbreeding process without explicit modeling in every generation. the ancestry inference is accurate and fast, independent of the number of generations, for model animal resources such as the collaborative cross (cc). experiments on both simulated and real cc data demonstrate that our method offers comparable accuracy to those methods that build an explicit model of the entire pedigree, but much better scalability with respect to the pedigree size.model organisms, such as laboratory mice, are frequently bred or crossed in order to study genetic influences . often, such animal resources are generated using prescribed breeding system to ensure diversity and reproducibility, which leads to complex pedigree structure consisting of many generations. through recombination, the dna sequences of founder organisms are intermixed in each generation. a dna sequence of any descendant organism is a mosaic of its founders dna segments. as recombinations at each breeding stage cannot be observed directly, it is of great interest to infer the ancestry of resulting dna sequences. in other words, which part of a resulting dna sequence is inherited from which founder. the vast majority of the sequence variations are attributed to single base pair mutations known as single nucleotide to whom correspondence should be addressed.the development of high-density snp technology makes model animal resources a powerful tool for studying genetic variations. it also makes any analysis on such resources computationally challenging. in this article, we demonstrate that modeling repetitive substructure of a pedigree can provide significant improvement in efficiency without compromising accuracy. we introduce anovel method for modeling the inbreeding process. integrated into the hmm framework originally introduced by the landergreen algorithm, our method can handle large pedigrees such as cc efficiently. the inbreeding substructure model alone does not speed up the ancestry inference for all types of pedigrees, but, as we have shown with the cc, the computational benefit can be crucial for analyzing many model animal resources. in analyzing such data, our method outperforms previous methods in terms of accuracy and efficiency. we believe that substructure modeling is a promising approach for large pedigree analysis, especially when specific types of pedigree are of interest. in the future, we plan to investigate other common substructures and build a more general framework to allow efficient computation on more types of pedigrees. funding: national science foundation (iis0448392, iis0812464, partially); national institutes of health (gm076468, partially) conflict of interest: none declared.  
