efficient parameter search for qualitative models of regulatory networks using symbolic model checking motivation: investigating the relation between the structure and behavior of complex biological networks often involves posing the question if the hypothesized structure of a regulatory network is consistent with the observed behavior, or if a proposed structure can generate a desired behavior. results: the above questions can be cast into a parameter search problem for qualitative models of regulatory networks. we develop a method based on symbolic model checking that avoids enumerating all possible parametrizations, and show that this method performs well on real biological problems, using the irma synthetic network and benchmark datasets. we test the consistency between irma and time-series expression profiles, and search for parameter modifications that would make the external control of the system behavior more robust. availability: gna and the irma model are available ata central problem in the analysis of biological regulatory networks concerns the relation between their structure and dynamics. this problem can be narrowed down to the following two questions: (a) is a hypothesized structure of the network consistent with the observed behavior? (b) can a proposed structure generate a desired behavior? qualitative models of regulatory networks, such as (synchronous or asynchronous) boolean models and piecewise-affine differential equation (pade) models, have been proven useful for addressing the above questions. the models are coarse-grained, in the sense that they do not explicitly specify the biochemical mechanisms. however, they include the logic of gene regulation and allow different expression levels of the genes to be distinguished. they are interesting in their own right, as a way to capture in a simple manner the complex dynamics of a large regulatory network . they can also be used as a first step to orient the development of more detailed quantitative ode models. qualitative models bring specific advantages when studying the relation between structure and dynamics. in order to answer to whom correspondence should be addressed. questions (a) and (b), one has to search the parameter space to check if for some parameter values the network is consistent with the data or can attain a desired control objective. in qualitative models, the number of different parametrizations is finite and the number of possible values for each parameter is usually rather low. this makes parameter search easier to handle than in quantitative models, where exhaustive search of the continuous parameter space is in general not feasible. moreover, qualitative models are concerned with trends rather than with precise quantitative values, which corresponds to the nature of much of the available biological data . nevertheless, the parametrization of qualitative models remains a complex problem. for most models of networks of biological interest the state and parameter spaces are too large to exhaustively test all combinations of parameter values. the aim of this article is to address this search problem for pade models by treating it in the context of formal verification and symbolic model checking . our contributions are twofold. on the methodological side, we develop a method that in comparison with our previous work makes it possible to efficiently analyze large and possibly incompletely parametrized pade models. this is achieved by a symbolic encoding of the model structure, constraints on parameter values and transition rules describing the qualitative dynamics of the system. we can thus take full advantage of symbolic model checkers for testing the consistency of the network structure with dynamic properties expressed in temporal logics. the computer tool gna has been extended to export the symbolic encoding of pade models in the nusmv language . in comparison with related work , our method applies to incompletely instead of fully parametrized models, provides more precise results and the encoding is efficient without (strongly) simplifying the pade dynamics. on the application side, we show that the method performs well on real problems, by means of the irma synthetic network and benchmark experimental datasets . more precisely, we are able to find parameter values for which the network satisfies temporal-logic properties describing observed expression profiles, both on the level of individual and averaged time series. the method is selective in the sense that only a small part of the parameter space is found to be compatible with the observations. analysis of these parameter values reveals that biologically relevant constraints have been identified. moreover, we make suggestions to improve the robustness of the external control of the irma behavior by proposing a rewiring of the network.we propose a method for efficient search of the parameter space of qualitative models of regulatory networks, to investigate the relation between structural and behavioral properties of these systems. on the methodological side, the main novelty is that we develop a symbolic encoding of the dynamics of pade models, enabling the use of highly efficient model-checking tools for analyzing incompletely parametrized models. the symbolic encoding avoids explicit state space generation and the enumeration of possible parametrizations. we demonstrate that the proposed approach scales up to relatively complex synthetic networks. although developed for pade models, the main ideas underlying the approach carry over to logical models (thomas and d). on the biological side, we show the practical relevance of the approach by means of an application to the irma network. the parameter constraints we obtained are precise, have a clear biological interpretation, and are consistent with independent experimental observations. even when considering complex dynamical properties, the search of the parameter space takes at most a few minutes. our results seem to confirm the intended separation of irma from the host network, and suggest that to obtain a more robust response to the addition of galactose, an effective rewiring of the network would be needed.in comparison with traditional quantitative approaches, the results we obtain are quite general, since they do not depend on specific molecular mechanisms or parameter values. moreover, the analysis is exhaustive in the sense that the entire parameter space is scanned. these two features are particularly interesting for negative results, such as showing that a given design is not likely to show a desired behavior. in contrast, quantitative ode models like those developed indo not predict a range of possible behaviors but rather single out one likely behavior with quantitative precision. qualitative and quantitative approaches provide complementary information on system dynamics. in comparison with other analysis and verification methods developed for similar modeling formalisms , our approach is original in two respects. first, it applies to incompletely parametrized models and can handle any dynamical property expressible in temporal logics supported by the model checker. second, we reason at a finer abstraction level, in that we take into account dynamics on the thresholds and work with a partition of the state space preserving derivative sign patterns. the latter feature is particularly well-suited for the comparison of model predictions with time-series data in irma. an interesting direction for further research is to consider more general problems in which not only parameters but also regulation functions are incompletely specified. this would make a connection with work on the reverse engineering of boolean models .  
