efficient privacy-preserving string search and an application in genomics motivation: personal genomes carry inherent privacy risks and protecting privacy poses major social and technological challenges. we consider the case where a user searches for genetic information (e.g. an allele) on a server that stores a large genomic database and aims to receive allele-associated information. the user would like to keep the query and result private and the server the database. approach: we propose a novel approach that combines efficient string data structures such as the burrowswheeler transform with cryptographic techniques based on additive homomorphic en-cryption. we assume that the sequence data is searchable in efficient iterative query operations over a large indexed dictionary, for instance, from large genome collections and employing the (positional) burrowswheeler transform. we use a technique called oblivious transfer that is based on additive homomorphic encryption to conceal the sequence query and the genomic region of interest in positional queries. results: we designed and implemented an efficient algorithm for searching sequences of snps in large genome databases. during search, the user can only identify the longest match while the ser-ver does not learn which sequence of snps the user queried. in an experiment based on 2184 aligned haploid genomes from the 1000 genomes project, our algorithm was able to perform typical queries within 4.6 s and 10.8 s for client and server side, respectively, on laptop computers. the presented algorithm is at least one order of magnitude faster than an exhaustive baseline algorithm. availability and implementation: https://github.com/iskana/pbwt-sec and https://string search is a fundamental task in the field of genome informatics, for which a large variety of techniques have been developed (see, for instance,). traditionally, those techniques have been optimized for accuracy and computational efficiency, however a recent boom of personal genome sequencing and analyses has spotlighted a new criteria, namely, privacy protection. as reported in many studies, a genome is considered v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.in this paper, we have proposed a novel approach for searching genomic sequences in a privacy-preserving manner. our approach combines an efficient data structure that can be used for recursive search and a novel approach for recursive oblivious transfer. it achieves high utility and has strong security features and requires acceptable compute and communication resources. the developed novel algorithm can find the longest match between a query and a large set of aligned genomic sequences indexed by pbwt. we implemented our algorithm and tested on the dataset created from the 1000 genomes project data (the 1000). compared to an exhaustive baseline approach, our algorithm, named pbwt-sec, was orders of magnitude more efficient both in run time and data transfer overhead for practical query sizes. when the prototype program was run on laptop machines, the total run time including communication time over the network was 15.5 s for searching on 2184 genomes without concealing the query position. searches with a concealed query position using a compute node took between 18.6 and 133 s depending on the level of privacy.as the original data structure supports many useful search options such as wild card search and set maximal search, pbwt-sec could also support those options by using the same techniques used in the original structures in combination with cryptographic techniques, including ot. moreover, the approach could be easily applied for bwt and has a potential to be applied for other recursively searchable data structures. to the best of our knowledge, the proposed algorithm is the first that allows set-maximal search of genomic sequences in a privacypreserving manner for user and database. we note that the implementation can still be improved and the overall run time can likely be reduced to not more than a few seconds per query. this would make it practical to use our approach in a genomic beacon (see ga4ghs beacon project) that would allow the privacy-preserving search for combinations of variants. it also appears practical to use our approach to enable search by a user that has access to his/her genomic sequence and would like to query the database, for instance, for information related to disease risk without sharing this information with anybody. finally, the algorithm can also be used to facilitate sharing of genetic information across institutions and countries in order to identify large enough cohorts with a similar genetic backgrounds. this is in spirit of the mission of the global alliance for genome and health.wall time includes server ( 90) and user time ( 10). d is the number of positions queried simultaneously to conceal the query position (if required).  
