structural bioinformatics efficient rna pairwise structure comparison by setter method motivation: understanding the architecture and function of rna molecules requires methods for comparing and analyzing their 3d structures. although a structural alignment of short rnas is achievable in a reasonable amount of time, large structures represent much bigger challenge. however, the growth of the number of large rnas deposited in the pdb database calls for the development of fast and accurate methods for analyzing their structures, as well as for rapid similarity searches in databases. results: in this article a novel algorithm for an rna structural comparison setter (secondary structure-based tertiary structure similarity algorithm) is introduced. setter uses a pairwise comparison method based on 3d similarity of the so-called generalized secondary structure units. for each pair of structures, setter produces a distance score and an indication of its statistical significance. setter can be used both for the structural alignments of structures that are already known to be homologous, as well as for 3d structure similarity searches and functional annotation. the algorithm presented is both accurate and fast and does not impose limits on the size of aligned rna structures. availability: the setter program, as well as all datasets, is freely available from http://siret.cz/hoksza/projects/setter/.in addition to its role in the transfer of biological information, the evidence shows that rna molecules also play key roles in a variety of cellular processes . rna shows, among others, an enzymatic activity in ribozymes , it takes part in the transcription regulation and it is involved in the chromatin modeling . rna 3d structure is hierarchical and can be divided into primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary levels. rna secondary structure motifs can be defined as double helices interconnected by various types of loop structures and are stable independently of their 3d folds. tertiary interactions stabilize the overall arrangement and packing of double helices in large rna structures. the first resolved rna crystal structure was that for the yeast phenylalanine to whom correspondence should be addressed. transfer rna (trna) . this achievement was followed by solving structures of other naturally occurring trnas , as well as of a variety of oligomeric rna model structures . with the improvements in molecular biological methods and in crystallographic techniques , the size of solved rna structures has later increased dramatically. large rnas (an arbitrary limit of 100 residues is used to define large rnas . allowed for the first detailed studies of rna structure elements not found in smaller molecules, such as continuous interhelical base stacking, rna domain structure and helical packing. the function of an rna molecule is largely determined by the 3d structure that is typically more evolutionarily conserved than its sequence . thus, methods for the comparative rna function annotation based on structural similarity usually yield much better results than sequence-based approaches. although detecting optimal structural similarity between two biomolecules in 3d has been shown to be np-hard , the development of automatic tools capable of an efficient and accurate rna structural alignment has become an important part of structural bioinformatics. the study of rna tertiary and quaternary structures must be facilitated by the software that is able to work both with small and large rna molecules. to be computationally tractable, currently available software tools for comparing two rna 3d structures, such as arts , dial , iparts , sara , sarsa or r3d align are therefore based on heuristic approaches. arts detects a maximum common substructure between two rna 3d structures using backbone phosphate atoms. based on 3d similarity between 1333 solved rna structures assessed by the arts algorithm, a database of hierarchically classified structures darts was subsequently developed . arts is not practical for comparison of large rna molecules due to its cubic time complexity. to overcome this problem, the dial server using a dynamic programming algorithm and running in a quadratic time was developed . the dial alignment algorithm is based on torsion and/or pseudotorsion similarity sequence similarity and base pairing similarity, and it provides access to global, local and semi-global structural alignments. an improvement in the speed over the dial algorithm was later brought by parts , an algorithm based on the so-called structural alphabet (sa). sa is an emerging concept in the structural biology of proteins. a protein structure is represented as a limited series of letters each assigned to a well-characterized conformation . parts uses the vector quantization approach to derive an rna sa of 23 letters representing the most common backbone conformations. the rna structures are represented as 1d sequences of sa letters, and these are aligned using classical methods for pairwise and multiple sequence alignments. a new set of sa letters was derived for the improved version of parts called iparts . iparts outperforms its previous version parts, as well as (in some aspects) another highly efficient algorithm sara . in sara, distances among selected atoms are represented as unit vectors existing on unit spheres . all-to-all unitvector root mean square division (rmsd) distances of consecutive unit spheres are computed and used as scoring matrix for the dynamic programming-based global alignment. highly accurate alignments of homologous molecules are produced by the r3d align approach which is based on local nucleotide by nucleotide superpositions that effectively accommodate the flexibility of rna molecules. local alignments are then merged to form a global alignment by using a maximum clique algorithm on a specially defined local alignment graph. in this article, a novel pairwise rna comparison method (secondary structure-based tertiary structure similarity algorithm) setter is proposed. the method divides the whole rna structure into non-overlapping generalized secondary structure units (gssus). the structural alignment is then obtained by using a distance measure based on rmsd transformations between all possible pairs of gssus. the algorithm scales as o(n 2 ) with the size of gssu and as o(n) with the number of gssus in the structure. the segmentation to gssus offers the advantage of high speeds even for the largest structures. the algorithm can be used both for the 3d structural alignments (figs. 112 in the supplementary information show several examples of pairwise structural alignments), as well as for 3d structural similarity searches and for functional annotation. high speed of the algorithm does not compromise its accuracy as is demonstrated by benchmarking of both structural alignment and functional annotation against other published methods.  
