sequence analysis eficaz 2.5 : application of a high-precision enzyme function predictor to 396 proteomes high-quality enzyme function annotation is essential for understanding the biochemistry, metabolism and disease processes of organisms. previously, we developed a multi-component high-precision enzyme function predictor, eficaz 2 (enzyme function inference by a combined approach). here, we present an updated improved version, eficaz 2.5 , that is trained on a significantly larger data set of enzyme sequences and prosite patterns. we also present the results of the application of eficaz 2.5 to the enzyme reanno-tation of 396 genomes cataloged in the ensembl database. availability: the eficaz 2.5 server and database is freely available with a use-friendly interface atunderstanding cellular functions such as metabolic pathways requires the precise assignment of enzymatic functions to proteins in their respective genomes. the ever-increasing accumulation of sequence data that is the result of the genome-sequencing projects requires rapid computational methods to assign enzyme functions . enzymes are classified by the enzyme commission (ec) using a hierarchical system of fourdigit codes, such as ec 1.2.3.4, for each type of enzymatic activity . high-precision ec number assignment is of utmost importance for studies such as metabolic pathway reconstruction, understanding evolutionary relationships in pathways and metabolite prediction, etc. . previously, we developed an automatic engine for the proteomic scale inference of enzyme function, eficaz (enzyme function inference by a combined approach) . eficaz combines the predictions from four independent methods, namely: (i) chiefc family-based functionally discriminating residue (fdr) identification, (ii) multiple pfam-based fdr recognition, (iii) chiefc sit evaluation and (iv) high-specificity multiple prosite patterns. the main strength of eficaz is its ability to identify fdrs as residues that discriminate the members of a homo-functional family (consisting of members with a specific ec number) from a hetero-functional family (sequences with another ec number). subsequently, we enhanced our approach to eficaz 2 (with the inclusion of support vector machine (svm) models for discrimination between homo-functional and heterofunctional ec family members. this led to the inclusion of two additional components: (v) chiefc family-based svm evaluation and (vi) multiple pfam family-based svm evaluation. recent years have seen a huge influx of sequence data as a result of automated genome-sequencing projects and subsequent assignment of new sequences by the ec. catfam , priam and enzymedetector are some of the programs capable of genome-level enzyme prediction. however, all of them are sequence similarity-based methods, whereas eficaz also uses prosite, pfam, followed by detection of fdrs and is optimized for high precision. here, we present the latest implementation of our enzyme function prediction engine, eficaz 2.5 , using the latest, significantly larger, data set of sequences from swissprot and sequence patterns from prosite . we use enzyme annotations of the swissprot (o) component of uniprot sequences for training eficaz 2.5. subsequently, we applied eficaz 2.5 to annotate 396 fully sequenced genomes in the ensembl database belonging to bacteria, fungi, protists, metazoans, plants and vertebrates. the results are cataloged and are available at http://cssb.biology .gatech.edu/enzymes.  
