elaspic web-server: proteome-wide structure-based prediction of mutation effects on protein stability and binding affinity elaspic is a novel ensemble machine-learning approach that predicts the effects of mutations on protein folding and proteinprotein interactions. here, we present the elaspic web-server, which makes the elaspic pipeline available through a fast and intuitive interface. the web-server can be used to evaluate the effect of mutations on any protein in the uniprot database, and allows all predicted results, including modeled wild-type and mutated structures, to be managed and viewed online and downloaded if needed. it is backed by a database which contains improved structural domain definitions, and a list of curated domaindomain interactions for all known proteins , as well as homology models of domains and domaindomain interactions for the human proteome. homology models for proteins of other organisms are calculated on the fly, and mutations are evaluated within minutes once the homology model is available. availability and implementation: the elaspic webserver is available online at http://elaspic.kimsequence variation in the human genome is a crucial aspect in biomedical research. many variants can directly cause mendelian diseases and can confer susceptibility or protection to more multifactorial diseases, such as cancer . to unravel the mechanism behind those phenotypic effects we first need to understand the biochemical impact of mutations. a number of computational tools have been developed to predict the effect of mutations on protein stability or binding . however, those tools require a resolved crystal structure of the protein, precluding their application on a proteome-wide scale. there are webservers which use structural information to predict the effect of mutations , and which map mutations to proteins in a 3d protein interaction network . however, none of those resources predict the effect of mutations on protein protein interaction affinity. here, we present a webserver that can be used to predict the effect of mutations on protein stability and protein interaction affinity, for any protein for which a homology model can be constructed. the webserver is based on the elaspic pipeline , but drastically simplifies the experience for the end user.impact results for all human mutations implicated in hereditary diseases and cancers. new mutations are evaluated within minutes if homology models are available, and under an hour if those models are to be generated. the webserver offers a streamlined and intuitive interface for analyzing the results, and makes all predictions and structures available for download.  
