systems biology empirical bayes conditional independence graphs for regulatory network recovery motivation: computational inference methods that make use of graphical models to extract regulatory networks from gene expression data can have difficulty reconstructing dense regions of a network, a consequence of both computational complexity and unreliable parameter estimation when sample size is small. as a result, identification of hub genes is of special difficulty for these methods. methods: we present a new algorithm, empirical light mutual min (elmm), for large network reconstruction that has properties well suited for recovery of graphs with high-degree nodes. elmm reconstructs the undirected graph of a regulatory network using empirical bayes conditional independence testing with a heuristic relaxation of independence constraints in dense areas of the graph. this relaxation allows only one gene of a pair with a putative relation to be aware of the network connection, an approach that is aimed at easing multiple testing problems associated with recovering densely connected structures. results: using in silico data, we show that elmm has better performance than commonly used network inference algorithms including genenet, aracne, foci, genie3 and glasso. we also apply elmm to reconstruct a network among 5492 genes expressed in human lung airway epithelium of healthy non-smokers, healthy smokers and individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease assayed using microarrays. the analysis identifies dense sub-networks that are consistent with known regulatory relationships in the lung airway and also suggests novel hub regulatory relationships among a number of genes that play roles in oxidative stress and secretion. availability and implementation: software for running elmm is made available ata combination of microarray and next-generation sequencing are producing data on the gene expression profiles that characterize the to whom correspondence should be addressed. genomic and regulatory states of cell populations . these data contain information that can be mined to identify regulatory relationships responsible for genomic profiles and that are important for understanding processes underlying disease development . a variety of algorithms making use of probabilistic graphical models, both directed and undirected, have been used to recover putative network structure from such data . these approaches have been successful in recovering networks with broad-scale topology which are consistent with gene and pathway annotations, where some of the predicted relationships have been verified by experiments . to deal with the high dimensionality and small sample size of training data that is typical of gene expression experiments, researchers have used various strategies, including regularized estimation of parameters , learning sparse networks , empirical estimation of testing statistics and mutual information methods . these approaches were shown to improve the accuracy of the network inference especially when the recovered network is sparse. in spite of these advances, the goal of highly accurate recovery of regulation networks, which are not necessarily sparse, remains a difficult problem . in this article, we present a new algorithm, empirical light mutual min (elmm), for reconstructing undirected networks from gene expression data, which has properties well suited for recovering dense network regions when the size of the observed samples is small. elmm is a variant of bayesian network (bn) inference approaches that include reconstruction of an undirected graph, the skeleton of the bn, using conditional independence (ci) testing . elmm uses an empirical bayes approach to learn the independence/dependence parameters from gene expression data, an approach that has been found to have good properties for dealing with small samples and noisy data . in addition, elmm uses a heuristic relaxation of independence testing that aims at easing the effects of the multiple testing problem when recovering densely connected sub-graphs. we assessed the performance of elmm using 10 in silico networks simulated based on known regulatory mechanisms and network topologies in yeast and escherichia coli. the analysis shows that elmm has a higher accuracy compared with popular network recovery algorithms including genenet (copyedited by: sk manuscript category: original paper  
