data and text mining emzed: an open source framework in python for rapid and interactive development of lc/ms data analysis workflows the python-based, open-source emzed framework was developed for mass spectrometry (ms) users to create tailored work-flows for liquid chromatography (lc)/ms data analysis. the goal was to establish a unique framework with comprehensive basic function-alities that are easy to apply and allow for the extension and modification of the framework in a straightforward manner. emzed supports the iterative development and prototyping of individual evaluation strategies by providing a computing environment and tools for inspecting and modifying underlying lc/ms data. the framework specifically addresses non-expert programmers, as it requires only basic knowledge of python and relies largely on existing successful open-source software, e.g. openms. availability: the framework emzed and its documentation are freely available atliquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (lc/ms) data analysis generally requires flexible software tools. although a number of solutions for specific or multiple applications currently exist, many of these belong to one of two extremes. the first group includes frameworks that are highly flexible but have been developed in languages (e.g. c) that require advanced programming skills, e.g. openms . although such frameworks have a rapid application run time, the testing of new workflows and concepts is cumbersome because programming requirements are high, and edit-compile cycles are slow. the second group includes closed black-box solutions with graphical user interfaces that are easy to use but inherently non-transparent and inflexible, e.g. maven and mzmine2 . note that libraries such as the r-based xcms or the matlab-based bioinformatics toolbox (mathworks, natick, ma, usa) lie between these extremes. the motivation to develop emzed was to provide an open-source framework to establish transparent and flexible workflows for high-end data treatment that requires only basic programming skills of the user. to this end, we combined the powerful and easy-to-learn programming language python, a comprehensive library of elementary building blocks, and an integrated development environment.metabolomics and related fields are rapidly progressing and require the development and modification of workflows and analytical strategies. in this context, the speed of data analysis routines is an important factor, although efforts to implement and test new solutions are equally important. to this end, emzed provides a workspace and capability to inspect and visualize interim results at each step of data processing. in addition, emzed provides a common base for developing individual applications and supports interchangeable individual solutions. this approach may help to simplify the current landscape of existing lc/ms software, which is fragmented and often laboratory specific.  
