genetics and population analysis enlight: web-based integration of gwas results with biological annotations identifying causal variants remains a key challenge in post-gwas (genome-wide association study) era, as many gwas single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) (including imputed ones) fall into non-coding regions, making it difficult to associate statistical significance with predicted functionality. therefore, we created a web-based tool, enlight, which overlays functional annotation information , such as histone modification states, methylation patterns, transcription factor binding sites, eqtl and higher-order chromosomal structure, to gwas results. availability and implementation: accessible by a web browser atgenome-wide association studies (gwas) enabled the identification of genetic variants associated with complex diseases and traits. to date, there are 14 012 genome-wide significant variants in the gwas catalog . however, most of the top hits are believed to be proxy markers for the underlying causal variants, and the majority of those variants lie within noncoding sequences . despite substantial efforts in the post-gwas era to identify causal variants, lack of knowledge on biological functions has become a major hurdle for differentiating causal variants from highly correlated tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps). a large amount of biological annotation is now available for non-coding sequences, given the community efforts devoted to elucidating functional significance of non-coding sequences in the past few years. for example, the encode project has systematically mapped regions of active transcription, transcription factor (tf) association, chromatin structure and histone modification, and assigned at least one biochemical function to 80 of the genome . recent studies showed that disease-related variants detected by gwas are significantly enriched in regions where regulatory elements are inferred, such as dnase i hypersensitivity sites and tf binding sites (tfbs) . proper integration of this biological information with gwas results will likely shed light on prioritization and identification of candidate causal variants . to that end, tools such as haploreg , regulomedb , gwas3d and funcisnp were developed to leverage functional annotations to interrogate gwas variants. however, users cannot visually recognize the annotation patterns. the popularity of regional plots highlights the importance of visual inspection of the gwas results. although locuszoom generates high-quality images showing local linkage disequilibrium (ld) and association significance, it provides little information for interpreting non-coding variants. therefore, we developed a web-based tool, enlight, combining biological annotation and gwas-related information into one single plot. it takes gwas results (including imputed ones) as input, and returns a regional plot with a variety of epigenetic information, such as histone modification, methylation patterns, tfbs, eqtl and higher-order chromosomal structure.  
