a generalized model for multi-marker analysis of cell cycle progression in synchrony experiments motivation: to advance understanding of eukaryotic cell division, it is important to observe the process precisely. to this end, researchers monitor changes in dividing cells as they traverse the cell cycle, with the presence or absence of morphological or genetic markers indicating a cells position in a particular interval of the cell cycle. a wide variety of marker data is available, including information-rich cellular imaging data. however, few formal statistical methods have been developed to use these valuable data sources in estimating how a population of cells progresses through the cell cycle. furthermore, existing methods are designed to handle only a single binary marker of cell cycle progression at a time. consequently, they cannot facilitate comparison of experiments involving different sets of markers. results: here, we develop a new sampling model to accommodate an arbitrary number of different binary markers that characterize the progression of a population of dividing cells along a branching process. we engineer a strain of saccharomyces cerevisiae with fluorescently labeled markers of cell cycle progression, and apply our new model to two image datasets we collected from the strain, as well as an independent dataset of different markers. we use our model to estimate the duration of post-cytokinetic attachment between a s.cerevisiae mother and daughter cell. the java implementation is fast and extensible, and includes a graphical user interface. our model provides a powerful and flexible cell cycle analysis tool, suitable to any type or combination of binary markers.cell division is a process fundamental to the growth, development and reproduction of every living organism. in the case of the budding yeast, saccharomyces cerevisiae, cell division entails a complex and highly regulated series of morphological and genetic changes . to better understand these changesand thereby the nature of budding yeast cell cycle progressionresearchers track the status of certain cellular features that mark progress through the cell division cycle. one way to monitor cell cycle progression is with populations of dividing cells. such approaches entail synchronizing a population of cells in culture at some discrete cell cycle stage, releasing the to whom correspondence should be addressed. population into the cell division cycle and collecting independent samples from the culture after release. under such an approach, marker status for a sample of cells can then be quantified at each time point. fluorescent microscope images provide a rich source of marker data and have become increasingly common . microscope images provide the means to track large numbers of cellular features. fluorescence images, for example, can reveal the localization and status of organelles, protein complexes and single proteins . in a cell cycle context, microscope images permit the visualization and quantitation of multiple cell-cycle-regulated markers, offering a more detailed view of the relationships and dependencies between subprocesses of cell division. however, few methods currently exist to extract from these image data reliable estimates of cell cycle event timing or of cell cycle progression dynamics in the population. furthermore, the types and combinations of markersimagederived or otherwisecan vary across studies. in the case of budding yeast, many groups look for the presence of a bud (the precursor of the soon-to-be-formed daughter cell). however, additional marker data can run the gamut from flow cytometric measurements of dna content to the aforementioned features derived from microscopy images. this lack of consensus in the markers under observation complicates the comparison of cell cycle analyses across studies. thus, new general methods are required to jointly model marker data, especially when the type or combination of markers changes from one study to another. we present a powerful, general model of cell cycle progression in a population of cells estimated from any number or combination of binary-valued markers. we build on a branching process framework called cloccs (characterizing loss of cell cycle synchrony), previously developed in our lab for the purpose of describing populations undergoing cell division . however, in this article, we develop a completely new sampling model that is suited to estimating parameters from any experiment involving some combination of binary markers of progression. in addition, our sampling model is designed to address subtle aspects of observed data that crop up in real experiments. for instance, some small but non-negligible number of cells may be dead or halted during the experiment (and thus not progressing through the cell cycle like the other cells); our sampling model is capable of estimating the number of such cells. we demonstrate the utility of our new sampling model on two datasets of differential interference contrast (dic) and fluorescenceusing a multimodal imaging platform, we collected dic and fluorescence microscopy images of four markers of budding yeast cell cycle progression; namely, myosin rings, buds, short mitotic spindles and long mitotic spindles. we used the dic images to measure budding and the fluorescence images to detect the other markers (see section 3.2). we processed the images visually, counting cells with each marker across all fields of view at each time point. we compiled two such image datasets on populations of budding yeast cells synchronized either by treatment with the mating pheromone -factor or by centrifugal elutriation. in the former method of synchronization, cells arrest at the point of cell cycle entry in late g 1 known as start . centrifugal elutriation on the other hand selects cells based on their size, isolating the smallest cells.one obvious extension of the model framework would be to obtain a joint measurement of the marker status of each cell, rather than independently assaying the presence of each marker as we are now. knowing the joint marker status of each cell would permit the modeling of markers as a multivariate binomial random variable, and thus allow us to assess correlations between the presence of different markers, which might be particularly important when i301shown are fits with the -factor-treated cells using a model not accounting either for cells with visible markers during synchronization recovery or for dead cells. shown in (b) and (c) are fits with a model accounting only for dead cells or for early cells, respectively. the model fits in (d) accounted for both early and dead cells.  
