ensemble-based evaluation for protein structure models motivation: comparing protein tertiary structures is a fundamental procedure in structural biology and protein bioinformatics. structure comparison is important particularly for evaluating computational protein structure models. most of the model structure evaluation methods perform rigid body superimposition of a structure model to its crystal structure and measure the difference of the corresponding residue or atom positions between them. however, these methods neglect intrinsic flexibility of proteins by treating the native structure as a rigid molecule. because different parts of proteins have different levels of flexibility, for example, exposed loop regions are usually more flexible than the core region of a protein structure, disagreement of a model to the native needs to be evaluated differently depending on the flexibility of residues in a protein. results: we propose a score named flexscore for comparing protein structures that consider flexibility of each residue in the native state of proteins. flexibility information may be extracted from experiments such as nmr or molecular dynamics simulation. flexscore considers an ensemble of conformations of a protein described as a multivariate gaussian distribution of atomic displacements and compares a query computational model with the ensemble. we compare flexscore with other commonly used structure similarity scores over various examples. flexscore agrees with experts intuitive assessment of computational models and provides information of practical usefulness of models. availability and implementation: https://bitbucket.org/mjamroz/flexscoreproteins are intrinsically flexible molecules. flexibility is essential in understanding protein activity where conformational entropy has a major role, including protein-ligand , proteinprotein interactions , protein allostery , and protein folding. although it is conventional to consider a single structure for a protein particularly when the structure was solved by x-ray crystallography, a protein can change its conformation in different experimental conditions . furthermore, there is compelling evidence that indicates even x-ray diffraction data contains flexibility information and that diffraction data can be interpreted into different conformations . indeed, a group of structural biologists proposed to deposit an ensemble of structures even for x-ray crystallography to public databases so that data represent structural heterogeneity and dynamics more properly . thus, in principle it is more appropriate to represent a protein structure as an ensemble of alternative conformations . in practice, flexibility information of a protein can be obtained either from experiments, such as nmr, or computational analysis including molecular dynamics (md) simulations and normal mode analysis. by bringing flexibility into the picture of proteins, the protein sequence-tostructure-to-function paradigm must be revised to sequence-to-structure-to-dynamics-to-function. reflecting the current situation that a protein is usually represented with a single conformation, most of the commonly used protein structure model evaluation methods compare a model against a single structure of the protein (the native structure). for example,we proposed a new score named fs and its variant, fs-gdt, which evaluates the quality of computational protein structure models by considering flexibility of protein chains. fs effectively distinguishes deviations of a model from a reference structure at intrinsically flexible and rigid regions, and assigns more permissive scores to the former than the latter. this is reasonable from the biophysics perspective of protein structures. the flexibility of a protein was measured from a md simulation of 10 ns because it was long enough to observe large flexibility in protein terminal regions and to highlight incorrect regions of structure models that are beyond the range of chain flexibility. for a casp11 model, t0733, we extended the md run to 100 ns, but fs did not show meaningful change (supplementary table s2 and). the framework provided here is valid in principle with any data of protein flexibility, and fs would provide reasonable evaluation to these models under the provided flexibility information. we point out that md simulations are easier to perform than it used to be, for example by using web-based md tools . previously, we developed a method named flexpred, which predicts absolute values of residue fluctuation from a tertiary structure (i.e. a pdb file) of a target protein , which can be also used to obtain flexibility. at this juncture, it would be of interest to discuss difference of using md simulations and using b-factors as the source of fluctuation. as mentioned in introduction, the work by wu & wu introduced a b-factor weighted rmsd (2010). first of all, the level of fluctuation considered are different between them. b-factors indicate discrepancy of a solved structure to the x-ray diffraction pattern of the protein. thus, although the b-factors were shown to have correlation to residue flexibility observed in computational simulation , it is flexibility in the crystal condition of proteins. it was shown that b-factors are appropriate measure of fluctuations for stable parts of proteins, but significantly underestimate motion in flexible regions . in contrast, md used in fs is aimed at considering flexibility of proteins in solution, which is a more natural environment for proteins. from a technical stand point, to use b-factors for flexibility value, a weight parameter needs to be arbitrarily selected because b-factors do not provide absolute values of flexibility . also in fs, flexibility is used more explicitly in the structure superimposition step than the b-factor weighted rmsd. the results in the prediction group ranking shows that fs is in reasonable agreement with the other existing scores. in recent rounds of the casp experiments, computational models are evaluated with a combination of several scoring terms that examine different structural aspects of models . combined with other scores, fs will be able to provide a new viewpoint to the protein structure evaluation. the technique  
