genetics and population analysis ensemblegasvr: a novel ensemble method for classifying missense single nucleotide polymorphisms motivation: single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) are considered the most frequently occurring dna sequence variations. several computational methods have been proposed for the classification of mis-sense snps to neutral and disease associated. however, existing computational approaches fail to select relevant features by choosing them arbitrarily without sufficient documentation. moreover, they are limited to the problem of missing values, imbalance between the learning datasets and most of them do not support their predictions with confidence scores. results: to overcome these limitations, a novel ensemble computational methodology is proposed. ensemblegasvr facilitates a two-step algorithm, which in its first step applies a novel evolutionary embedded algorithm to locate close to optimal support vector regression models. in its second step, these models are combined to extract a universal predictor, which is less prone to overfitting issues, systematizes the rebalancing of the learning sets and uses an internal approach for solving the missing values problem without loss of information. confidence scores support all the predictions and the model becomes tunable by modifying the classification thresholds. an extensive study was performed for collecting the most relevant features for the problem of classifying snps, and a superset of 88 features was constructed. experimental results show that the proposed framework outperforms well-known algorithms in terms of classification performance in the examined datasets. finally, the proposed algorithmic framework was able to uncover the significant role of certain features such as the solvent accessibility feature, and the top-scored predictions were further validated by linking them with disease phenotypes. availability and implementation: datasets and codes are freely available on the web atunderstanding the relationship between genotype and phenotype is a fundamental problem in biology and biomedicine. today, genome-wide sequencing combined with high-throughput platforms deliver significant improvements over older methods for identifying dna sequence variations . one of the most common types of genetic variation in humans is the single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps). a particular subcategory of snps called non-synonymous coding snps (nssnps) or missense snps refers to a single base substitution in a coding region that causes an amino acid substitution in the corresponding protein. the effects of nssnps in molecular function range from complete neutrality to disease susceptibility and lethality . coding-region snps not only characterize human evolution and diversity but are also associated with drug sensitivity and disease susceptibility . classifying nssnps according to their phenotypic effects has an important insinuation for understanding several diseases and exploring genetic ancestry, evolution and diversity among species . consequently, the effective characterization of polymorphic variations emerges as a challenging area of research. testing experimentally the relationship between nssnps and diseases is not a trivial task and has several disadvantages in terms of cost and time . for this purpose, several computational methods have been developed . from the algorithmic perspective, there are two types of existing methodologies. the first type concerns the sequence homology methods that apply conservation analysis of amino acids substitutions among evolutionarily related proteins . in principle, highly conserved residues in the polypeptide chain seem to be intolerant to amino acid substitutions, whereas positions with low degree of conservation allow more substitution without affecting protein functionality. the latter type regards machine learning (ml) methods that reformulate the characterization problem to a classification task and categorize polymorphisms into neutral or pathogenic based on structural, functional, sequential and evolutionary attributes. up to now, several classification techniques have been applied including artificial neural networks , random forests , na ve bayes classifiers to whom correspondence should be addressed. and support vector machines (svm;). although these methods have led to the characterization of a great number of snps and achieve high classification performance, they have so far been limited by several disadvantages . for instance, features used for classification are chosen arbitrarily without sufficient documentation . furthermore, the feature selection process, which is of great importance for several bioinformatics problems , is not systematized . additionally, handling imbalanced pathogenic and neutral datasets is another obstacle that the existing methodologies fail to tackle efficiently . similar to other bioinformatics applications, the problem of missing values is also present and restricts the generalization ability of the developed models. the effective imputation of missing features without loss of information or expensive computations are aspects that require further consideration. in this study, a novel ml methodology called ensemblegasvr is introduced. ensemblegasvr is an embedded classification technique, which combines an adaptive genetic algorithm (ga) with nu-support vector regression (nu-svr), through an ensemble algorithmic framework. ensemblegasvr predicts whether a given nssnp is pathogenic or neutral, based on an extensive feature set that contains the most indicative features proposed in the literature. the feature selection component is integrated to the learning phase of the methodology and uses an adaptive ga for selecting relevant feature subsets. simultaneously, the ga optimizes the nu-svr parameters using a novel objective function tailored to the problem-related requirements. also, to deal with the problem of missing values in the datasets, alleviate the class imbalance lying in the examined datasets and raise the algorithms overall performance, ensemblegasvr combines eight individual classification models that extend the proposed algorithm to function as an ensemble technique. specifically, for the classification of a single snp, only models for which this particular snp has missing values below a predefined threshold are deployed to classify it. by training multiple classifiers and using a fitness function specialized for imbalanced bioinformatics datasets, we take advantage of our full dataset distribution, while at the same time we reduce the effects of class imbalance. the combined action of multiple classifiers enables the acquisition of an extremely robust regression technique, which could be used to classify snps and assign scores for every prediction. moreover, by varying the ensemble classification threshold, ensemblegasvr becomes tunable in terms of sensitivity and specificity. experimental results indicate that the proposed algorithmic technique outperformed existing methods in the datasets, which were used in this study, and leads to the automatic identification of a small and consistent subset of polymorphic features. ensemblegasvr achieves a correct prediction rate of 87.45 and a geometric mean of 82, tested on an independent human nssnps dataset. a set of four features appears to be present in all the eight extracted independent svr models, and useful conclusions are made about their role in characterizing snps. moreover, one newly introduced feature, protein essentiality, is selected in six of the eight svr models indicating its importance in classifying nssnps.  
