gene expression a general method for accurate estimation of false discovery rates in identification of differentially expressed genes the omic data such as genomic data, transcriptomic data, proteomic data and single nucleotide polymorphism data have been rapidly growing. the omic data are large-scale and high-through-put data. such data challenge traditional statistical methodologies and require multiple tests. several multiple-testing procedures such as bonferroni procedure, benjaminihochberg (bh) procedure and westfallyoung procedure have been developed, among which some control family-wise error rate and the others control false discovery rate (fdr). these procedures are valid in some cases and cannot be applied to all types of large-scale data. to address this statistically challenging problem in the analysis of the omic data, we propose a general method for generating a set of multiple-testing procedures. this method is based on the bh theorems. by choosing a c-value, one can realize a specific multiple-testing procedure. for example, by setting c 1.22, our method produces the bh procedure. with c51.22, our method generates procedures of weakly controlling fdr, and with c41.22, the procedures strongly control fdr. those with c g (number of genes or tests) and c 0 are, respectively , the bonferroni procedure and the single-testing procedure. these are the two extreme procedures in this family. to let one choose an appropriate multiple-testing procedure in practice, we develop an algorithm by which fdr can be correctly and reliably estimated. simulated results show that our method works well for an accurate estimation of fdr in various scenarios, and we illustrate the applications of our method with three real datasets.the advance of omic technologies has led to a great development of large-scale data such as microarray data, transcriptomic data, metabolomic data and proteomic data. these omic data enable us to take a global insight into complex biological procedures, the interaction between genetic and environmental factors and pathological mechanisms of complex diseases, such as diabetes, heart disease, hypertension and various cancers, via identification of genes differentially expressed and cluster or classification of functional genes, pathway or network. such large-scale data or high-throughput data challenge traditional statistical tests because the traditional statistical tests are single tests. in a single hypothesis test, the threshold is meaningful for determining whether a test is significant because is a probabilistic threshold for the occurrence of an event in a population. however, threshold 0.05 does not remain valid for multiple statistical analyses of omic data because, for example, in identification of 10 000 genes, at least 500 findings are expected by chance at the significance level of 0.05 . therefore, threshold is required to be adjusted for multiple tests. currently, several statistical procedures have been developed for adjusting threshold or adjusting p-values in the multiple tests. among them, the bonferroni procedure, the holm procedure , the hochberg procedure , the westfall and young procedure , the sidak procedure , the benjaminihochberg (bh) procedure and the benjaminiliu procedure are typical multiple-testing approaches. among these procedures, the bh procedure has been most broadly applied in practice. but we found that the true false discovery rate (fdr) does not always remain consistent with the estimated fdr of the bh procedure, and all existing multiple-testing procedures are actually special cases of the multiple-testing procedure family that ranges from the single-testing procedure to the bonferroni procedure; in other words, these procedures give different rejection space . in practice, our simulation also shows that true fdr is often significantly overestimated or underestimated by the bh procedure. to accurately estimate fdr in a largescale statistical analysis, here we propose a method that is based on the bh theorems to generate a set of multiple-testing procedures in a range of the single-testing procedures to the bonferroni procedure and a simulation algorithm to choose a desirable procedure.the first example for application of the multiple-procedure approach ismicroarray data. as seen above, the data consist of 7129 genes.tried to find genes differentially expressed between four human lymphoblastoid cell line samples treated by ionizing radiation and four samples without ionizing radiation. we set 140 c-values from 0.1 to 1.39 to create 140 multiple-testing procedures. because c-value40.92 did not produce meaningful results (no findings), we obtained a set of 83 real ratios of findings from the real data using classical two-condition t-test method. after adjusting, we found a 0.02, b 2.9 and 0.3 and repeated our algorithm process for 15 times and generated a set of 83 estimated ratios of findings and a set of 83 estimated fdrs. we plotted real and estimated ratios of findings in. applications of our method to the real data. the real ratio set of findings was obtained by using a set of 140 procedures for multiple t-tests of gene differential expressions between two conditions from a real dataset. the estimated ratio set of findings was obtained by using our method from 15 simulated datasets each similar to real data. the estimated ratio of findings is compelled to be identical to its real value across all given procedures so that the true fdr generated by each of procedures would be reliably estimated. column 1: plots of estimated versus real ratios of findings. solid line is a regression line, dash line is observed line. column 2: plots of estimated fdrs versus c-values (procedures). row a: the ionizing irradiation microarray data provided by. 7129 genes of being expressed in 4 human lymphoblastoid cell line samples treated by ionizing radiation and in 4 samples without ionizing radiation were detected on human cdna arrays. row b: the data are acute leukemia microarray data that were downloaded from broad institute cancer program data set. this dataset consists of 12582 genes whose expression values in 24 acute lymphoblastic leukemia (all) cell lines and in 28 acute myelogenous leukemia (aml) cell lines were measured by oligonucleotide arrays. row c: arabidopsis microarray data . this dataset contains 22810 genes that were detected for differentially expression between the c58 infected and control stalks each with 3 replicates on plant arabidopsis gene chip. plots of true versus bh-estimated fdr in existing statistical methods. estimated curve was made by plotting estimated fdr against true fdr along cutoff of $0 to $0.21 and theoretical line is a diagonal line made by plotting true fdr against true fdr along the same cutoff. the true fdr was calculated by counting false positives in findings of a statistical method at an fdr cutoff point in a simulated dataset and the estimated fdr was predicted by a statistical method. the true and estimated fdrs were averaged over three simulated datasets. (a) exact tests, (b) generalized linear model, (c) empirical bayesian, (d) beta t-tests almost a diagonal line with intersection 0 0.0008 0 and regression coefficient 1 0.94511. hence, the estimated ratio of findings is proximately identical to its real ratio at each of c-values. thus, the simulated fdr given incan be used to estimate the true fdr across the 83 c-values.shows that the smallest fdr is 0.36 at c-value 0.92, which is much larger than cutoff of 0.05. therefore, at fdr cutoff of 0.05, no gene in this dataset was found to be differentially expressed between human lymphoblastoid cell lines treated with ionizing radiation and control cell lines. this result is consistent with the report of tusher et al., the plot dots of the estimated versus real ratios of findings almost fall on a diagonal line with intersection 0 0:0065 0 and regression coefficient 1 0:9824 1, suggesting that the estimated ratio of findings was constrained to be almost identical to the real one at each c-level. thus, the true fdr set can be given by the estimated fdr set.shows that at c 1.31, fdr 0.049723 is close to 0.05 at which 582 genes were identified to be differentially expressed between all and aml cell lines. the third example is arabidopsis microarray data. to explore whether arabidopsis genes respond to oncogenes encoded by the transfer-dna (t-dna) or to bacterial effector proteins codelivered by agrobacteria into the plant cells, lee et al. (2009) conducted microarray experiments at 3 h and 6 d after inoculating wounded young arabidopsis plants with strains c58 and gv3101, a cognate of strain c58, which only lacks transferdna, but possesses proteinaceous virulence (vir) factors such as vird2, vire2, vire3 and virf . wounded, but uninfected, stalks were served as control. as an example, we just downloaded 6d postinoculation data from geo (geo accession: gse14106) website (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/geo/). the data consisting of 22 810 genes were obtained from the c58 infected and control stalks each with three replicates. we performed the classical two-condition t-test approach on this dataset and applied our multiple-procedure approach to do multiple tests. we set 140 c-values from 0.01 to 1.4 to create 140 procedures and obtained 140 real ratios of findings from two-condition t-tests. after adjusting, we found a 0.08, b 15 and 0.035. using these parameters, we obtained 140 estimated ratios of findings and fdrs by 140 procedures for 15 repeats.shows that the observed plot line of estimated versus real ratios of findings completely overlapped with the predicted line. because intersection 0 0:007 0 and regression coefficient 1 0:985 1, the observed line of estimated and real ratios of findings is a diagonal line, so that the estimated ratio of findings is one-to-one identical to the real one at each cvalue. thus, the true fdr set can be given by the estimated fdr set.shows that 1427 genes were identified to be differentially expressed between the young tumor and control stalks at c 1.2 with fdr 0.0497 . however, using the fold change method,just identified 196 differentially expressed genes at p50.01. both have a big difference. to verify our findings, we displayed heatmap of the raw data of the 1427 de genes selected in.shows that in the downregulation, all the 498 genes clearly had much lower expression values in young crown gall tumors than in. heatmap. rows are 1427 genes found to be differentially expressed between young tumor (6d postinoculation), and control stalk and columns are three control (reference) stalk replicates (right side) and three young tumor replicates (left side), among which 498 genes were downregulated in c58 strain relative to control stalk, and 929 were upregulated in c58 strain relative to control stalks. yellow is the lowest expression values, and deep red is the highest expression valuesthe probabilistic threshold is adjusted as where is called rate for controlling false discoveries. the single-testing procedure and the bonferroni procedure are two extreme procedures. as shown in, the single-testing procedure is a top horizontal line with 1 for all g tests, whereas the bonferroni procedure is a bottom horizontal line with 1/g for all g tests. the bh procedure has the rate of controlling false discoveries i/g where i 1. .. , g, which is a diagonal line. they all are special cases of our method. interestingly, if equation (9) is changed asour multiple-procedures can then switch the step-up procedures given in equation (9) to the step-down procedures given in equation (13): for r 1 0, we have 1 =g, whereas for r g 1, we have g . like step-up procedures, by changing c-value, a set of r k-values is also altered so that a set of new multiple-testing procedures is created. if c 0, then r k 1 and k for all hypotheses, which is the single-testing procedure. if c41000, then r k 0 and k /g for all hypotheses, which is just bonferroni procedure. if c x so that g ri i, i 1,. .. , g, then i =g i 1 is just the holm procedure. if c y so that i =g g ri 1 ai=g, we get a proximate bh procedure. these indicate that in our multiple-procedure approach, the step-down procedures are equivalent to the step-up procedures. as seen in, our method is somewhat similar to sam and ram because a set of c-values (procedures) is equivalent to a set of thresholds (s) given for declaring significant tests in comparison between the observed ranked statistics and the estimated ranked null statistics in sam and ram. however, as seen inand in supplementary table s1, our method ensures that estimated fdr is close to its true value by constraining that the estimated ratio of findings is identical or approximate to its real ratio at each of the given c-values, whereas the sam and ram do not have any constraint to ensure that estimation of fdr is reliable.  
