gene expression epigenetic priors for identifying active transcription factor binding sites motivation accurate knowledge of the genome-wide binding of transcription factors in a particular cell type or under a particular condition is necessary for understanding transcriptional regulation. using epigenetic data such as histone modification and dnase i, accessibility data has been shown to improve motif-based in silico methods for predicting such binding, but this approach has not yet been fully explored. results we describe a probabilistic method for combining one or more tracks of epigenetic data with a standard dna sequence motif model to improve our ability to identify active transcription factor binding sites (tfbss). we convert each data type into a position-specific probabilistic prior and combine these priors with a traditional probabilistic motif model to compute a log-posterior odds score. our experiments, using histone modifications h3k4me1, h3k4me3, h3k9ac and h3k27ac, as well as dnase i sensitivity, show conclusively that the log-posterior odds score consistently outperforms a simple binary filter based on the same data. we also show that our approach performs competitively with a more complex method, centipede, and suggest that the relative simplicity of the log-posterior odds scoring method makes it an appealing and very general method for identifying functional tfbss on the basis of dna and epigenetic evidence. availability and implementation: fimo, part of the meme suite software toolkit, now supports log-posterior odds scoring using position-specific priors for motif search. a web server and source code are available at http://meme.nbcr.net. utilities for creating priors are at http://research.binding of transcription factors (tfs) to dna is a key step in the regulation of gene expression, strongly influencing the activation or repression of genes. however, accurately locating transcription factor binding sites (tfbss) in eukaryotic genomes containing to whom correspondence should be addressed. gigabases of dna is challenging because a typical tf binds to relatively short (410 bp) dna sequences that occur at many places throughout the genome, only a small portion of which are actively involved in gene regulation in any particular cell type. in vivo, several molecular mechanisms limit the binding of tfs to a small fraction of the potential sites. perhaps most significantly, local chromatin structure, arising from the packaging of dna, histones and other proteins, occludes access of the tf to many genomic loci. some aspects of this structure notably, numerous types of post-translational covalent modifications such as acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination, ribosylation, glycosylation and sumoylationaffect tf binding in a complex fashion that is not yet completely understood. empirically, however, numerous studies have shown that tf binding is associated with several types of histone marks (e.g mono-and tri-methylation of histone h3 lysine 4) and with hypersensitivity to cleavage by dnase i . in light of these observations, a variety of computational methods have been proposed that aim to improve our ability to identify active tfbss on the basis of the dna sequence plus one or more epigenetic experimental assays. perhaps the simplest such approach scans for occurrences of a specified dna motif, but deterministically filters out some positions on the basis of the raw signal from a histone modification chip-seq assay . this type of filter greatly improves the accuracy of tfbs prediction. several other integrative methods have been proposed for combining dna motifs with chromatin data . among these methods, the one most directly comparable to the one proposed here is centipede , which employs a hierarchical bayesian mixture model that incorporates information about the dna sequence, evolutionary conservation, distance to the transcription start site, dnase i accessibility and activating and repressing histone marks. in this work, we propose a probabilistic method for combining one more more tracks of epigenetic data with a standard dna sequence motif model to improve our ability to identify active tfbss. our work thus makes two primary methodological contributions. first, we describe a heuristic procedure for converting each data type into a probabilistic prior. the approach itself is novel, though it is motivated by similar methods introduced in the context ofpage: 57 5662  
