epimirbase: a comprehensive database of microrna-epilepsy associations micrornas are short non-coding rna which function to fine-tune protein levels in all cells. this is achieved mainly by sequence-specific binding to 3 0 untranslated regions of target mrna. the result is post-transcriptional interference in gene expression which reduces protein levels either by promoting destabilisation of mrna or translational repression. research published since 2010 shows that micrornas are important regulators of gene expression in epilepsy. a series of microrna profiling studies in rodent and human tissue has revealed that epilepsy is associated with wide ranging changes to microrna levels in the brain. these are thought to influence processes including cell death, inflammation and rewiring of neuronal networks. micrornas have also been identified in the blood after injury to the brain and therefore may serve as biomarkers of epilepsy. epimirbase is a manually curated database for researchers interested in the role of micrornas in epilepsy. the fully searchable database includes information on up-and down-regulated micrornas in the brain and blood, as well as functional studies, and covers both rodent models and human epilepsy.epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders, affecting 65 million people worldwide. it is characterised by recurring seizures; abnormal, synchronous firing of groups of neurons within the brain that disrupt sensory, motor and other brain functions . although antiepileptic drugs help control seizures for many patients, there is no cure for epilepsy and about one in three patients are drug resistant. analysis of brain tissue from patients and rodent models suggests that there are large-scale changes in gene expression within affected brain regions (pitk nen and). understanding what controls gene expression may open new avenues for treatment or prevention of epilepsy. micrornas are short non-coding rnas which function to fine-tune protein levels in all cells. they achieve this mainly by sequence-specific binding to 3 0 untranslated regions of target mrna . the result is post-transcriptional interference in gene expression which reduces protein levels either by promoting destabilisation of mrna or translational repression . targeting typically requires a 28-nt watson-crick base pairing (the so-called seed region) between the 5 0 end of the microrna and its mrna target . this interaction is mediated by proteins of the argonaute (ago) family, in particular ago2 . since 2010, research has emerged that shows micrornas are important regulators of gene expression in epilepsy. changes to many different micrornas have been reported to date, through a combination of animal studies and analysis of human tissue samples. the regulated micrornas are implicated in controlling levels of proteins involved in processes such as cell death, inflammation, re-wiring of v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com neuronal networks and other cell functions . micrornas have also been identified in the blood after injury to the brain and therefore may serve as biomarkers of epilepsy . a number of functional studies have determined that the manipulation of individual micrornas can exert a powerful effect on seizures and seizure-induced neuronal death . as active investigators in this growing area of epilepsy research, we recognised the need for a database to keep track of the rapidly expanding published literature on micrornas and epilepsy. we have developed epimirbase in order to provide complete and up-to-date information on all publications relating to micrornas and epilepsy. the database contains over 2000 manually curated microrna entries including up-/down-regulated micrornas from high-throughput profiling studies of human brain tissue and rodent experimental models, after evoked seizures and in chronic epilepsy; low-throughput expression analysis and functional studies in which micrornas have been manipulated in seizure models; and microrna biomarker studies in which micrornas have been surveyed in biofluids such as blood in epilepsy patients and animal models of epilepsy.  
