systems biology epitop—a proteochemometric tool for mhc class ii binding prediction motivation: t-cell epitope identification is a critical immuno-informatic problem within vaccine design. to be an epitope, a peptide must bind an mhc protein. results: here, we present epitop, the first server predicting mhc class ii binding based on proteochemometrics, a qsar approach for ligands binding to several related proteins. epitop uses a quantitative matrix to predict binding to 12 hla-drb1 alleles. it identifies 89 of known epitopes within the top 20 of predicted binders, reducing laboratory labour, materials and time by 80. epitop is easy to use, gives comprehensive quantitative predictions and will be expanded and updated with new quantitative matrices over time.t-cell epitope identification is a challenging immunoinformatic problem within vaccine design. to be an epitope, a peptide should bind a major histocompatibility complex (mhc) protein. for mhc class i, epitopes typically comprise 810 residues. the mhc class ii binding site is open-ended, allowing much longer peptides to bind, although only nine amino acids occupy the site. many computational methods have been developed for t-cell epitopes: see flower (2008). many work well and are widely used by immunologists and vaccinologists. most available epitope prediction methods separately address peptides binding particular mhc proteins, developing models for a single target allele. for mhc class ii, only the generalized artificial neural network (ann)-based server netmhciipan uses both peptide and human leukocyte antigen (hla) sequence information . recently, we developed a proteochemometrics-based approach to mhc class ii prediction . proteochemometrics, a quantitative structure-activity relationships (qsar) approach originally developed by wikberg , deals with ligands binding to several related proteins. in conventional qsar, the to whom correspondence should be addressed. x matrix of descriptors includes only information from ligands. in proteochemometrics, the x matrix contains information from proteins and ligands. a single proteochemometric model could potentially predict peptide binding to many mhc proteins. we have developed and validated several models for binding to several hla-drb1 alleles, and now make the best model available in the server epitop. it uses a quantitative matrix (qm) to predict peptide affinity to 12 hla-drb1 proteins: drb10101, drb10301, drb10401, drb10404, drb10405, drb1 0701, drb10802, drb10901, drb11101, drb11201, drb11301 and drb11501.we undertook a rigorous evaluation of the performance of epitop across three datasets, comparing it to that of either four or eight other servers, using either recall statistics or roc analysis. overall, epitop compares very favourably with other more specialized models. for the antijen and iedb datasets, epitop performs suboptimally only at the highest specificity; since it is strongly inclusive and much broader in its predictive potential, other much more highly focused, allele-specific models outperform it at this highly stringent level. at more permissive thresholds, and within statistical error, epitop performs identically to best-in-class servers. for lins dataset, the five tested binders were much close in performance: within the limits of error, epitop performs suboptimally only for drb10101. it is interesting to note that epitop is very much the best model for drb10301. for the identification of binding cores, epitop again performs well, but interestingly core identification correlates inversely with overall statistical perform, perhaps suggesting that much remains to be understood regarding class mhcpeptide interaction. taken together, results from these various benchmarking exercises both validate epitop and indicate that development of a synergistic meta-server, which integrates results from several servers should prove a useful exercise, hopefully yielding significant overall enhancements.epitop is the first proteochemometrics-based server for t-cell epitope prediction. it is a tool for performing preliminary computational analyses of large datasets for accelerated epitopebased vaccine design. it is easy to use, gives comprehensive quantitative predictions and will be expanded and updated with new qms.  
