genetics and population analysis eps: an empirical bayes approach to integrating pleiotropy and tissue-specific information for prioritizing risk genes motivation: researchers worldwide have generated a huge volume of genomic data, including thousands of genome-wide association studies (gwas) and massive amounts of gene expression data from different tissues. how to perform a joint analysis of these data to gain new biological insights has become a critical step in understanding the etiology of complex diseases. due to the polygenic architecture of complex diseases, the identification of risk genes remains challenging. motivated by the shared risk genes found in complex diseases and tissue-specific gene expression patterns, we propose as an empirical bayes approach to integrating pleiotropy and tissue-specific information (eps) for prioritizing risk genes. results: as demonstrated by extensive simulation studies, eps greatly improves the power of identification for disease-risk genes. eps enables rigorous hypothesis testing of pleiotropy and tissue specific risk gene expression patterns. all of the model parameters can be adaptively estimated from the developed expectationmaximization (em) algorithm. we applied eps to the bipo-lar disorder and schizophrenia gwas from the psychiatric genomics consortium, along with the gene expression data for multiple tissues from the genotype-tissue expression project. the results of the real data analysis demonstrate many advantages of eps. availability and implementation: the eps software is available on https://sites.google.com/site/as of april 2015, genome-wide association studies (gwas) have identified more than 15 000 disease-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) at a genome-wide significance level (i.e. p-value 5 10 8 ). despite these discoveries, these snps can only explain a small fraction of the genetic contribution to diseases . it is widely agreed that this phenomenon is due to polygenicity of complex phenotypes and the large number of risk variants with weak effects that remain undiscovered . growing evidence suggests that there are many genetic variants that may affect the multiple, seemingly different phenotypes (traits/ diseases) . in fact, a term named pleiotropy was introduced to describe such a phenomenon more than 100 years ago . the original definition of pleiotropy only v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com concerns the nonzero effect of a locus on different phenotypes and allows the effect direction to be either the same (i.e. the risk allele increases the risk of two diseases) or different (i.e. the risk allele increases the risk of one disease while decreases the risk of another disease). for example, the g allele of rs6983267 increases the risk for prostate cancer and colorectal cancer but the g allele of rs12720356 increases the risk for crohns disease and decreases the risk for psoriasis . a closely related but different concept is genetic correlation (also known as co-heritabilitycross-disorder group of the psychiatric). this refers to the correlation between the genetic effect sizes of two phenotypes and thus the direction of these effects plays a role. to be clear, when referring to pleiotropy in this article, we adopt its original definition. we are interested in the substantial overlap of genetic factors that underlie the multiple, seemingly different phenotypes. fortunately, more gwas results are becoming publicly available from gwas repositories, such as the gwasgrasp . this offers us an unprecedented opportunity to explore pleiotropic effects. besides an enormous amount of gwas data, diverse data resources for biological processes at different layers are also becoming available . for example, the ongoing genotype-tissue expression project (gtex) is generating a comprehensive atlas of gene expression and regulation across multiple human tissues . this provides abundant information to quantify biological processes that occur at the cellular level and thereby helps us to dissect the etiology of complex diseases. moreover, the comprehensive gene expression data in multiple tissues may avoid the potential bias of the candidate tissue approach. for example, in the study of obesity, the affected tissue is fat, but the causal tissue is, in some cases, the hypothalamus . this suggests that the integration of gwas data and gene expressions from multiple tissues may advance our understanding of complex diseases. at present, the accumulating evidence on pleiotropy and vast, publicly available data on tissuespecific gene expression [e.g. tiger and gtex (require novel statistical approaches to gain a deeper understanding of complex diseases . statistical approaches that take pleiotropy into consideration have recently become very active , such as the conditional false discovery rate (fdr) approach , and linear mixed model-based approaches . various statistical methods have also been proposed to analyze tissue-specific gene expression data , such as joint eqtl analysis in multiple tissues and covariate-modulated fdr (cmfdr) . more recently, a statistical approach named gpa was proposed to simultaneously integrate both pleiotropic information and functional annotation. although gpa has demonstrated a very promising direction for the integration of multiple sources of genomic information, it does not fully account for the effects of linkage disequilibrium (ld) and only allows binary annotation as its input. these disadvantages may limit its use in the integrative analysis of large-scale genomic data. in this article, we propose an empirical bayes approach to integrating pleiotropy and tissue-specific (eps) information for prioritizing risk genes. compared with some existing approaches , eps has several merits. first, eps only requires the summary statistics at the gene level, rather than the genotype data at the individual level. the ld effects are carefully accounted for when grouping the snp-level summary statistics into the gene level summary statistics by using reference panel data (e.g. 1000 genome data). second, eps is able to integrate both pleiotropy information and gene expression data (e.g. gtex data), which greatly improves the power of risk gene prioritization. third, eps provides rigorous hypothesis testing to evaluate the significance of pleiotropy and tissue-specific patterns. these merits are demonstrated via extensive simulation studies and real data analysis.we have presented a statistical approach, named eps, that can integrate pleiotropy information from gwas data and tissue-specific gene expression data. compared with some existing approaches, such as linear mixed models, which require genotype data at the individual level, eps only requires summary statistics for analysis. more importantly, eps provides statistically rigorous evaluations of tissue-specific gene expression patterns and pleiotropic effects via hypothesis testing. these merits make eps an attractive and effective tool for the integrative analysis of gwas data with gene expression data from multiple tissues. despite the promising statistical improvements we have made, the biological implications need to be independently replicated. one limitation of eps is that it does not take into account overlapping samples. addressing this issue in integrating multiple gwas is an important area for future work.  
