genome analysis erc analysis: web-based inference of gene function via evolutionary rate covariation the recent explosion of comparative genomics data presents an unprecedented opportunity to construct gene networks via the evolutionary rate covariation (erc) signature. erc is used to identify genes that experienced similar evolutionary histories, and thereby draws functional associations between them. the erc analysis website allows researchers to exploit genome-wide datasets to infer novel genes in any biological function and to explore deep evolutionary connections between distinct pathways and complexes. the website provides five analytical methods, graphical output, statistical support and access to an increasing number of taxonomic groups.genes carry out their functions in a complex network of interactions, both physical and genetic. these interactions have effects on gene evolution for multiple reasons. first, genes performing a common function will experience shared adaptive and conservative evolutionary pressures, so that fluctuations in these pressures affect genes throughout the network. second, changes in one gene product can affect the function of physically interacting gene products and thereby encourage compensatory changes. both effects are hypothesized to cause genes participating in a common function to experience evolutionary rates that covary over time. this signature of co-functionality is quantified by the evolutionary rate covariation (erc) statistic. erc measures the gene-by-gene correlation of evolutionary rates over a phylogeny of species, allowing the extraction of genes that have experienced parallel evolutionary histories. generally, erc values are significantly elevated between genes that encode proteins in a common complex, metabolic cascade or genetic pathway, and this observation extends across divergent taxonomic groups including prokaryotes, fungi, insects and mammals . in practical application, erc can be used to discover new functionalities via a sort of guilt by association. recently, erc signatures were used to expand the gene network controlling mating response in drosophila . in this study, erc signatures between known pathway genes and an initial pool of 664 candidates were used to identify six new genes in the pathway. a similar study used erc in yeast and drosophila to discern the functional roles of homologous recombination genes . for human genes, erc has been shown to efficiently identify causal disease genes out of chromosomal regions or other large sets of candidate genes . these successful applications make a compelling case for public access to erc datasets so that geneticists and evolutionary biologists may similarly infer functional relationships between genes. we have generated genome-wide erc datasets focused on three taxonomic groups including humans and popular genetic models. the size of these datasets prohibits casual browsing and analysis, and requires custom computational tools and statistical tests in order to be used effectively. the aim of the erc analysis website is to allow users to quickly perform custom erc-based inferences for specific gene sets of interest.  
