systems biology eresponsenet: a package prioritizing candidate disease genes through cellular pathways motivation: although genome-wide association studies (gwas) have found many common genetic variants associated with human diseases, it remains a challenge to elucidate the functional links between associated variants and complex traits. results: we developed a package called eresponsenet by implementing and extending the existing responsenet algorithm for prioritizing candidate disease genes through cellular pathways. using type ii diabetes (t2d) as a study case, we demonstrate that eresponsenet outperforms currently available approaches in prioritizing candidate disease genes. more importantly, the package is instrumental in revealing cellular pathways underlying disease-associated genetic variations. availability: the eresponsenet package is freely downloadable atgenome-wide association studies (gwas) have uncovered hundreds of common genetic variants contributing to human diseases. various methods have been developed to translate statistical associations into biological functions, such as identification of expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) using expression profiles or prediction of disease causative genes linked with single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) using biological networks . however, it is still an enormous gap to understand the biological mechanisms by which each dna variation affects disease risk . here, to address this gap, we developed a computational package by implementing and extending the responsenet algorithm. we showed that the extended package eresponsenet can effectively prioritize candidate disease genes linked to disease-associated snps and uncover cellular pathways underlying disease-associated human genetic variations. to whom correspondence should be addressed.in this article, we present eresponsenet, a package demonstrated effective for prioritizing candidate disease genes and identifying their underlying molecular pathways to human disease. this method apparently can be generalized to analyzing any complex disease and can be used to link any two layers of omics data, including not only the snps to gene expression (as described here), but also epigenomic or microrna data to gene expression, gene expression to proteomic or metabolic data and so on. the eresponsenet output files can be directly visualized in cytoscape (supplementary material). funding: china natural national science foundation (grant 30890033 and 91019019), chinese ministry of science and technology (grant 2011cb504206), chinese academy of sciences (grant kscx2-ew-r-02 and kscx2-ew-j-15), and stem cell leading project (xda01010303) to j.-d.j.h. conflict of interest: none declared.  
