data and text mining ess++: a c++ objected-oriented algorithm for bayesian stochastic search model exploration ess++ is a c++ implementation of a fully bayesian variable selection approach for single and multiple response linear regression. ess++ works well both when the number of observations is larger than the number of predictors and in the large p, small n case. in the current version, ess++ can handle several hundred observations, thousands of predictors and a few responses simultaneously. the core engine of ess++ for the selection of relevant predictors is based on evolutionary monte carlo. our implementation is open source, allowing community-based alterations and improvements. availability: c++ source code and documentation including compilation instructions are available under gnu licence atin recent years, biological sciences have taken full advantage of rather inexpensive high-throughput technologies. new experiments at a systemic level have been conceived to dissect the role of genetic and environmental factors in the development of common diseases or the identification of risk factors for complex phenotypes . the dimensions and diversity of available genetic, genomics and other omics data sets pose new theoretical and computational problems requiring multi-level data integration and efficient statistical analysis tools. when the aim is to predict the variation of pathophysiological or complex phenotypes, regression models are widely used. in this set up, bayesian variable selection (bvs) allows the construction of parsimonious regression models for high-dimensional datasets, adopting prior specifications that translate expected sparsity of the underlying biology and facilitate the interpretation of the results. moreover, in problems where no single model stands out, model uncertainty is taken into account, reporting competing models with their posterior evidence. to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint first authors. ess++ is a c++ implementation of a fully bvs approach for linear regression that can analyse single and multiple responses in an integrated way . whereas other approaches consider one predictor at the time, ess++ performs an efficient search for combinations of covariates that predict the variation of single and multiple responses. like shotgun stochastic search , ess++ is also designed to work under the large p, small n paradigm i.e. when the number of predictors p is large with respect to the number of observations n, thus making fully bayesian analysis feasible in genetics/genomics experiments. when the number of predictors is large, the multimodality of the model space is a known issue in variable selection. ess++ explores the 2 p-dimensional model space using an extension of parallel tempering called evolutionary monte carlo that combines markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) and genetic algorithms. specifically, ess++ relies on running multiple tempered chains in parallel which exchange information about set of covariates that are selected in the regression models. since chains with higher temperatures flatten the posterior density, global moves (between chains) allow the algorithm to jump from one local mode to another. local moves (withinchains) permit the fine exploration of alternative models, resulting in a combined algorithm that ensures that the chains mix efficiently and do not become trapped in local modes.  
