genetics and population analysis estimating and testing high-dimensional mediation effects in epigenetic studies motivation: high-dimensional dna methylation markers may mediate pathways linking environmental exposures with health outcomes. however, there is a lack of analytical methods to identify significant mediators for high-dimensional mediation analysis. results: based on sure independent screening and minimax concave penalty techniques, we use a joint significance test for mediation effect. we demonstrate its practical performance using monte carlo simulation studies and apply this method to investigate the extent to which dna methylation markers mediate the causal pathway from smoking to reduced lung function in the normative aging study. we identify 2 cpgs with significant mediation effects. availability and implementation: r package, source code, and simulation study are available at https://github.com/yinanzheng/hima.mediation analysis plays an important role in biomedical, behavioral, and psychosocial research studies, typically to understand the mechanism whereby change in one variable causes change in another . analytical methods for mediation analysis have been published extensively in the literature. for example,compared several methods to test the statistical significance of the mediation effect via a monte carlo study;considered estimating and testing mediation effects in censored data;investigated four applications of permutation tests to the single-mediator model;presented the causal mediation formula based on the counterfactual approach; zhang and wang (2013) introduced and compared four approaches to dealing with missing data in mediation analysis;developed a permutation approach for testing multiple mediators. for more details about mediation analysis, we refer to the review papers by ten have and joffe (2010) and preacher (2015). a comprehensive list of literature on mediation analysis is given in a webpage maintained by david kenny (http://davidakenny.net/cm/mediate.htm). most of the above results are concerned with a single or multiple but low-dimensional mediators. to the best of our knowledge, there is very limited research on the high-dimensional mediation effects. however, with the development of advanced data collection techniques, high-dimensional data become increasingly common in many areas of scientific research. our motivating example is an epigenome-wide dna methylation study. in the methylation process, methyl groups are added to dna at binding sites typically referred to as cytosine-phosphate-guanine (cpg) islands, which results in changes (typically down-regulation) to the expression of that dna. illumina infinium humanmethylation450 beadchip array is a widely used platform that allows to measure dna methylation levels of roughly 480k probes, resulting in high-dimensional data. specifically, our clinical interest lies in the effect of smoking (measured in pack-years) on lung function, and the extent to which this effect may be mediated by methylation changes. prior studies have identified cpg sites associated with cigarette smoking in both epigenome-wide or gene-specific analyses, e.g.,. identifying which markers mediate the effect of smoking on lung function is highly desirable from a public health perspective as it can lead to improved techniques for disease early detection and prevention. however, currently there are no appropriate statistical methods developed for use in the high-dimensional mediation analysis. in this article, we will adopt the multiple mediator models framework and extend it to the highdimensional setting. then, we propose a method to estimate and test mediation effects in high-dimensional epigenetic studies. our key ideas are: first, reduce the pool of potential mediators from a very large to a moderate number (i.e. less than the sample size); next, conduct the variable selection with the minimax concave penalty (mcp, zhang 2010); third, carry out joint significance testing for mediation effects. the structure of the article is given as follows. in section 2, we introduce the high-dimensional mediation regression model and propose the estimation and inference procedures. in section 3, we illustrate the performance of our proposed procedure via extensive simulation studies. in section 4, we apply our method to study the mediating effect of high-dimensional dna methylation markers on the causal effect of smoking on lung function in the normative aging study. section 5 presents some concluding remarks and discusses further research topics.  
