systems biology estimating biological elementary flux modes that decompose a flux distribution by the minimal branching property motivation: elementary flux mode (efm) is a useful tool in constraint-based modeling of metabolic networks. the property that every flux distribution can be decomposed as a weighted sum of efms allows certain applications of efms to studying flux distributions. the existence of biologically infeasible efms and the non-uniqueness of the decomposition, however, undermine the applicability of such methods. efforts have been made to find biologically feasible efms by incorporating information from transcriptional regulation and thermo-dynamics. yet, no attempt has been made to distinguish biologically feasible efms by considering their graphical properties. a previous study on the transcriptional regulation of metabolic genes found that distinct branches at a branch point metabolite usually belong to distinct metabolic pathways. this suggests an intuitive property of biologically feasible efms, i.e. minimal branching. results: we developed the concept of minimal branching efm and derived the minimal branching decomposition (mbd) to decompose flux distributions. testing in the core escherichia coli metabolic network indicated that mbd can distinguish branches at branch points and greatly reduced the solution space in which the decomposition is often unique. an experimental flux distribution from a previous study on mouse cardiomyocyte was decomposed using mbd. comparison with decomposition by a minimum number of efms showed that mbd found efms more consistent with established biological knowledge, which facilitates interpretation. comparison of the methods applied to a complex flux distribution in lactococcus lactis similarly showed the advantages of mbd. the minimal branching efm concept underlying mbd should be useful in other applications.metabolic networks consisting of biochemical reactions and compounds in a cell have proven to be an extremely useful in silico tool to study cellular metabolism . the structure of a metabolic network is reflected in the stoichiometric matrix s, and the state of the network is embodied in the flux distribution (fd) v, which is a vector containing all reaction rates in the network. based on the well-established quasi-steady-state assumption, v can be constrained in a polyhedral cone (sv=0; v ub ! v ! v lb ) and studied using a series of so-called constraint-based reconstruction and analysis (cobra) methods . one of the approaches of theoretical importance and application value is the elementary flux mode (efm) analysis . an efm is a fd with a minimal number of active reactions that together satisfy the steady-state condition. it is thus a minimal metabolic pathway in a metabolic network. efms have been successfully applied to examine network structures, explore new metabolic pathways, suggest rational strain design, etc. (reviewed in). another property of efms useful for studying fds is that every fd v is a non-negative sum of efms:where e 1 e k are all efms of the network, and k is the corresponding weight coefficient. this decomposition of fds from efms or extreme pathways (another type of pathways with a similar definition) has been investigated and applied to certain biological studies by choosing particular decompositions [reviewed in chan and. the usefulness of these methods, however, is limited for two main reasons. first, the practical computation of the decomposition requires the set of all efms a priori, which is usually not available in large-scale networks owing to combinatorial explosion. this computational issue can be overcome in two ways, either by sampling efms or by finding efms with particular properties to solve for the decomposition without requiring the entire set of efms . the second limitation is the non-uniqueness of decomposition and its dependence on the choice of algorithms or optimization objective . the ambiguity severely weakens the biological significance of decomposition.has proposed a method to obtain unique decompositions by combining efms with variable weights into compound modes with unique weights. another method for unique decompositions is the minimization of the sum of squares of weights , but the resulting decomposition can be dependent on how efms are scaled.the usefulness of efms can be enhanced by finding biologically feasible efms. attempts have been made to incorporate transcriptional regulatory information to enumerate biologically feasible efms and to rule out thermodynamically infeasible efms . these approaches integrating information other than stoichiometry did give promising results. the information, for instance, metabolomics data and transcriptomics data, however, is not always available. surprisingly, all the proposed methods to find efms or to choose decomposition have not made full use of their graphical properties, which should be intuitively important for interpreting efms. an earlier study on the co-regulation of metabolic pathways found that transcriptional regulation tends to favor linear metabolic flow by co-expressing only distinct branches at metabolic branch points . this means, inwhere a is a hypothetical branch point metabolite, the genes for the linear pair of reactions r1 and r3, or the pair r2 and r4, are more likely to be co-expressed than r3, r4 and r5, which are distinct branches. when decomposing a fd containing r1 to r4, two efms containing pair r1and r3 and pair r2 and r4 are thus a more preferable choice than one efm containing all r1 to r4, as there are probably two distinct pathways. this suggests the rationale of minimizing branching pathways to choose efms that are more likely to be biologically feasible. this rationale is also expected to allow clearer interpretation of the roles of the chosen efms because they are expected to contain fewer distinct pathways. we believed that such efms can have wide applicability. as the first attempt based on this rationale, in this article, a new optimization objective called minimal branching decomposition (mbd) is proposed to identify more biologically relevant efms to decompose fds using stoichiometric information alone.mbd to decompose a fd into a set of efms was derived. the efms contain as few branching pathways as possible. mbd advances the analysis of fd by decomposition into efms in three aspects. first, it originates from the consideration of the branching structure in metabolic network based on experimental evidence, which is a novel attempt. second, mbd results in more biologically relevant efms leading to clearer interpretation. third, mbd showed good performance regarding uniqueness. it diminishes the ambiguity of decomposition. the minimal branching efm concept underlying mbd can be useful in further applications, e.g. identifying metabolic pathways for engineering by acting as an estimate for biologically feasible efms. scaling up the method to genome-scale networks is necessary for practical applicability. in conclusion, mbd is able to bring useful insights when analyzing fds. combining information from e.g. transcriptional regulation and thermodynamics, wider application of efms can be anticipated.  
