genetics and population analysis estimating population diversity with catchall motivation: the massive data produced by next-generation sequencing require advanced statistical tools. we address estimating the total diversity or species richness in a population. to date, only relatively simple methods have been implemented in available software. there is a need for software employing modern, computationally intensive statistical analyses including error, goodness-of-fit and robustness assessments. results: we present catchall, a fast, easy-to-use, platform-independent program that computes maximum likelihood estimates for finite-mixture models, weighted linear regression-based analyses and coverage-based non-parametric methods, along with outlier diagnostics. given sample frequency count data, catchall computes 12 different diversity estimates and applies a model-selection algorithm. catchall also derives discounted diversity estimates to adjust for possibly uncertain low-frequency counts. it is accompanied by an excel-based graphics program. availability: free executable downloads for linux, windows and mac os, with manual and source code, at www.northeastern.edu/catchall.the field of microbial ecology is bursting with data from nextgeneration sequencing, but analysis remains a challenge. estimating the diversity of a microbial community is especially important. to model this statistically, assume that the population can be divided into a finite number of classes. the simplest definition of diversity is the number of classes c. a sample drawn from such a population will typically have repeated observations of the various classes: some may be observed once only, others twice and so on, while many classes may not appear in the sample at all. the frequency count data is (i,f (i)),i 1 where f (i) is the number of sample classes of size i. for example, the dataset (1,10),(2,4),(3,2),(7,1) has 10 singletons, four doubletons, ... and one class occurring seven times in the sample. for bacterial and phage diversity, the counts are derived from the frequencies of 16s rrna genes and contig spectra. to whom correspondence should be addressed.statistical estimation of diversity, from frequency count data goes back to 1943 , but so far only coverage-based non-parametric methods have been implemented in widely available software, because they do not require numerical optimization. we improve upon previous methods by (i) implementing parametric finite-mixture models and a new weighted linear regression approach in addition to existing non-parametric methods; (ii) providing a way to statistically discount large numbers of potentially artifactual rare species; and (iii) applying our analyses to highly diverse phage metagenomes.  
