estimating the order of mutations during tumorigenesis from tumor genome sequencing data motivation: tumors are thought to develop and evolve through a sequence of genetic and epigenetic somatic alterations to progenitor cells. early stages of human tumorigenesis are hidden from view. here, we develop a method for inferring some aspects of the order of mutational events during tumorigenesis based on genome sequencing data for a set of tumors. this method does not assume that the sequence of driver alterations is the same for each tumor, but enables the degree of similarity or difference in the sequence to be evaluated. results: to evaluate the new method, we applied it to colon cancer tumor sequencing data and the results are consistent with the multi-step tumorigenesis model previously developed based on comparing stages of cancer. we then applied the new method to dna sequencing data for a set of lung cancers. the model may be a useful tool for better understanding the process of tumorigenesis. availability: the software is available at: http://linus.nci.nih.gov/data/youna/ordermutation.zip contact:human tumors are thought to arise and evolve through a sequence of somatic alterations to dna but the early stages of oncogenesis occur years before tumor detection and are rarely directly observable. better understanding the temporal order of mutations is important since the early mutations may represent important therapeutic targets and late mutations may play important roles in metastasis.inferred some information about the sequence of genetic alterations associated with the stages of colorectal tumors. by examining the genomes of small colonic adenomas, intermediate-sized adenomas, large adenomas and carcinomas, they discovered that most of the early stage adenomas showed loss of heterozygosity (loh) in the apc gene. almost half of intermediate-sized adenomas carried an additional mutation in kras. the long arm of chromosome 18 showed frequent loh in advanced adenomas and carcinomas. also frequent loh on the short arm of chromosome 17, which later turned out to target tp53, was observed mainly in carcinomas. although, the loss of apc gene to whom correspondence should be addressed. function almost always occurs as an initiating event in colorectal tumors, the precise order of subsequent alterations seemed to vary among tumor samples . developing evidence for an ordered sequence of mutations driving tumor progression was possible for colorectal tumors due to the accessibility of the colonic epithelium to colonoscopy. for other tumor types, however, such evidence is not well developed. for this reason, there has been interest in indirect computational methods to provide information about the order of mutations .attempted to estimate the order between gains and losses on chromosomal regions by fitting an oncogenic tree model to cgh data.used a population genetics mathematical model describing the evolutionary paths of cells from the unmutated state to the fully mutated state. in their model, the parameters such as rates of mutations, amplification or deletion, and the number of cells per patient at risk of tumorigenesis are assumed constant for all tumor samples. the methods ofare very complex and the number of trees to be searched or the number of parameters to be fit increases exponentially with the number of investigated genes. consequently, these models are restricted to investigation of a very small number of driver genes. these models address mutational events which co-occur and cannot explain the negative correlation between some pairs of mutations, such as those for genes in the same pathway.estimated the order of mutations in areas of copy-neutral loh (cn-loh) as well as the order of occurrence of cn-loh regions within an individual cancer. they used the idea that if a mutation precedes a regional duplication, its copy number is doubled, whereas mutations following a duplication event appear with haploid copy number. although this method can provide accurate estimates, it is restricted to cn-loh regions. recent advances in sequencing technologies have made it possible to perform large scale resequencing of tumor genomes. these studies have often identified a large number (dozens) of driver genes (genes causing clonal expansions when mutated). these studies generally define driver genes as those which are more frequently mutated than expected based on the background mutation rate estimated from synonymous mutations. since the lists of detected driver genes do not generally provide satisfactory insight into the process of oncogenesis, methods which can help to elucidate the order of the mutational events in driver genes and can handle a large number of driver genes would be useful. in this article, we propose a method which can estimate the order of mutations in driver genes from genome sequences of a set of tumors. the method is not restricted. distribution of mutations in driver genes and estimates of their order (a) distribution of mutations in four driver genes for ten patients of the same tumor type. for each patient, the colored letter m represents a mutation for the corresponding gene. (b) estimates for p k,i , the probability that the k-th mutational event involving the four driver genes occurs in gene i. the length of the sub-bar corresponding to gene i at the k-th mutational event is the estimates for p k,i to a very small number of driver genes and does not utilize a complex cell level model. by comparing mutation profiles of driver genes in a large number of tumors of a type, the probability distribution for the order of mutations is estimated. this enables the degree of similarity or difference in the order for that set of tumors to be evaluated. consider a population of patients at various stages of the same histologic type of cancer in which four tumor driver genes have been identified. for each patient, the colored letter m inrepresents a mutation for the corresponding gene. as tumorigenesis progresses, tumor cells accumulate more mutations in tumor driver genes. our statistical model estimates p k,i , the probability that the kth mutational event involving the four driver genes occurs in gene i. this becomes feasible if we assume that all samples are governed by the same set of p k,i probabilities. mutations in gene a, b or c occur in samples having one or two mutations, therefore the probability for the early mutation occurring in gene a, b or c will be high. in contrast, mutations in gene d always occur with mutations in other genes a, b or c. since other samples support that probability for the early mutation occurring in gene a, b or c will be high, it is likely that gene d occurs as the late event.shows the estimates of p k,i in which the length of the sub-bar corresponding to gene i at the k-th mutational event is p k,i. we describe the statistical model in section 2 and present the result obtained by applying this model to lung adenocarcinomas and colorectal tumor sequencing data and simulated data in section 3.in this article, we have proposed a computational method based on tumor sequencing data for estimating the probability distribution of the relative order of mutational events among tumor driver genes during tumorigenesis. the results obtained from using this method with lung cancer and colorectal tumor sequencing data are consistent with the previous evidence obtained from analyzing various stages of cancer. this provides a degree of validation of the new method. since the early stages of tumorigenesis are not observable for human tumors, we believe that this method will be a useful tool in understanding the process of tumor development. application of the new method to the three datasets described here was somewhat limited by the limited number of genes sequenced in those studies. this will be much less of a limitation in analysis of the large tumor sequencing studies currently underway. these larger datasets may also enable more complex models to be developed. our model assumes the number of mutations in driver genes in a sample is independent of the mutated genes. this may not be true in some cases since some genes are known to increase mutation rates when altered (mutator genes). if samples having altered mutator genes tend to have many mutations in driver genes, the probability of late events occurring in mutator genes may be overestimated. we examined the correlation between mutational status of each driver gene and the number of mutated driver genes in both the lung and colorectal cancer datasets. for the colorectal data, there are no driver genes whose mutational status was strongly correlated with the number of mutations. for lung data, there are several genes which showed some correlation, but it could have resulted from the gene mutating late and the correlation was not strong enough to suggest that they are mutator genes. even for tp53, the only well known mutator gene in the set of driver genes, the p-value for the correlation was 0.01. our model estimates that tp53 mutations occur as early events (second event) for both lung and colorectal data. consequently, the bias caused by our assumption not being strictly true seems to be small. currently no other computational methods for estimating the order of mutational events account for the increase of the mutation rate by mutator genes. our method used all non-silent mutations occurring in driver genes in estimating p k,i. however, some of the non-silent mutations may be passenger mutations irrelevant to tumorigenesis. since the purpose of our method is to estimate the order of mutations relevant to tumorigenesis, we may obtain better estimates by restricting to the mutations occurring in well known functional domains within genes. in this article, we estimated the order of mutations in driver genes. however, it can be used to estimate the order of any events in general. for example, it can be applied to estimate the order of copy number aberrations in a defined chromosomal regions. it can also estimate the order of mutations occurring in different functional domains within a gene if we separate functional domains in a gene when applying our method. if we divide mutations according to different types, such as point mutations, insertions or deletions, we can also capture the order of specific types of mutations occurring within a gene if such order matters and if there are enough data to estimate the order accurately. as we have indicated previously, the method we have developed does not assume that the sequence of mutations is the same for each tumor. the probability distribution estimated provides information about inter-tumor variability in the order of mutational events. for a given k, the dispersion of p k,i-values among the genes i indicates the variation among tumors of the k-th event. for a given gene index i, the dispersion of p k,i-values among the event indices k indicates the degree to which mutations in gene i show an order preference. although the sequence of mutations may vary among tumors and late mutations can be clinically important, better understanding the earliest stages of development of individual tumors may be particularly valuable. the earliest mutations are presumably present in all the subsequent sub-clones of the tumor and may therefore represent important therapeutic targets . with the further development of rapid single molecule deep sequencing technologies it may become possible to phylogenetically reconstruct the evolution of tumors . the current method is a step in using sequencing data and probabilistic modeling to obtain information about the early stages of tumorigenesis.  
