eugène-maize: a web site for maize gene prediction motivation: a large part of the maize b73 genome sequence is now available and emerging sequencing technologies will offer cheap and easy ways to sequence areas of interest from many other maize genotypes. one of the steps required to turn these sequences into valuable information is gene content prediction. to date, there is no publicly available gene predictor specifically trained for maize sequences. to this end, we have chosen to train the eugne software that can combine several sources of evidence into a consolidated gene model prediction.the b73 maize genome sequence is now available . we can anticipate that next generation sequencing technologies will soon supply a deluge of genomic data from other maize genotypes. therefore, in addition to the annotation provided by the maize sequence consortium for the b73 genotype, the community will also need a tool for the annotation of maize genomic sequences produced from other genotypes. to date, the www.maizesequence.org web site provides the filtered gene set including annotation of 32 540 gene models (refgen_v1), based on biological evidence. however, no tool is provided to annotate personal sequences yet. fgenesh was among the first ab initio gene prediction softwares available for maize while it was trained for monocot species. combiner softwares like eugne can improve their own ab initio prediction results by integrating information from sequence alignment software, from splice site and translation start site prediction software or from other gene finder algorithms, thereby improving prediction quality. eugne uses probabilistic markov models to discriminate coding sequences from non-coding ones, or genuine splice sites from false ones. gene models generated by eugne are associated with a score based on all the available information. in order to calculate the weight for each information source and to calibrate its ab initio prediction module, eugne was trained using a maize-curated gene sequence set built in this study. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
