systems biology evaluating the drosophila bicoid morphogen gradient system through dissecting the noise in transcriptional bursts motivation: we describe a statistical model to dissect the noise in transcriptional bursts in a developmental system. results: we assume that, at any given moment of time, each copy of a native gene inside a cell can exist in either a bursting (active) or non-bursting (inactive) state. the experimentally measured total noise in the transcriptional states of a gene in a population of cells can be mathematically dissected into two contributing components: internal and external. while internal noise quantifies the stochastic nature of transcriptional bursts, external noise is caused by cell-to-cell differences including fluctuations in activator concentration. we use our developed methods to analyze the drosophila bicoid (bcd) morphogen gradient system. for its target gene hunchback (hb), the noise properties can be recapitulated by a simplified gene regulatory model in which bcd acts as the only input, suggesting that the external noise in hb transcription is primarily derived from fluctuations in the bcd activator input. however, such a simplified gene regulatory model is insufficient to predict the noise properties of another bcd target gene, orthodenticle (otd), suggesting that otd transcription is sensitive to additional external fluctuations beyond those in bcd. our results show that analysis of the relationship between input and output noise can reveal important insights into how a morphogen gradient system works. our study also advances the knowledge about transcription at a fundamental level.transcription is an inherently noisy molecular process that takes place as burst-like events . how the incoherent transcriptional bursts lead to coherent and precise gene expression patterns during development is a fundamental question and a subject of intense investigations (martinez). it has been suggested that averaging over time and/or space allows a biological system to gain coherence and improve expression boundary precision (to whom correspondence should be addressed.2009;). to fully understand how precise gene expression patterns are achieved in response to morphogen inputs, it is necessary to have methods that can evaluate the experimentally detected transcriptional bursts before such averaging takes place. here we develop a statistical model for such a purpose, where we mathematically dissect the experimentally measured total noise into the internal and external components. we use our model to analyze our experimental data extracted from early drosophila embryos , where both the nuclear concentrations of the activator bicoid (bcd) and the transcriptional states of its target genes hunchback (hb) and orthodenticle (otd) are simultaneously measured. we show that the dissected external noise in hb transcriptional bursts can be implicitly derived from the measured bcd input noise. in contrast, additional input noise is required to account for both the measured total noise and the dissected external noise in otd transcription. these results suggest that, although bcd acts as a direct and sustained input for both otd and hb transcription , these two target genes are distinct from each other. our findings are consistent with recent studies , suggesting that, in addition to bcd, otd transcription also responds to other input(s) and, thus, is sensitive to additional external fluctuations. our study provides an example illustrating the use of dissecting experimentally measured transcriptional noise in understanding the mechanistic operations of a native morphogen gradient system.  
