genome analysis evaluation and validation of de novo and hybrid assembly techniques to derive high-quality genome sequences motivation: to assess the potential of different types of sequence data combined with de novo and hybrid assembly approaches to improve existing draft genome sequences. results: illumina, 454 and pacbio sequencing technologies were used to generate de novo and hybrid genome assemblies for four different bacteria, which were assessed for quality using summary statistics (e.g. number of contigs, n50) and in silico evaluation tools. differences in predictions of multiple copies of rdna operons for each respective bacterium were evaluated by pcr and sanger sequencing, and then the validated results were applied as an additional criterion to rank assemblies. in general, assemblies using longer pacbio reads were better able to resolve repetitive regions. in this study, the combination of illumina and pacbio sequence data assembled through the allpaths-lg algorithm gave the best summary statistics and most accurate rdna operon number predictions. this study will aid others looking to improve existing draft genome assemblies.the development and evolution of next-generation sequencing (ngs) platforms has dramatically changed biological studies in recent years . assembly of dna reads to correctly reconstruct genomes is an essential task to facilitate genomic studies, and a variety of assembly algorithms and methods for quality evaluation have been developed . however, most sequenced genomes are incomplete owing to technical difficulties, time and the expense leading to an increasing disparity in quality and usefulness between finished and draft genomes in databases . because of their low cost, accuracy and high throughput, illumina platforms have dominated the sequencing industry . short read sequencing technologies have limited power to resolve large repetitive regions even within relatively small microbial genomes . the so-called third generation single-molecule sequencing technology developed by pacific biosciences (pacbio) has been compared with several ngs platforms . read lengths up to 14 kb have been reported for pacbio rs i chemistry and nearly 27 kb for rs ii chemistry . repetitive dna such as ribosomal dna (rdna) operons present one of the greatest technical challenges during the assembly process, which is exacerbated when repeat sequence regions are longer than the read lengths . in many cases, where repetitive dna is present, short read genome assemblies remain highly fragmented and often only achieve high-quality draft status . the relative value of a finished genome , technical challenges and what is missing from finished versus draft quality genomes have been discussed previously. several strategies proposed and implemented for improving genome assemblies include the use of varying size fragment libraries, longer length reads, gap-closure software and postprocessing to detect misassemblies . recently, draft genome sequences for 41 bacteria isolated from the populus deltoides rhizosphere and endosphere were obtained using an illumina hiseq2000 instrument, and the genomes were represented by 187 contigs, on average . an additional two genomes were unsuitable for publication at that time because of high contig numbers, and 10 of the 43 genomes contained 4280 contigs. the aim of this study was to compare and select the most appropriate ngs technology combinations, assembly protocol and parameter optimization to improve the genome assemblies of the rhizobium sp. strain cf080 and burkholderia sp. strain bt03 that originally proved problematic, as well as two other strains, pseudomonas sp. strain gm41 and pseudomonas sp. strain gm30 of biological interest. in addition to a variety of in silico techniques for evaluation of genome assemblies, a pcr and sanger sequencing strategy was used to validate rdna operon predictions and further assess the assemblies.  
