structural bioinformatics evaluation of drug–human serum albumin binding interactions with support vector machine aided online automated docking motivation: human serum albumin (hsa), the most abundant plasma protein is well known for its extraordinary binding capacity for both endogenous and exogenous substances, including a wide range of drugs. interaction with the two principal binding sites of hsa in subdomain iia (site 1) and in subdomain iiia (site 2) controls the free, active concentration of a drug, provides a reservoir for a long duration of action and ultimately affects the adme (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion) profile. due to the continuous demand to investigate hsa binding properties of novel drugs, drug candidates and drug-like compounds, a support vector machine (svm) model was developed that efficiently predicts albumin binding. our svm model was integrated to a free, web-based prediction platform (http://albumin.althotas.com). automated molecular docking calculations for prediction of complex geometry are also integrated into the web service. the platform enables the users (i) to predict if albumin binds the query ligand, (ii) to determine the probable ligand binding site (site 1 or site 2), (iii) to select the albumin x-ray structure which is complexed with the most similar ligand and (iv) to calculate complex geometry using molecular docking calculations. our svm model and the potential offered by the combined use of in silico calculation methods and experimental binding data is illustrated.human serum albumin (hsa), a highly soluble negatively charged protein, greatly augments the transport capacity of blood plasma where it is present at a high concentration (0.6 mm). its effect is exerted by reversible binding of a vast array of chemically diverse exogenous and endogenous compounds . this astonishing binding capacity, which often seriously impacts pharmacokinetic properties of therapeutic drugs is encoded in the secondary structure of hsa. to whom correspondence should be addressed. namely, the protein is composed of 70:30 -helix:random coils with no -sheets, which gives the protein a high degree of conformational flexibility . the 66.5 kda single polypeptide chain of hsa consists of 585 amino acids and the individual helices are connected by 17 disulfide bonds to form 9 structural loops. each 190-residue domain, labeled i, ii and iii from the n terminus, contains 10 helices connected by turns and are structurally very similar to one another . the three homologous domains can be further divided into six-helix and four-helix subdomains termed a and b, which have a common four antiparallel -helix core. competitive displacement studies of sudlow et al. using fluorescent molecular probes enabled the identification of two specific drug binding sites termed in the literature as site 1 (subdomain iia) and sitepage: 1807 18061813of the drug binding site 1 of hsa in subdomain iia being involved in forming ionic/h-bonding interactions with ligand molecules (prepared using the 2bxd pdb file of the warfarinhsa complex). side-chain atoms are colored by atom type (carbon, purple or pink; nitrogen, blue; oxygen, red). note the two hydrophilic clusters of residues around the entrance (lys195, lys199, arg218, arg222) and at the middle/end (tyr150, his242, arg257) of the binding pocket. some apolar residues are also shown. (b) polar key residues interacting with ligands bound at drug binding site 2 of hsa in subdomain iiia (prepared using the 2bxg pdb file of the ibuprofenhsa complex). and iiia . residues 148153 from subdomain ib close off the top of the site which has an extension toward the interdomain cleft stabilized by residues from subdomain iib (val343, leu347) and iiia (leu481), respectively. the binding pocket can be accessed through an open entrance of 10 in diameter between helices h1 and h2, which faces subdomain iiia and thus is partially shielded from bulk solvent. the opening is surrounded by four basic residues (lys195, lys199, arg218, arg222). although the interior of the binding crevice is mainly apolar, there is an additional cluster of polar residues toward the middle/end of the pocket (tyr150, his242, arg257). the main volume of the pocket is separated by ile264 into two hydrophobic sub-chambers. just inside the hydrophilic entrance, there is a third chamber formed by phe211, trp214, ala215, arg218 and leu219. trp214 is an important structural element of site 1 since rotation of its indole ring enables certain ligands to be accommodated at the binding site and to form stacking interactions . the large central compartment of site 1 is typically occupied by planar aromatic/heterocyclic rings of the ligands, which are inserted snugly between the ceiling and floor of the pocket represented by ala291 and leu219/238, respectively. the enclosure of the guest molecules within the pocket is driven by formation of multiple hydrophobic contacts with nonpolar site residues. on the other hand, acidic or electronegative peripherial groups of the ligands are oriented in the sub-chamber formed around trp214, or toward the solvent accessible mouth of the cavity where they can form intermolecular h-bonds with the basic residues . the additional basic patch on the middle/opposite side of the pocket (tyr150, his242, arg257) also enables hbond formation with ligand substituents. x-ray data of compounds crystallized with hsa show in most cases h-bonding with the phenolic oh of tyr150 suggesting the important contribution of this residue in ligand binding at site 1 . appropriately sized molecules possessing two anionic functions on opposite ends such as l-thyroxine and the uremic toxin 3-carboxy-4-methyl-5-propyl-2-furanpropanoic acid (cmpf;) can form multiple h-bonds at both sides of the pocket resulting high-affinity binding. the site 1 has ample binding room so that most compounds examined to date by x-ray method do not fill it completely. due to this fact, site 1 is able to accommodate multiple ligands simultaneously as has been demonstrated by crystal structures of hsa with co-binding pairs of azapropazone-phenylbutazone, azapropazone-indomethacin and indomethacin-myristic acid . fatty acid (fa) binding induced conformational changes of hsa alter the structure of the site 1 in the sense that it diverts tyr 150 and, to a lesser extent, arg 257 out of the pocket. the carboxylate head of fas bound in the long and narrow channel located between subdomains ia and iia (fa site 2;) forms h-bonds with tyr150, arg257 and ser287 so these residues will be no longer available to interact with site 1 ligands . except for oxyphenbutazone, however, these changes have only a minor impact on the location and orientation of the bound ligands. the site 1 itself can also anchor a fatty acid molecule but due to its low-affinity binding drug ligands of the site displace the lipid molecule. site 2 in subdomain iiia (indole-benzodiazepin site) is topologically similar to site 1 in a sense that both are composed of six-helices of the corresponding subdomains, which are arranged to form largely apolar cavities with defined polar features. in contrast to site 1, the entrance to site 2 is exposed to solvent and its inner cavity is smaller and more rigid which features account for the pronounced stereoselectivity observed for bound compounds (e.g. l-tryptophan shows a 100-fold greater hsa affinity than the d-enantiomer; 2,3 benzodiazepines exhibit conformational selectivity;page: 1808 18061813the goal of the current work was to develop a model that accurately predicts hsa binding site of a ligand and the resulting complexgeometry. a web service has been established that utilizes the combined method for prediction of hsa binding. a 2d structure of a ligand is used as input and hsa binding characteristics are predicted.a number of studies utilize different in silico methods for hsa binding prediction . while both previous and our study are aimed at in silico prediction of albumin binding, there is a significant difference between our and the previously published models which makes direct comparisons impossible. namely, the published models have limited global applicability in contrast to our model because of the followings: (i) the published models do not distinguish between site 1 and site 2 ligands. this is a major drawback of these studies, as valid qsar calculations should be based on structurally related molecules binding at the same site of the protein. (ii) the models were designed to quantitatively predict the binding affinity of compounds, which bind to hsa, while our method is capable to classify nonalbumin and albumin ligands. (iii) the applied experimental methods (binding constant calculated from the retention time in a hplc column with immobilized hsa in) are not accurate and the experimental conditions (using 15 acetonitril in the eluent, thus ligand binding is investigated in a partly organic buffer) do not reflect the real physiological environment of albumin.  
