evaluation of hierarchical models for integrative genomic analyses motivation: advances in high-throughput technologies have led to the acquisition of various types of-omic data on the same biological samples. each data type gives independent and complementary information that can explain the biological mechanisms of interest. while several studies performing independent analyses of each dataset have led to significant results, a better understanding of complex biological mechanisms requires an integrative analysis of different sources of data. results: flexible modeling approaches, based on penalized likelihood methods and expectation-maximization (em) algorithms, are studied and tested under various biological relationship scenarios between the different molecular features and their effects on a clinical outcome. the models are applied to genomic datasets from two cancer types in the cancer genome atlas project: glioblastoma multiforme and ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma. the integrative models lead to improved model fit and predictive performance. they also provide a better understanding of the biological mechanisms underlying patients survival. availability and implementation: source code implementing the integrative models is freely available at https://github.com/mgt000/integrativeanalysis along with example datasets and sample r script applying the models to these data. the tcga datasets used for analysis are publicly available at https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/advances in high throughput technologies have led to the acquisition of various types of-omic data, including whole-genome sequencing, methylation, transcriptomic, glycomic, proteomic and metabolomic. each data type provides a snapshot of the molecular processes involved in a particular phenotype. while studies focused on one type of-omic data have led to significant results , an integrative-omic analysis can provide a better understanding of the complex biological mechanisms involved in the etiology or progression of a disease by combining the complementary information from each data type. consequently, there has been a growing effort in recent years to collect multiple-omic data types on the same sampling units. initially, the efforts had focused on the integration of two types of data, as in expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) analysis which explores the association between dna sequence variations and gene expression phenotypes , or copy number variants (cnv)-gene expression associations . there are now several studies that collect various-omic data on the same samples. the nci-60 project, for example, provides various-omic data for a panel of 60 cancer cell lines collected from diverse tissues (http://discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminer). the cancer genome atlas (tcga) project (http://cancergenome. nih.gov/) is another great public resource for integrative genomic v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com analysis that collects multiple-omic data types on the same samples for different cancers. the availability of these data has led to the development of statistical methods and bioinformatics tools to explore the associations between different-omic datasets and evaluate their relationships with phenotypic outcomes (seefor a review). various studies have demonstrated that integrative approaches are more effective in identifying subtle effects that would have been missed in single dataset analysis, thus providing improved statistical power while reducing the detection of false positives . a commonly used approach for integrative analysis remains the application of univariate tests evaluating the association between pairs of elements from two-omic data types . this, however, raises a problem of multiplicity making it practically impossible to identify significant links after correcting for multiple testing. in addition, it ignores the fact that genomic markers do not work independently but in coordination. monni and tadesse (2009) developed a bayesian stochastic partitioning method that overcomes this by combining ideas of mixtures of regression models and variable selection to uncover cluster structures in gene expression profiles and simultaneously identify subsets of cnvs associated to the correlated expression profiles.proposed icluster, which uncovers tumor subtypes by integrating various-omic datasets using latent allocation indicators and specifying a variancecovariance structure that accounts for the dependence across data types.proposed an integrative bayesian analysis of genomic data (ibag), which specifies a hierarchical model that considers links between markers from different-omic sources at the gene level and identifies their association with a clinical outcome using bayesian lasso. in a similar approach,used a hierarchical bayesian model to incorporate relationships between biological features and introduced latent scores to explain the clinical outcome. in this paper, our main objective is to identify significant associations between markers across-omic datasets and elucidate the complementary information that explain the clinical outcome. similarly to, we will focus on-omic features at the gene-level but we also explore different modeling approaches that allow dependencies between features within a gene, within a functional network, or across all genes in the datasets. in addition, we do not introduce latent scores that summarize the information of several markers, as our primary interest is in identifying relevant markers and their interrelationships in order to gain a better understanding of the biological mechanisms underlying a phenotype. the remainder of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 describes the tcga datasets used to demonstrate the performance of the models. section 3 presents the biological considerations and the different statistical models investigated. section 4 presents the results of the analyses and section 5 concludes the paper with a summary of the main findings.tables 1 and 2 present the mean and standard deviation of the adjusted-r 2 over repeated cross-validation fits for the various integrative models in each of the three data subsets (data1, data2, data3) for the gbm and osc datasets, respectively. as a reference comparison model, we fit a penalized cox model on the gene expression data only, adjusting for age:we also report the cox model with only age effect. we considered integrative models investigating association between cnvs and gene expression levels at the gene level (integrative-gene), within the same disease/function network (integrative-network), and throughout the genome (integrativegenome). when cnv-methylation relationships are considered as in, the methylation sites within the gene are viewed as independent outcomes (uni-methylation) or as a multivariate correlated outcome (multi-methylation). we also assessed the impact of incorporating the uncertainty in the cnv-methylation relationship using the em algorithm outlined in section 3.3. these comparisons are performed allowing cnvs to directly affect or not the survival outcome as depicted inand 2. for all the datasets, the integrative models provide better fit to the data compared to the reference model or the model with only age effect. with regards to the subsets of features considered for integration, focusing on markers selected based on the relevance of pathways for the phenotype under investigation, as in data1, has the worst performance compared to using features selected based on univariate scans; we obtain the largest adjusted-r 2 with data3. in terms of cnv-methylation relationships, the performance depends on the data subsets considered and the subsequent cnvgene expression or cnv-survival associations allowed. for example, for gbm data2, the integrative model that considers cnvs and methylations not to be related to each other but to each act directly on gene expressions (no cnv-methylation) gave the largest adjusted-r 2 when cnv-survival association is allowed. instead for gbm data3, the no cnv-methylation model did not necessarily have the best performance and had the lowest adjusted-r 2 when allowing all cnvs to act on gene expression changes (integrative-genome). when allowing for cnv-methylation association, the multi-methylation model that accounts for the dependence between methylation sites in the same gene and the unimethylation model have similar performance. this may be due to two factors: (i) in most cases, there are only one or two methylation sites that map to the same gene; (ii) the multivariate regression group-penalization procedure ofwe used is designed to select the same covariates for all outcomes but with varying regression coefficients. thus, in a situation where a cnv may affect only one of the methylation sites mapping to a gene, all sites would be related to the cnv thereby introducing noise. when a cnv-methylation relationship is allowed, accounting for the uncertainty in the association using the em algorithm appears to help in some of the models. with respect to cnv-gene expression association, the model that lets cnvs act on expression levels of genes they map to (integrative-gene) performs significantly better for all gbm data subsets when cnv-survival association is allowed. when copy numbers are not allowed to be directly associated with the survival outcome, the integrative-genome setting, which lets all cnvs potentially act on a gene expression level, provides, in general, the best performance. for osc, although the integrative-gene model is the best for data2, for the other data subsets, the integrative-network or the integrative-genome scenarios give better model fits. with regard to cnv-survival association, allowing copy numbers to act directly on survival rather than just through their effect on gene expression levels, provides improved model fit. this is most obvious in gbm data1 and data2. for the other data subsets, the performance slightly varied depending on the cnv-methylation and cnv-gene expression associations considered, although the results were relatively comparable. finding models with good predictive performance is more challenging than determining good explanatory models. in particular, survival prediction in cancer is a difficult task because of the intrinsic high variability that exists in patients survival outcome . another challenge is the lack of a good criterion to assess the predictive performance of survival models. here, we used repeated 10-fold cross-validations to assess the performance of the various models using the c-index measure as described in section 3.3. we present inthe results for gbm and osc in the larger data subset, data3, which gave the best model fit. considering methylation sites mapping to the same gene as a multivariate outcome or incorporating the em algorithm in the cnv-methylation relationships gave similar results as the unimethylation models, so only the latter and the models assuming no cnv-methylation link are reported. we note that the integrative models give improved predictive performance. for example, for gbm, the integrative-gene models give the highest cross-validated c-indices. when considering cnv-gene expression associations across the whole genome (integrative-genome), the model with no cnv-methylation appears not to perform as well as the reference model (relating only gene expression data to survival outcomes). however, when allowing for cnv-methylation associations, this models predictive performance is comparable to that of the integrative-gene. similarly, for osc, the integrative-gene models and the models that allow for cnv-methylation association have the highest c-index values. we note concordant results between goodness-of-fit and predictive performance; the better explanatory models withhigher adjusted-r 2 values also give better prediction with higher cross-validated c-indices. besides providing improved model fit and better predictive performance, an advantage of the integrative approach is that it gives insights into the biological mechanisms underlying the clinical outcome by identifying relationships between molecular features and their effects on the outcome.provides a graphical summary of these relationships for the best performing integrative model in gbm (adjusted-r 2 0.605, cross-validated c-index 0.756). this corresponds to the model depicted inallowing for cnvmethylation and direct cnv-survival association in data3. overall 33 mrna transcripts are found to be associated with survival. among these, 2 genes have transcript levels that are modulated by methylation markers, which themselves are influenced by cnv markers mapping to the same genes; 3 gene expression levels are associated to copy number changes, while 4 other genes have their mrna abundance modulated by methylation markers. there are also another set of 12 cnvs found to be directly associated to survival. many of the identified markers are known to be implicated in cancer. we found p21 protein-activated kinase 7 (pak7), which is predominantly expressed in brain, to have a couple of methylation markers modulating its transcription levels, which in turn, are related to survival in gbm. previous studies have determined this gene to be highly expressed in tumor tissues of glioma patients and have suggested that inhibition of this gene by rna interference might efficiently suppress tumor development in glioma cells . another study examining the underlying molecular mechanism of pak7 found that suppression of this gene in glioma cells significantly inhibited cell growth, cell migration and invasion, and that pak7 could inhibit cell apoptosis, suggesting that it could have a potential role in prevention and treatment of glioma tumors . among the cnv markers directly associated to survival is eph receptor a7 (epha7), which is known to be overexpressed in different tumors, including gbm, and shows an inverse association with survival in gbm. epha7 has been put forward as a prognostic marker and a potential therapeutic marker for primary and recurrent gbm . other cnv markers we identified, like protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, a (ptpra) and bcl2-like 14 (bcl2l14) have respectively been shown to be implicated in oncogenic transformation and to play an important role in inducing apoptosis. among the mrna transcripts identified to be associated to survival is fibroblast growth factor 7 (fgf7), a gene known to be involved in cell survival activities, tumor growth and invasion. other gene expression changes found to be related to gbm survival include eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5a (eif5a), which has two isoforms both carrying unfavorable prognostics for various cancers, glutathione s-transferase mu 3 (gstm3), which has been linked to adult brain tumors, and tnf receptor-associated factor 1 (traf1) known to mediate antiapoptotic signals from tnf receptors.. result of integrative genomic analysis for gbm data 3. methylation markers are represented with rectangles; cnv markers with soft-edged rectangles; mrna transcripts with ellipses. for cnvs acting directly on survival, the names of the genes they map to are provided inintegrative genomics  
