evaluation of hybrid and non-hybrid methods for de novo assembly of nanopore reads motivation: recent emergence of nanopore sequencing technology set a challenge for established assembly methods. in this work, we assessed how existing hybrid and non-hybrid de novo assembly methods perform on long and error prone nanopore reads. results: we benchmarked five non-hybrid (in terms of both error correction and scaffolding) assembly pipelines as well as two hybrid assemblers which use third generation sequencing data to scaffold illumina assemblies. tests were performed on several publicly available minion and illumina datasets of escherichia coli k-12, using several sequencing coverages of nanopore data (20, 30, 40 and 50). we attempted to assess the assembly quality at each of these coverages, in order to estimate the requirements for closed bacterial genome assembly. for the purpose of the benchmark, an extensible genome assembly benchmarking framework was developed. results show that hybrid methods are highly dependent on the quality of ngs data, but much less on the quality and coverage of nanopore data and perform relatively well on lower nanopore coverages. all non-hybrid methods correctly assemble the e. coli genome when coverage is above 40, even the non-hybrid method tailored for pacific biosciences reads. while it requires higher coverage compared to a method designed particularly for nanopore reads, its running time is significantly lower.during the last ten years next generation sequencing (ngs) devices have dominated genome sequencing market. in contrast to previously used sanger sequencing, ngs is much cheaper, less time consuming and not so labor intensive. yet, when it comes to de novo assembly of longer genomes many researchers are being skeptical of using ngs reads. these devices produce reads a few hundred base pairs long, which is too short to unambiguously resolve repetitive regions even within relatively small microbial genomes . although the use of paired-end and mate-pair technologies has improved the accuracy and completeness of assembled genomes, ngs sequencing still produces highly fragmented assemblies due to long repetitive regions. these incomplete genomes have to be finished using a more laborious approach that includes sanger sequencing and specially tailored assembly methods. owing to ngs, many efficient algorithms have been developed to optimize running time and memory footprints in sequence assembly, alignment and downstream analysis steps.the need for technologies that would produce longer reads which could solve the problem of repeating regions has resulted in the advent of new sequencing approachesthe so-called third generation sequencing technologies. the first among them was a single-molecule sequencing technology developed by pacific biosciences (pacbio). although pacbio sequencers produce much longer reads (up to several tens of thousands of base pairs), their reads have significantly higher error rate ($10 to 15) than ngs reads ($1) . existing assembly and alignment algorithms were not capable of handling such high error rates. this caused the development of read error correction methods. at first, hybrid correction was performed using complementary ngs (illumina) data . later, self-correction of pacbioonly reads was developed which required higher coverage (50). the development of new, more sensitive aligners (blasr ) and optimization of existing ones (bwa-mem was required. in 2014, oxford nanopore technologies (ont) presented their tiny minion sequencerabout the size of a harmonica. the minion can produce reads up to a few hundred thousand base pairs long.1d reads from the minion sequencer (with the latest r7.3 chemistry) have raw base accuracy less than 75, while higher quality 2d reads (8088 accuracy) comprise only a fraction of all 2d reads . this again spurred the need for development of even more sensitive algorithms for mapping and realignment, such as graphmap and marginalign . any doubt about the possibility of using minion reads for de novo assembly was resolved in 2015 when loman et al. demonstrated that the assembly of a bacterial genome (escherichia coli k-12) using solely ont reads is possible even with high error rates . thanks to extremely long reads and affordability and availability of the nanopore sequencing technology, these results might cause a revolution in de novo sequence analysis in near future. following up on the results from loman et al. and, we explored the applicability of existing hybrid and nonhybrid de novo assembly tools that support third generation sequencing data and assessed their ability to cope with nanopore error profiles. in our study, we compared seven assembly tools/ pipelines which include five long-read assemblers: pipeline published by loman et al. (in continuation lqs pipeline), pbcr , falcon (https://github.com/pacificbiosciences/falcon), miniasm and canu (https://github.com/marbl/canu); and two hybrid assemblers: allpaths-lg and spades . these tools were tested on real, publicly available datasets of a well-known clonal sample of e. coli k-12 mg1655. all of the tools/pipelines were evaluated on all test datasets up to the draft assembly level, not including the polishing phase. draft assemblies, containing one big contig of at least 4 mbp, were polished using nanopolish and compared. for the purpose of our analyses, we developed a benchmarking framework nanomark which automates running of different assemblers and processing of the results. the framework provides wrappers with uniform interfaces for each assembly tool, simplifying their usage for the end user.in our study we developed a benchmarking framework for de novo assembly tools focused on third generation sequencing data and compared several hybrid and non-hybrid de novo assemblers as well as assessed their ability to work with nanopore sequencing data. each examined tool proved capable of assembling a whole bacterial genome under the right conditions. needless to say, the choice of the best assembly tool will heavily depend upon the characteristics of the dataset. keeping in mind that hybrid and non-hybrid assemblers are not directly comparable, we can say that allpaths-lg showed overall the best results. however, it requires a rather specific set of illumina paired-end and mate-pair short read libraries to perform the assembly, which might not always be practical to obtain. in case only paired-end reads are available, spades might be a good choice. of the non-hybrid assembly tools, on some datasets lqs pipeline came close to or even surpassed hybrid tools. however, extremely high cpu time used by nanocorrect might make itbold values present the best scoring result for a particular dataset.prohibitively slow on larger genomes and larger datasets, in which case canu, falcon or pbcr could be used instead. miniasm must be considered apart from other assemblers. while the lack of error correction and consensus phases results in assemblies with a significant error rate, astonishing cpu efficiency makes it a perfect candidate for time-critical applications, especially if it could be enhanced with a suitably efficient consensus phase. applying nanopolish to miniasm assemblies showed that they could be significantly improved, but at this point still fall behind other assemblies. polishing draft assemblies with nanopolish improved the results of non-hybrid assemblies, but worsened the results of hybrid ones. relative assembly quality remained the same, but after polishing the difference between hybrid and non-hybrid assemblies reduced substantially. the high contiguity of nanopore-only assemblies provides a number of other important opportunities. for example, even small bioinformatics laboratories can now study genomic structural variations and rearrangements, or identify large antibiotic resistance islands in genomes, for which exact base variations are not of such high importance; all in-house. we can expect that with further development of nanopore technology (and other long read sequencing technologies) read quality will increase and the technology will become more accessible and more affordable. this will make de novo assembly using nanopore reads faster, more precise and applicable to larger genomes.  
