event extraction across multiple levels of biological organization motivation: event extraction using expressive structured representations has been a significant focus of recent efforts in biomedical information extraction. however, event extraction resources and methods have so far focused almost exclusively on molecular-level entities and processes, limiting their applicability. results: we extend the event extraction approach to biomedical information extraction to encompass all levels of biological organization from the molecular to the whole organism. we present the ontological foundations, target types and guidelines for entity and event annotation and introduce the new multi-level event extraction (mlee) corpus, manually annotated using a structured representation for event extraction. we further adapt and evaluate named entity and event extraction methods for the new task, demonstrating that both can be achieved with performance broadly comparable with that for established molecular entity and event extraction tasks. availability: the resources and methods introduced in this study are available from http://nactem.ac.uk/mlee/.a detailed understanding of biological systems requires the ability to trace cause and effect across multiple levels of biological organization, from molecular-level reactions to cellular, tissue-and organ-level effects to organism-level outcomes . consequently, any effort aiming to comprehensively represent biological systems must address entities and processes at all of these levels. this challenge has so far been only partially met in biomedical information extraction (ie) and text mining, which aim to improve access to domain knowledge by automating aspects of processing the literature. until recently, efforts in domain ie were primarily focused on the basic task of recognizing mentions of relevant entities such as genes and proteins in text and on the extraction of pairwise relations between these representing, for example, protein protein interactions . such representations lack the capacity to capture any but the simplest of associations. in recent years, there has been increasing interest in the extraction of structured representations capable of capturing associations of arbitrary numbers of participants in specific roles. such approaches to whom correspondence should be addressed. to ie, frequently termed event extraction, are capable of representing complex associationssuch as the binding of a protein to another inhibiting its localization to a specific cellular compartment and open many new opportunities for domain text mining applications ranging from semantic search to database and pathway curation support . there is significant momentum behind the move to richer representations for ie: more than 30 groups have introduced methods for biomedical event extraction in shared tasks (, b); event-annotated corpora have been introduced for many extraction targets, including dna methylation , protein modifications and the molecular mechanisms of infectious diseases ; event extraction methods have been applied to automatically analyze all 20 million pubmed abstracts ; and event extraction analyses are being integrated into literature search systems such as medie 1 and applied in support of advanced tasks such as pathway curation . while the event extraction approach has been demonstrated to be applicable to a variety of extraction targets across different subdomains of biomedical science, related efforts all share a key restriction: nearly exclusive focus on molecular-level entities and events. 2 entities such as proteins and genes and events such as binding and phosphorylation are an important part of the picture of biological systems, but still only a part, and any ie approach aiming to capture the whole picture must also consider other levels of biological organization. in this study, our aim is to extend the scope of existing event extraction resources and methods to levels of biological organization ranging from the subcellular to the organism level as a step toward developing the capacity for the automatic extraction of these targets from the entire available literature. toward this end, we propose relevant entity and event types for annotation across these levels with reference to community-standard ontologies, develop a set of detailed guidelines for their annotation in text and create structured event annotation marking over 8000 entities and 6000 events in abstracts relevant to cancer biology, previously annotated by domain experts to identify spans of text relevant to their interests. using this data, we perform experiments using state-of-the-art methods for both entity mention detection and event extraction to analyze. example sentence with event annotation. prot,-reg and cell comp. abbreviated for protein, negative regulation and cell component, respectively the feasibility of extraction using existing tools, further evaluating the benefits of specific adaptations of such tools to the novel task.we have presented the mlee corpus, a resource aiming to extend the coverage of resources and methods for structured event extraction from the molecular level to encompass all levels from the subcellular to the organism. experiments using state-of-the-art entity mention detection and event extraction methods demonstrated that the newly proposed extraction targets can be met with reasonable performance using the mlee corpus, with approximately 80 overall f score for entity mention detection and over 50 f score for event extraction using standard evaluation criteria. in future work, we will focus on the extension of the annotations and extraction methods to improve the domain independence of  
