evidence mining and novelty assessment of protein–protein interactions with the consensuspathdb plugin for cytoscape proteinprotein interaction detection methods are applied on a daily basis by molecular biologists worldwide. after generating a set of potential interactions, biologists face the problem of highlighting the ones that are novel and collecting evidence with respect to literature and annotation. this task can be as tedious as searching for every predicted interaction in several interaction data repositories, or manually screening the scientific literature. to facilitate the task of evidence mining and novelty assessment of proteinprotein interactions, we have developed a cytoscape plugin that automatically mines publication references, database references, interaction detection method descriptions and pathway annotation for a user-supplied network of interactions. the basis for the annotation is consensuspathdba meta-database that integrates numerous proteinprotein, signaling, metabolic and gene regulatory interaction repositories for currently three species: homo sapiens, saccharomyces cerevisiae and mus musculus. availability: the consensuspathdb plugin for cytoscape (version 2.7.0 or later) can be installed within cytoscape on a major operating system (windows, mac os, unix/linux) with sun java 1.5 or later installed through cytoscapes plugin manager (category network and attribute i/o). the plugin is freely available for download on the consensuspathdb web sitedue to the high explanatory power of proteinprotein interactions for biological processes in health and disease , dedicated interaction detection methods like yeast-two-hybrid (y2h) screening and co-purification are applied on a daily basis by molecular biologists worldwide and contribute to the completion of the map of protein protein interactions for human and other species. an immediate task after generating a network of predicted interactions is to identifypage: 2797 27962797on the basis of accession numbers such as uniprot or ensembl . interactions from the query network are matched to the repository based on their participants. the performance of the interaction matching depends critically on how well proteins in the query network are annotated with accession numbers. in the case that accession numbers are not available, the user is prompted to specify whether the node labels represent accession numbers of a certain type. the interaction matching performance is influenced by two parameters, protein annotation matching (strict/fuzzy) and interaction cardinality matching (strict/allow containment). strict protein annotation matching denotes that a protein from the query network and a protein from the database are considered identical only if all identifiers of a type match. fuzzy matching means that the identifiers of the query protein may form a sub-set of the identifiers of the database counterpart or vice versa. fuzzy matching is useful, e.g. when proteins on the one side are compared with protein families on the other side. the interaction cardinality matching parameter specifies whether the binary interactions from the query network should be matched only with binary interactions from the database network (strict matching) or whether they may be matched to complex interactions, i.e. interactions of more than two proteins that contain the binary interactions. more details about protein and interaction mapping can be found in the supplementary material to this paper. after matching proteins and interactions, the web service server sends annotation attributes for matched query interactions in the form of publication references (pubmed identifiers), interaction detection methods, database references (such as intact and mint) and pathway annotations (i.e. pathways that contain both participants of a proteinprotein interaction) to the client plugin. the plugin creates a custom visual style in cytoscape where the thickness of interaction edges reflects (optionally) the number of publications, number of containing interaction databases, number of distinct detection methods, or number of containing pathways for the protein interaction . interactions that are not found in the repository, and thus represent potential novel interactions, are highlighted in green. in the results tab of cytoscape, an interaction mapping summary is displayed together with a legend. the interaction attributes that have been retrieved from consensuspathdb can be viewed for selected interactions under the interaction details tab of the results panel . if applicable, this information is provided as web links to the primary data and can be viewed in a web browser.shows the performance of the plugin implementation with respect to the mining of interaction annotation for different network sizes. results show that even for large networks evidence mining executes in minutes, for example 2 min for a network with 20 000 nodes. it should be noted, however, that the internet connection speed of the client influences the overall speed of interaction matching.  
