genetics and population analysis evoker: a visualization tool for genotype intensity data genome-wide association studies (gwas), which produce huge volumes of data, are now being carried out by many groups around the world, creating a need for user-friendly tools for data quality control (qc) and analysis. one critical aspect of gwas qc is evaluating genotype cluster plots to verify sensible genotype calling in putatively associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps). evoker is a tool for visualizing genotype cluster plots, and provides a solution to the computational and storage problems related to working with such large datasets.genome-wide association studies (gwas) have recently transformed the landscape of complex human disease genetics by identifying hundreds of genes affecting risk for common diseases and traits . while these studies have become commonplace, the large volumes of data they produce still pose analytical and computational challenges. among the most important of these is the importance of rigorous quality control (qc) procedures which help to reduce false positives arising from poor quality dna, population structure, hidden confounders and genotyping artifacts. this last category, genotype calling artifacts, persist despite the considerable effort which has been invested in genotype calling algorithms and automated qc filters. while filters like genotype call rate and hardyweinberg equilibrium can flag a proportion of poorly clustered snps, the most reliable means of verifying the quality of genotypes is to visualize the genotype cluster plots for each snp individually (wellcome trust). while genotype cluster visualization is critical to gwas qc, it remains challenging for many gwas research groups to do so efficiently. the normalized intensity files from which genotype cluster plots are generated are extremely large and unwieldy in the default formats from snp chip providers (uncompressed text-format intensities from a gwas of 10 000 individuals would be hundreds of gigabytes). extracting subsets of data and plotting hundreds of snps of interest is typically a tedious procedure requiring some computational sophistication. moreover, the rapid proliferation of gwas has exposed a general need for freely available, easy-to-use to whom correspondence should be addressed. tools for routine tasks, as illustrated by the widespread adoption of programs like plink for qc and association analyses. therefore, we have developed evoker, a java program which supports two simple and compact binary data formats and is designed to make genotype cluster plot inspection an easy and efficient process.evoker is an open source program for visualizing genotype cluster plots designed to be integrated into qc workflows for gwas. it provides a fast, user-friendly and interactive interface to these large and cumbersome datasets, enabling researchers without computational backgrounds to undertake this key qc step consistently while reducing the amount of time spent on the task.  
