genome analysis agplus: a rapid and flexible tool for aggregation plots aggregation plots are frequently used to evaluate signal distributions at user-interested points in chip-seq data analysis. agplus, a new and simple command-line tool, enables rapid and flexible generation of text tables tailored for aggregation plots from which users can easily design multiple groups based on user-definitions such as regulatory regions or transcription initiation sites. availability and implementation: this software is implemented in ruby, supported on linux and mac osx, and freely available ataggregation plots are frequently used to convert genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (chip-seq) data into a simple curve of averaged chip-seq signal intensities at user-interested points (anchor points), such as regulatory sequences . aggregation plots allow differences in the signal distribution among different chip-seq data to be assessed intuitively. many chip-seq data analysis toolkits include software for the creation of aggregation plots, including homer, bwtools, cgat, ngsplot and htseq . these software are designed to analyze transcription start sites (tsss), transcription factor binding sites (tfbss), exon-intron structures, etc. for example, ngsplot takes a configuration file of gene sets with corresponding raw data to produce a visual of different chipseq signal distributions at gene loci. more recently, chip-seq applications have begun to offer diverse purposes for aggregation plots. however, user definitions of the anchor points required for aggregation plots are not trivial, e.g. comparisons of the signal distribution of transcription start sites around different gene sets (gene ontology database or a set defined by their gene expression profile data) or regulatory regions (promoters, enhancers or other non-coding region). therefore, a simpler tool for loci definitions and grouping tasks is preferred. here, we introduce agplus, a flexible tool designed for the creation of aggregation plots using various points of user interest.we have developed agplus, a tool that enables rapid and flexible creation of aggregation plots. this tool is expected to reduce effort and time for aggregation-style analysis by chip-seq users.  
