structural bioinformatics evol and prody for bridging protein sequence evolution and structural dynamics correlations between sequence evolution and structural dynamics are of utmost importance in understanding the molecular mechanisms of function and their evolution. we have integrated evol, a new package for fast and efficient comparative analysis of evolutionary patterns and conformational dynamics, into prody, a computational toolbox designed for inferring protein dynamics from experimental and theoretical data. using information-theoretic approaches, evol coanalyzes conservation and coevolution profiles extracted from multiple sequence alignments of protein families with their inferred dynamics. availability and implementation: prody and evol are open-source and freely available under mitthe significance of protein dynamics in a wide range of biological functions, including cell signaling, regulation and machinery is widely established . in many cases, sequence variability goes hand in hand with structural dynamics . structural dynamics correlates with evolvability or sequence and conformational diversity and enables adaptation to substrate binding while maintaining specificity . to our knowledge, existing software usually relate evolutionary properties to static structures , or they are exclusively dedicated to either sequence analysis or structural dynamics . there is a need for methods that allow combined analysis of sequence (co)evolution and structural dynamics. these would be particularly useful if they could be performed and visualized in a versatile, integrated computing environment.toward addressing this need, we introduce the v1.5 of prody with evol applications. highlights of the new version are rich methods for coevolutionary analysis, and extensions for analyzing and interpreting structural dynamics, following the approach adopted in our recent comparative study of sequence conservation and coevolution patterns versus structure/dynamics properties for a representative set of protein families , which has been validated in detailed case studies (e.g.). a distinctive feature of prody is its capability to extract mechanistic information from principal component analysis (pca) of ensembles of structures (e.g. drug targets) . the new release has several new modules and command line applications named evol to evaluate sequence conservation and coevolution using information-theoretic and statistical approaches. to our knowledge, this is the only package that enables comparative analysis of protein dynamics with sequence evolution data extracted from multiple sequence alignments (msas) for protein families.evol adds new api features and command line applications to prody for rapid assessment and visualization of sequence conservation and coevolution patterns and allows for examining these results in the light of the structure and dynamics of proteins, motivated by our current understanding of the role of intrinsic dynamics in sequence evolution. the prody api and the new extensions implemented here can harness efficient and powerful features of other open-source scientific packages (e.g. numpy, scipy and matplotlib), to harness their efficient and powerful features, thus making the api suitable for interactive usage and rapid and easy development of new applications.  
