evpedia: a community web portal for extracellular vesicles research motivation: extracellular vesicles (evs) are spherical bilayered proteolipids, harboring various bio-active molecules. due to the complexity of the vesicular nomenclatures and components, online searches for ev-related publications and vesicular components are currently challenging. results: we present an improved version of evpedia, a public database for evs research. this community web portal contains a database of publications and vesicular components, identification of orthologous vesicular components, bioinformatic tools and a personalized function. evpedia includes 6879 publications, 172 080 vesicular components from 263 high-throughput datasets, and has been accessed more than 65 000 times from more than 750 cities. in addition, about 350 members from 73 international research groups have participated in developing evpedia. this free web-based database might serve as a useful resource to stimulate the emerging field of ev research.almost all living organisms on earth shed extracellular vesicles (evs) into their microenvironment. evs are spherical bilayered proteolipids with an average diameter of 201000 nm . cells release evs either constitutively or in a regulated manner and these vesicles harbor a specific subset of proteins, mrnas, mirnas, lipids and metabolites reflecting their originating cell types and conditions . evs are also found in various biological fluids, such as amniotic fluid, ascites, breast milk, plasma, saliva, semen, serum and urine . recent advances in this fast growing field have facilitated several insights: (1) evs play multifaceted functions in intercellular communication (; (2) ev-mediated intercellular communication is an evolutionarily conserved phenomenon ; (3) evs are rich sources of biomarkers for non-invasive diagnosis and prognosis of various human diseases ; and (4) diverse therapeutic approaches have been pursued to utilize evs and their mimetics for vaccine, chemotherapeutic drug and sirna delivery . publications on evs have grown rapidly during the last several years, indicating that the field of evs is expanding intensively . the identification of vesicle-specific cargos could help us to unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying the cargo sorting and biogenesis of evs. in addition, this will lead to better comprehension of the pathophysiological functions of evs, and discovery of evbased potential biomarkers of human diseases. therefore, many evpedia: a portal for extracellular vesicles researchinvestigators have focused on categorizing these complex vesicular components by various high-throughput technologies, such as mass spectrometry-based proteomics and lipidomics as well as microarray-and next-generation sequencing-based transcriptomics . together with conventional biological approaches, these multiomics-based analyses of evs derived from various cell types and body fluids have identified several thousands of different vesicular components. ev secretion and ev-mediated intercellular communication are evolutionarily conserved . researchers in this field have coined dozens of different names for evs, especially for more complex eukaryotic cell-derived evs as listed in box (extracellular vesicles: diverse nomenclature) . nevertheless, there is progress toward a single nomenclature, since the different names in use make it difficult to follow the progress in the field. in addition, most vesicular components identified by multiomics-based high throughput analyses are presented in the supplementary information of published articles. taken together, online searches for ev-related publications and vesicular components are currently challenging, especially for start-up researchers in this field. therefore, a comprehensive public repository of ev-related publications and vesicular components will help the community of ev research to understand various aspects of these complex extracellular organelles.  
