genetics and population analysis ew_dmgwas: edge-weighted dense module search for genome-wide association studies and gene expression profiles we previously developed dmgwas to search for dense modules in a human protein protein interaction (ppi) network; it has since become a popular tool for network-assisted analysis of genome-wide association studies (gwas). dmgwas weights nodes by using gwas signals. here, we introduce an upgraded algorithm, ew_dmgwas, to boost gwas signals in a node-and edge-weighted ppi network. in ew_dmgwas, we utilize condition-specific gene expression profiles for edge weights. specifically, differential gene co-expression is used to infer the edge weights. we applied ew_dmgwas to two diseases and compared it with other relevant methods. the results suggest that ew_dmgwas is more powerful in detecting disease-associated signals. availability and implementation: the algorithm of ew_dmgwas is implemented in the r package dmgwas_3.0 and is available at http://bioinfo.over the past decade, genome-wide association studies (gwas) have successfully uncovered many susceptibility loci for common diseases. however, the identified loci only explain a small portion of the genetic risk . it is challenging to uncover the remaining risky loci as their association signals are likely to be moderate or weak. one potential solution to this challenge is to incorporate other functional information, such as proteinprotein interaction (ppi) networks, to investigate joint association signals beyond single markers . we previously developed a network-assisted approach, dmgwas, to address this problem . dmgwas applies a greedy algorithm to search for dense modules in a ppi network in which nodes are weighted by using gwas signals. after its initial release, dmgwas received much attention from the research community and has become quite popular for network-assisted analysis of gwas signals.motivated by the strong demand, we enhanced dmgwas by integrating and enabling gene expression profiles to assign edge weights, and denoted the new algorithm ew_dmgwas. differential gene co-expression (dgce), which measures the change of gene co-expression between case and control samples, is one important feature of transcriptional information, reflecting cellular dynamics and contributing to pathogenesis . thus, we utilize dgce to infer the weight of each edge and combine the association signals of its two nodes to assess the overall disease risk of network modules within the human ppi network.  
