sequence analysis a gradient-boosting approach for filtering de novo mutations in parent–offspring trios motivation: whole-genome and-exome sequencing on parentoff-spring trios is a powerful approach to identifying disease-associated genes by detecting de novo mutations in patients. accurate detection of de novo mutations from sequencing data is a critical step in trio-based genetic studies. existing bioinformatic approaches usually yield high error rates due to sequencing artifacts and alignment issues, which may either miss true de novo mutations or call too many false ones, making downstream validation and analysis difficult. in particular , current approaches have much worse specificity than sensitivity, and developing effective filters to discriminate genuine from spurious de novo mutations remains an unsolved challenge. results: in this article, we curated 59 sequence features in whole genome and exome alignment context which are considered to be relevant to discriminating true de novo mutations from artifacts, and then employed a machine-learning approach to classify candidates as true or false de novo mutations. specifically, we built a classifier, named de novo mutation filter (dnmfilter), using gradient boosting as the classification algorithm. we built the training set using experimentally validated true and false de novo mutations as well as collected false de novo mutations from an in-house large-scale exome-sequencing project. we evaluated dnmfilters theoretical performance and investigated relative importance of different sequence features on the classification accuracy. finally, we applied dnmfilter on our in-house whole exome trios and one ceu trio from the 1000 genomes project and found that dnmfilter could be coupled with commonly used de novo mutation detection approaches as an effective filtering approach to significantly reduce false discovery rate without sacrificing sensitivity. availability: the software dnmfilter implemented using a combination of java and r is freely available from the website atde novo mutations (dnms) represent the most extreme form of rare variants and play an important role in human diseases . with rapid development of high-throughput-sequencing technology, large-scale wholegenome or-exome sequencing of parentoffspring trios or multiplex families is becoming a powerful approach to investigating dnms associated with human disease. recent sequencing studies have revealed that dnms can affect genes with diverse biological consequences in several neuropsychiatric diseases, such as autism spectrum disorder , intellectual disability , schizophrenia and epileptic encephalopathies . here, we focus on a critical step in such studies, the detection of dnms from whole genome/exome sequencing data in parent offspring trios. the standard approach used by most studies is to call variants in each sample of a trio independently and then identify putative dnms by comparing offspring against parental genotypes with mendelian inconsistency. therefore, a false positive variant call in offspring or a false negative variant call in either parent will result in a false positive dnm call; conversely, a false negative variant call in offspring or a false positive variant call in either parent will result in a false negative dnm call. although there have been great improvements in development of single-and multiple-sample variant-calling approaches , a variety of factors, including sequencing artifacts and alignment issues, lead to high rates of both false positive and false negative variant calls. although allele frequency and linkage disequilibrium (ld) have been successfully leveraged to improve variant calling accuracy , it cannot apply to dnm calling because no such information is available for new mutations. distinct from standard approaches, methods that jointly model parentoffspring relationships within a trio have been developed specifically for dnm calling by utilizing mendelian inheritance information within a trio. for example, denovogear calculates a posterior probability of being a true dnm call for every candidate-variant site by taking into account all three samples genotype likelihoods under a prior based on genome-wide dnm rate. polymutt calculates maximum likelihoods of genotype configurations without and with mendelian constraint, respectively, and then takes the ratio of the two resulting likelihoods as the cutoff. the larger the ratio, the more confident the dnm call is. due to the use of extra information in the model, joint modeling approaches achieve much improved accuracy compared to standard approaches . both standard and joint modeling approaches can achieve high sensitivity. however, in terms of specificity, despite the better performance of joint modeling over standard approaches, both approaches rely on information of single sites assuming all reads having been correctly mapped, so they cannot eliminate false positive dnm calls originating from alignment mistakes. heuristic filtering strategies and visual alignment inspection via genome browsers are usually used to filter out such false positive dnm calls. however, it is inherently difficult to select appropriate filtering parameter combinations to accommodate sensitivity and specificity simultaneously; it is also impractical to manually inspect a large number of candidates. these challenges necessitate the development of effective and automated dnm filtering algorithms. machine learning is a powerful approach to modeling complex multidimensional data and has been successfully applied to nextgeneration sequencing (ngs) data to identify genetic variants. for example, variant quality score recalibration in genome analysis toolkit (gatk) uses a semi-supervised machine-learning algorithm, gaussian mixture model, to estimate the probability that each variant is a true polymorphism rather than a sequencer, alignment or data processing artifact, by evaluating sequence features extracted from true variants (typically hapmap 3 sites and polymorphic sites on the omni 2.5m snp chip array) . supervised machine-learning algorithms, which usually train a model with known true and false positive variants, are also widely used to classify candidates as real variants versus artifacts. for example, snpsvm (o) utilizes support vector machine (svm) to detect single nucleotide variants (snvs); the atlas2 suite builds a logistic regression model to call snvs, insertions and deletions (indels); forestsv and svm 2 employs random forest (rf) and svm to detect large structural variants (svs). in addition, mutationseq makes use of four algorithms including rf, svm, bayesian additive regression tree and logistic regression to identify somatic mutations from tumornormal paired-sequencing data. because these machine-learning approaches can incorporate multidimensional sequence features into a model, they usually yield better results than approaches that are based on single or very few sequence features. since dnms are extremely rare, oftentimes real mutations are buried in a mass of false calls. in this article, we develop a supervised machine-learning-based approach, namely dnmfilter, to effectively sift out false dnm calls from a large number of putative candidates. we choose gradient boosting as the classification algorithm for dnmfilter based on recent reports showing that it can achieve better performance than other supervised machine-learning algorithms in many conditions and our own preliminary comparative analysis (data not shown). dnmfilter is designed to train a model based on experimentally validated and collected dnms and then classify each novel candidate as a true or false dnm probabilistically.in the following sections, we describe dnmfilter, a gradient boosting approach for classifying and filtering dnm candidates identified from any computational or manual approaches. we investigate multidimensional sequence features in whole genome and exome alignment context that have been shown to be relevant to dnm calls. then we illustrate how to employ gradient boosting to design dnmfilter based on these features. we evaluate dnmfilters theoretical performance and evaluate the contribution of different sequence features. finally, we apply dnmfilter on in-house whole-exome trios and one wholegenome ceu trio from the 1000 genomes project (1000gp) to investigate its general performance in practice.given a training set of (x 1 , y 1 ), (x 2 , y 2 ),. .. , (x n , y n ), boosting aims to find n approximation fx to a function f x that minimizes the expected value of some specified loss function l(y, f(x)), as followsboosting iteratively fits an additive expansion of the formwhere m is the expansion coefficient, hx; m is the base classifier parameterized by m : gradient boosting is one kind of boosting algorithms that applies steepest descent to minimize the loss function on the training data. at iteration step m, the gradient is calculated by,. .. , fx n g t is updated as followswhere m is the step length, which is calculated bygradient boosting machine makes use of decision trees as the base classifiers and implements the above generic gradientboosting algorithm. in addition, stochastic gradient boosting incorporates the idea of bagging to gradient-boosting machine, which can improve the performance by fitting every base classifier with bootstrapped samples of the whole dataset at each iteration step. in this article, we use gradient-boosting machine as well as stochastic gradient boosting implemented in the r gbm package (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/gbm/index.html). as to the parameter settings, bernoulli distribution is chosen as the loss function, shrinkage is set to 0.001, tree construction depth is set to 1 and bag fraction is set to 0.5. moreover, 10-fold cross-validation is used for tuning the number of iterations. the remaining parameters are all with gbm packages default settings. in addition, a score between 0 and 1 will be produced for each prediction, representing the probability of the classification as the true dnm.we build the training set using the approach described in section 2.4 and evaluate the models theoretical classification performance. in addition, we evaluate different sequence features contribution to the models performance. furthermore, we combine dnmfilter with commonly used dnm detection approaches and apply them on in-house whole-exome trios and one 1000gp ceu trio to look into its performance in the general case.in summary, we developed dnmfilter, a novel gradient boosting-based approach for filtering dnms identified in parentoffspring trios. we curated 59 sequence features in wholegenome and-exome alignment context and employed gradient boosting as the classification algorithm. we built the training set with confirmed true and false positive dnms as well as collectedfalse positive dnms. the evaluation of theoretical performance demonstrates that dnmfilter works confidently for its designed purpose. according to feature relative importance measure, we showed that alignment error is a significant cause of false dnm calls. we also applied dnmfilter on in-house whole-exome trios and one 1000gp ceu trio, and found that dnmfilter could maintain the high sensitivity and significantly reduce false positive dnms when coupled with commonly used dnm detection approaches. all results indicate that dnmfilter is a valuable complement for existing dnm detection approaches. by combining dnmfilter with any dnm detection approach(es) into a pipeline, users can first relax the confidence of detection step to ensure sensitivity, and then dnmfilter can be employed to filter out false positive dnm calls, which eventually leads to a reasonable size of highly confident dnm call set for experimental validation and further analysis. in particular, dnmfilter is expected to work best when it is applied to samples from the same sequencing and alignment pipeline as the ones used in the training set. in future, we will consider extending dnmfilter to other kinds of dnms, such as indels and svs. currently, dnmfilters power is largely limited by the small number of known dnms, especially for potential de novo indel and sv filtering. as more parentoffspring trios are sequenced in future, more dnms within a more complete variant spectrum will be validated and incorporated into the training set. we plan to actively update dnmfilter with new whole-exome and-genome data to make it more effective and robust. we also consider incorporating additional relevant sequence features to capture a more comprehensive pattern discriminating true and false dnm calls that might not be represented by existing sequence features. we hope that dnmfilter is useful to the community as either a stand-alone tool for detecting dnms or a filtering strategy combined with other dnm detection tools to boost both sensitivity and specificity.  
