sequence analysis exomeai: detection of recurrent allelic imbalance in tumors using whole-exome sequencing data whole-exome sequencing (wes) has extensively been used in cancer genome studies; however, the use of wes data in the study of loss of heterozygosity or more generally allelic imbalance (ai) has so far been very limited, which highlights the need for user-friendly and flexible software that can handle low-quality datasets. we have developed a statistical approach, exomeai, for the detection of recurrent ai events using wes datasets, specifically where matched normal samples are not available. availability: exomeai is a web-based application, publicly available at: http://in cancer, recurrent genomic aberrations are highly likely to affect oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes that drive cancer progression. one efficient way to identify such aberrations is to investigate genomic profile of allelic imbalance (ai) simultaneously across the genomes of a number of similar tumor samples. detection of ai is based on the study of the relative proportion of the two alleles (a and b) at heterozygous sites . in a diploid normal heterozygous locus, the expected frequency of the b allele is 0.5 (1:1 ratio). ai is defined as a significant deviation from this proportion. the genotypes, b, aab, bb, which show loss of heterozygosity (loh), duplication and copy-neutral loh, respectively, are examples of ai. the first two cases are also examples of copy number aberrations (cna). to date, investigation of ai/loh in cancer studies has mainly been based on single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) genotyping or comparative genomic hybridization arrays and the potential of wes data has not been fully exploited. to our knowledge, there is no publicly available software for identification of recurrent genomic ai segments, using wes data, shared across multiple tumor-only samples . to address the limitation, we developed a novel software, exomeai, which can detect recurrent ai across cancer genomes by analyzing batches of wes data, and specifically in the absence of matched normal samples. we recently applied our approach to different cancer types [e.g. small-cell carcinoma of the ovary hypercalcemic type, , gliomas and renal cell carcinoma (our unpublished data)] and successfully identified recurrent ai regions. to facilitate the analysis for non-computational cancer researchers, using galaxy platform , we implemented our approach and developed a user-friendly web application., exomeai gets a batch of tumor variant call format files, as input (see supplementary information for an alternative format). using preset quality filters on variants, it converts read counts for each variant to b-allele frequency (baf), where baf is the number of reads with the non-reference base at the variant site divided by the total read count. since only heterozygous variants are informative in ai detection, only variants with baf values from 0.05 to 0.95 (default values) will be used as heterozygous variants for further analysis. the expected baf in a normal sample is 0.5 (one copy of b and one copy of a). the absolute deviation of baf values (dbaf) from the expected value (dbaf = jbaf 0.5j) is used for segmentation and segment-wise calling. segments of similar dbaf values are detected using circular binary segmentation (cbs) algorithm . the cbs algorithm is applied to each arm of all chromosomes. for segment-wise calling, where matched samples are not available, the dbaf values of each segment can be compared with a fixed threshold. although a fixed cutoff approach has been used successfully for snp arrays , the proper threshold may vary for wes datasets with different qualities (e.g. varying sequencing depths). we propose a two-step approach: we first call ai at each variant over the genome using a binomial test and we calculate the mean dbaf values for non-ai variants. in the second step, a wilcoxon signed rank test is performed to evaluate the distribution of dbaf in each segment (see supplementary information for details). one of the main issues in ai or cna calling is false positives, which gets even more challenging when the matched normal sample is not available. in cancer analysis, it is desirable to remove candidate segments that may either represent common copy number variations (cnvs) or technology or alignment artifacts. in order to remove false positives calls, we created a control database of 500 non-cancer wes samples (the database is kept updated). the statistically significant ai segments will then be compared with the control database to find the number of hits within the database. by default, exomeai counts each overlap of the control database with more than 50 of the query segment as one hit. in the next step, the significant segments that were not seen (or seen less than a given to whom correspondence should be addressed. frequency) in the control database will be used to find the recurrent ai. the output of this final step will be a list of identified segments with names and number of tumor samples that share the segment (supplementary) along with the plots of the segments for each chromosome (supplementary figs s6 and s7).  
