exome-based analysis for rna epigenome sequencing data motivation: fragmented rna immunoprecipitation combined with rna sequencing enabled the unbiased study of rna epigenome at a near single-base resolution; however, unique features of this new type of data call for novel computational techniques. result: through examining the connections of rna epigenome sequencing data with two well-studied data types, chip-seq and rna-seq, we unveiled the salient characteristics of this new data type. the computational strategies were discussed accordingly, and a novel data processing pipeline was proposed that combines several existing tools with a newly developed exome-based approach exomepeak for detecting, representing and visualizing the post-tran-scriptional rna modification sites on the transcriptome. availability: the matlab package exomepeak and additional details are available atdespite the unprecedented prosperity in epigenetics studies of dna and histone modifications with next-generation sequencing data , the rna epigenetics remains a largely uncharted territory and has not benefitted as much from the advancement in sequencing technology until lately. two recent studies of transcriptomewide mrna m 6 a methylation proposed a new powerful protocol (differently named as m 6 a-seq and merip-seq), where mrna is fragmented before the immunoprecipitation with anti-m 6 a antibody, and the immunoprecipitated and input control fragments are then sequenced for reconstructing transcriptome-wide m 6 a methylation sites. this protocol in theory enabled the transcriptome-wide unbiased study of a repertoire of 4100 known post-transcriptional rna modifications at a near single-base resolution, provided the corresponding antibody is available. to unify the nomenclatures, we call this protocol frip-seq, which stands for fragmented rna immunoprecipitation sequencing. frip-seq is different from rip-seq , where full-length rna is subjected to immunoprecipitation for detection of proteinrna interaction. in contrast, the immunoprecipitation of fragmented rna in frip-seq enables the precise prediction of rna modification sites on the transcriptome. from a technological perspective, frip-seq can be considered a marriage of two relatively well-studied techniques: chip-seq and rna-seq . this new technique brings a host of new computational challenges yet to be adequately addressed. next, we discuss briefly the best practice for frip-seq data analysis.estimating the background from the neighborhood genomic regions, frip-seq peak calling does require a paired input control sample of preferably fragmented rnas before immunoprecipitation as supposed to an immunoglobulin g control sample. peak annotation, gene and isoform transcripts: the association between detected rna modification sites and the specific mrna transcripts can be highly problematic. recent study shows that with an average of 1012 isoforms per gene, most genes tend to express multiple isoforms simultaneously . since the sequencing read length is mostly 5100bp, isoform quantification can be difficult, not to mention calling peaks for each individual isoform transcript. nevertheless, an mrna methylation site may be uniquely associated with a transcript when the site spans across the nearest exon(s) that uniquely belong to that transcript.our pipeline was applied to the data from and found at least one rna m 6 a site on 9218 genes in hek293t cells at a significance level of p-value 10 5 (see the supplementary material for more details). we then retainedfor the 3721 protein-coding genes with at least one m 6 a site, at least 10 kb exons, and only one refseq transcript, 56.3 (5195 of 9228) m 6 a sites fall within 1 kb distance to its stop codon on mrna only the protein-coding genes with coding length at least 10kb long and single refseq isoform, and then calculated the geometric distances between each detected m 6 a sites and four transcript landmarks of the respective gene, including the start codon, stop codon, transcription starting site and transcription ending site. result shows that the m 6 a sites are enriched within 1 kb distance around the stop codons , consistent with previous studies . funding: the william and ella medical research foundation grant to mkr; national institutes of health (nih-nci p30ca54174) to yc; national science foundation (ccf0546345) to yh; qatar national research fund (09-874-3235) to yc and yh. we thank computational support provided by the utsa computational systems biology core facility (nih rcmi grant 5g12rr013646-12). conflict of interest: none declared.  
