sequence analysis exome sequencing-based copy-number variation and loss of heterozygosity detection: exomecnv motivation: the ability to detect copy-number variation (cnv) and loss of heterozygosity (loh) from exome sequencing data extends the utility of this powerful approach that has mainly been used for point or small insertion/deletion detection. results: we present exomecnv, a statistical method to detect cnv and loh using depth-of-coverage and b-allele frequencies, from mapped short sequence reads, and we assess both the methods power and the effects of confounding variables. we apply our method to a cancer exome resequencing dataset. as expected, accuracy and resolution are dependent on depth-of-coverage and capture probe design. availability: cran package exomecnv. contact:the development of next-generation sequencing has enabled routine large-scale resequencing projects, permitting us to perform increasingly more comprehensive dna variant analysis. however, the cost and analytical complexity of sequencing still limit the number of whole genomes that can be sequenced in any single project . in fact, the analysis of complete human genome sequence often interprets dna alterations in protein coding regions primarily. this is in practice a reasonable strategy since 85 of the disease-causing mutations are found in the coding regions or canonical splice sites . thus, wholeexome sequencing presents an effective alternative to whole-genome sequencing and provides an unbiased, cost-effective and timeefficient tool for the study of the genetic basis for disease. following the first successful application of whole-exome sequencing in rediscovering the cause of a dominantly inherited rare mendelian disorder freemansheldon syndrome , a number to whom correspondence should be addressed. of studies have reported similar successes . although the cost of both genome and exome sequencing continues to fall at a rapid pace, whole-exome sequencing has a number of advantages, including a lower cost, more straightforward data analysis and interpretation and significantly greater depth of coverage with a corresponding overall improvement in data quality. exome sequencing is rapidly becoming a fundamental tool for genetic and functional genomic research laboratories and a diagnostic tool in clinics. at present the main applications of targeted exonic sequencing is for the determination of single nucleotide variants (snvs) or small indel variants but not structural variation. structural variation, especially copy-number variation (cnv) and loss of heterozygosity (loh), is an important class of genetic variability in mendelian, common inherited diseases and cancer . as is true of snvs, there are population-specific, common cnvs and rare, disease-causing cnvs . many large-scale projects and technological platforms have been devised to estimate the prevalence and impact of cnv. array comparative genomic hybridization (cgh) and snp genotyping arrays have been widely used as standard methods to detect cnv and loh. however, with the rapid increase in genomic and exomic sequence, there is growing interest in the use of these data to detect cnvs. while methods have been developed for cnv estimation in whole-genome sequencing , these methods make key assumptions that fail to hold in the exome sequencing setting. for example,assumes random, unbiased distribution of sequence reads, such that read depth can be modeled as a normal distribution across the genome, and deviation from the background indicates the presence of cnv. this random read distribution assumption breaks down in the context of exome capture as the probes have variable specificity and efficiency for the targeted exonic regions. the discrete nature of exome sequences also presents problems toexisting methods. many whole-genome cnv detection tools use segmentation algorithms that assume continuity of search space and do not function properly when given discontinuous and variable length exome sequencing data. segseq , for example, merges windows of a fixed length based on a log-ratio difference statistic. lastly, because exons are generally smaller than insert sizes for paired-end sequencing (200500 bp), paired-end based cnv detection methods are not generally applicable to exome data. here we present exomecnv, which uses depth-of-coverage and b-allele frequencies from mapped short sequence reads to estimate cnv (, left side) and loh (, right side). we describe an assessment of its validity, sensitivity, specificity and limitations through an analysis of a melanoma tumor and a matched normal sample. important model assumption and the effect of important confounding factor such as sample admixture rate are also considered.  
