genome analysis expedit: a webserver to explore human rna editing in rna-seq experiments expedit is a web application for assessing rna editing in human at known or user-specified sites supported by transcript data obtained by rna-seq experiments. mapping data (in sam/bam format) or directly sequence reads [in fastq/short read archive (sra) format] can be provided as input to carry out a comparative analysis against a large collection of known editing sites collected in darned database as well as other user-provided potentially edited positions. results are shown as dynamic tables containing university of california, santa cruz (ucsc) links for a quick examination of the genomic context. availability: expedit is freely available on the web atrna editing is a post-transcriptional mechanism challenging the central dogma of molecular biology. according to such phenomenon, genetic information is enzymatically overwritten at specific sites to generate transcripts different from their corresponding genomic templates [for a comprehensive review see. historically, rna editing has been described for the first time as the insertion and the deletion of uridine residues in mitochondrial rnas of kinetoplastid protozoa . nowadays, the term rna editing is also used to indicate post-transcriptional changes due to specific base substitutions . such alterations may affect coding as well as non-coding rnas located in different cellular compartments and occur in a variety of organisms including prokaryotes, animals, plants and viruses, through unrelated biochemical mechanisms . in mammals and, in particular in human nuclei, the a-to-i conversion is the most frequent type of rna editing catalyzed by the adar (adenosine deaminase acting on rna) family of to whom correspondence should be addressed. enzymes that requires double stranded rna as a substrate to carry out the deamination . inosines are commonly interpreted as guanosines by splicing and translational machineries as well as sequencing enzymes. several a-to-i changes have been described in coding regions causing amino acid substitutions with functional consequences. the vast majority of editing sites, however, have been recently found in repeated regions of the human genome and especially in alu rich segments . although the functional and physiological role of many human edits is currently elusive, the molecular mechanism of rna editing is indispensable to preserve the cellular homeostasis. deregulation of rna editing has been associated to a variety of pathological phenotypes including several neurodegenerative diseases . moreover, mice lacking the adar activity die during or soon after the weaning . a-to-i conversions in human have been mainly discovered computationally by analyzing alignments of messenger rna (mrna)/expressed sequence tag (est) sequences against their source genome . padlock experiments in combination with deep sequencing have also been used to confirm computationally selected editing candidates in different human tissues . nowadays, 40 000 editing changes are known in human and they are freely available through the specialized darned database . the extraordinary coverage provided by rna-seq methodology can now provide a comprehensive transcriptome snapshot dramatically improving our understanding of gene expression dynamics in different tissues, developmental stages or pathological conditions . massive transcriptome sequencing offers the great opportunity to explore and investigate posttranscriptional changes due to rna editing . indeed, the huge amount of short reads generated by the rna-seq provides significant support for individual genomic positions after the appropriate mapping strategy and facilitates the identification of a-to-g conversions. rna-seq experiments, therefore, may allow large-scale detection of editing sites thus contributing to elucidate their functional roles in a variety of tissues, developmental stages and physiological conditions. a large amount of rna-seq data is now publicly available through the sra repository at national center for biotechnology information (ncbi). however, no tool has been developed so far to investigate such data, as well as newly produced rna-seq data. to fill this gap we developed an ad hoc web  
