experimental design schemes for learning boolean network models motivation: a holy grail of biological research is a working model of the cell. current modeling frameworks, especially in the proteinpro-tein interaction domain, are mostly topological in nature, calling for stronger and more expressive network models. one promising alternative is logic-based or boolean network modeling, which was successfully applied to model signaling regulatory circuits in human. learning such models requires observing the system under a sufficient number of different conditions. to date, the amount of measured data is the main bottleneck in learning informative boolean models, underscoring the need for efficient experimental design strategies. results: we developed novel design approaches that greedily select an experiment to be performed so as to maximize the difference or the entropy in the results it induces with respect to current best-fit models. unique to our maximum difference approach is the ability to account for all (possibly exponential number of) boolean models displaying high fit to the available data. we applied both approaches to simulated and real data from the efgr and il1 signaling systems in human. we demonstrate the utility of the developed strategies in substantially improving on a random selection approach. our design schemes highlight the redundancy in these datasets, leading up to 11-fold savings in the number of experiments to be performed. availability and implementation: source code will be made available upon acceptance of the manuscript.network analysis tools have become over the last decade the method of choice for studying genome-wide data, yielding important insights into gene function, interaction and evolution. nevertheless, most of these tools, especially in the proteinprotein interaction domain, have been limited to pure topological analysis of the pertaining networks, calling for stronger and more expressive network models . recently, boolean network modeling has been successfully attempted at signaling networks, yielding a qualitative functional understanding of signaling pathways and the ability to predict their behavior under different perturbations and environmental cues . however, because of the sparsity of the currently available data, learning such models de novo remains a formidable task, requiring computational strategies to efficiently prioritize experimental conditions that will best reveal the underlying model. we refer the reader tofor a comprehensive survey of boolean modeling.an alternative modeling technique for signaling pathways dynamics based on ordinary differential equations (odes) was thoroughly studied . these equations offer a mechanistic chemically based view on the change in the level of cellular species as a function of the levels of their interactors. the dependency of such a detailed modeling on the availability of experimental data has triggered two lines of work of algorithmic experimental design : the first addressing the challenge in parameter estimation and the second addressing the model identification problem . nevertheless, the application of this formalism to largescale modeling is limited by the large number of required parameters whose estimation is difficult . in contrast to the relatively rich literature on odes, experimental design algorithms for boolean networks are scarce.proposed an experimental design scheme involving two principal entities: a predictor that generates models given an experimental data and a chooser that selects the next experiment to be conducted based on information theoretic principles. these two entities were used in an iterative manner to learn a genetic network from gene expression data. a similar entropy-based criterion was used byto learn regulatory relations downstream to a given signaling pathway.proposed an experimental design algorithm for learning regulatory networks that maximizes at each step an estimate of the expected information gain. in the context of signaling networks, we have previously sketched a maximum entropy-based experimental design scheme , but the scheme was not completely defined nor its utility was tested. here we propose two comprehensive experimental design strategies. the first realizes the maximum entropy principle to guide the selection of experiments in the context of boolean networks learning. the second strategy learns de novo experiments that maximize the disagreement between current best-fit models, a criterion that we term maximum difference. for this optimization task, we propose a novel algorithm that considers the entire space of candidate models and possible experiments. we implement and test these strategies on simulated and real experimental data using two detailed boolean models for egfr and il1 signaling. we show that both strategies can be used to prioritize experiments and discover redundancies among them, considerably outperforming a random-choice scheme. in particular, we find that the maximum difference criterion is superior to all other approaches in all the settings we tested, leading to 511fold savings in the number of experiments to be performed with respect to the available experiment sets. to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2014. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.comin this article, we studied two approaches for experimental design in boolean networks. our main contribution is in the development of an algorithm to optimally solve the maximum difference design criterion while exploring the space of all optimal models under all possible experiments. in addition, we implemented a method based on the well-studied criterion of maximum entropy and demonstrated its utility over a random selection of experiment as well as its limitations under varying conditions. our evaluation of these schemes indicated that under many conditions, especially in the face of scarce data and increasing complexity of the underlying system, our novel maximum difference approach outperforms the maximum entropy scheme. our findings suggest that current studies might suffer from redundant experimentation with respect to the available models of the systems at hand. furthermore, results on simulated data suggest that by adopting an experimental design scheme, much of the redundancy may be eliminated. thus, our approach should be beneficial for the study of systems whose underlying model is sufficiently detailed and may be formalized as a boolean network. on the methodological side, the maximum difference approach is limited to considering the differences between pairs of models, calling for a generalized approach that considers multiple models. additionally, in our current sampling procedure, we rely on the ilp solver to retrieve a diverse family of models. maximum entropy and similar approaches should benefit from the development of other strategies that better sample the model space.  
