databases and ontologies exploiting disjointness axioms to improve semantic similarity measures motivation: representing domain knowledge in biology has traditionally been accomplished by creating simple hierarchies of classes with textual annotations. recently, expressive ontology languages, such as web ontology language, have become more widely adopted, supporting axioms that express logical relationships other than classsubclass, e.g. disjointness. this is improving the coverage and validity of the knowledge contained in biological ontol-ogies. however, current semantic tools still need to adapt to this more expressive information. in this article, we propose a method to integrate disjointness axioms, which are being incorporated in real-world ontologies, such as the gene ontology and the chemical entities of biological interest ontology, into semantic similarity, the measure that estimates the closeness in meaning between classes. results: we present a modification of the measure of shared information content, which extends the base measure to allow the incorporation of disjointness information. to evaluate our approach, we applied it to several randomly selected datasets extracted from the chemical entities of biological interest ontology. in 93.8 of these datasets, our measure performed better than the base measure of shared information content. this supports the idea that semantic similarity is more accurate if it extends beyond the hierarchy of classes of the ontology.semantic similarity has direct application to the classsubclass hierarchy of many biomedical ontologies, such as the gene ontology (go;), the chemical entities of biological interest ontology (chebi;) and the human phenotype ontology . semantic similarity assigns a quantitative measure of similarity between two entities in an ontology, which has seen multiple applications in semantic web and bioinformatics contexts . the state-of-the-art in knowledge representation in the biomedical domain is evolving to make use of ontology languages such as the web ontology language (owl). owl allows for more logically expressive axioms than the simple classsubclass hierarchy and the relational statements favored in early bio-ontology releases . following this trend, there is a need to adjust the current similarity measures to conform to current practices in ontology development . ontologies such as chebi and go now contain disjointness axioms, which express for a pair of classes the constraint that an instance of one of them cannot also be an instance of the other [although the terms class and concept are usually interchangeable in literature, the former is favored by the semantic web and owl language communities and the latter by the description logic (dl) community. in this article, we use the term . the constraint also restricts subclasses from being a subclass of both of the disjoint classes. if such shared instances or subclasses are detected by an ontology reasoner, the reasoner will flag the ontology as inconsistent, which can be used by ontology developers as a validation step to prevent errors in ontology development. in this article, we propose that disjointness axioms can also enhance the information that is exploited by similarity measures.illustrates this situation. in this snippet, it is stated that no instance of rectangle can simultaneously be an instance of trapezoid. however, given the open-world assumption that underlies ontologies, there can be instances of rectangle that are also instances of parallelogram (in fact, it is a consequence of the relevant geometric definitions that all squares are both rectangles and parallelograms). (informally, the open-world assumption states that what is not known to hold does not give any information about what is known not to hold. one consequence is that if an ontology does not contain subclasses for a given class, it cannot be assumed that no such subclasses exist.) for this reason, the similarity between rectangle and parallelogram should intuitively be higher than the similarity between rectangle and trapezoid. using to represent the two-argument function that returns the similarity between two classes:several current semantic similarity measures make use of the idea of information content (ic) applied to the classes of the ontology . the ic is a number that reflects how specific the class is. for example, in the illustration in, shape is the least specific class, receiving a lower ic than the other classes. there have been many proposals for how best to measure the ic of a class [see, e.g. seddiqui and aono (2010) and van buggenhout and. another notion commonly used in semantic similarity is the most informative common ancestor (mica;). this applies to a pair of classes x and y, and is defined as the class with the highest ic from the set of all ancestors of both x and y: micax, y arg max c ficc j c 2 ax ayg 2 where ax is the set of ancestors (super-classes) of x, including x. the first semantic similarity measure to make use of ic, by, estimates similarity as the ic of the mica between x and y. the motivation behind this choice of the formula is simple: x and y share a certain amount of information, and the mica is one way to estimate this shared information. many semantic similarity measures are based on this notion of shared ic . for example:on the other hand, work has been published recently showing a new approach to the problem of finding the best way to measure shared ic between two classes. although shared ic has been assumed to be best estimated as icmicax, y , couto and silva (2011) suggest dishin, which behaves as an addon to the measure of ic, and contributes to a better measure of shared ic by exploring multiple parentage to ensure that all the shared information across multiple ancestors is taken into account. just as was done for dishin, instead of proposing a semantic similarity measure, we propose an add-on that can be used by existing measures, such as the ones in equations (3) and (4). our add-on refines the estimation of shared information between the two classes by incorporating the disjointness axioms in the ontology. we call the new shared ic measure ic s disj x, y, which will be based on a prior measure of shared ic, denoted by ic s x, y. we stress that any measure of shared ic can be used as a base to ic s disj , not just the one proposed by resnik, as is the case with dishin. given the example presented inand the inequality of equation (1), it would be desirable for the measure of shared ic to decrease for classes that are known to be disjoint, to formalize the intuition that disjoint classes are less similar, as they cannot share instances. furthermore, to respect the open-world assumption that often accompanies ontologies, the measure should stay unchanged when two classes are not known to be disjoint. with this novel measure of shared ic, we intend to show that semantic similarity can take advantage of the disjointness axioms of an ontology, thus providing evidence that future measures should consider them in evaluating the closeness in meaning between two classes.recently, couto and pinto (2013) presented the benefits that result from using dl axioms in the calculation of similarity. to the best of our knowledge, this article is the first attempt to include dl axioms into ontology-based similarity measures in the biomedical domain. accordingly, the main purpose of this work was to test whether exploiting the disjointness axioms of an ontology increases the performance of shared ic measures. we developed an add-on that can be used with any measure of shared ic, called ic s disj , which satisfies the designated requirements set forth in the beginning of the work, particularly that its value should decrease for disjoint pairs of classes. the assessment of our measure, which is based on the pearsons correlation coefficient between structural similarity and semantic similarity, has shown that there is, in fact, an improvement of the measure of shared ic because its correlation with structural similarity in an ontology that encodes structural knowledge increases as the number of disjointness axioms increase. this new approach is able to successfully explore more than just the subsumption hierarchy of an ontology, relyinga hypothetical developing step in one ontology. from one iteration to the next, the ontology gained a new term between a and b. before this change, the similarity between e and f depends on the difference icb ica; after the change it depends on icb icx. distribution of the difference in correlation coefficient for 550 random datasets. the majority of the cases show a positive difference. we used wolfes t-test to calculate the p-value associated with the hypothesis that the increase was due to random chance, and marked with a darker shade the amount of datasets for which p 50:05. the vertical line shows the 0 of the axis, i.e. where the two correlation coefficients are the sameadditionally on a partial subset of the description logic axioms that are included in the ontology to further refine the comparison of two classes. to the best of our knowledge, this represents the first attempt to use description logic expressivity in semantic similarity in the biomedical domain. we demonstrated our hypothesis that disjointness axioms contain informative data that can be correctly explored by semantic similarity measures, even with a navenave approach. more sophisticated approaches may include the exploration of the semantics of edges, other types of ic based on external corpus, etc. in conclusion, this work strongly suggests that future measures of semantic similarity should consider the full logical formalism of the ontologies that they use to establish a measure of similarity that more accurately reflects the reality of the domain of knowledge therein modeled.  
