exploiting hidden information interleaved in the redundancy of the genetic code without prior knowledge motivation: dozens of studies in recent years have demonstrated that codon usage encodes various aspects related to all stages of gene expression regulation. when relevant high-quality large-scale gene expression data are available, it is possible to statistically infer and model these signals, enabling analysing and engineering gene expression. however, when these data are not available, it is impossible to infer and validate such models. results: in this current study, we suggest chimeraan unsupervised computationally efficient approach for exploiting hidden high-dimensional information related to the way gene expression is encoded in the open reading frame (orf), based solely on the genome of the analysed organism. one version of the approach, named chimera average repetitive substring (chimeraars), estimates the adaptability of an orf to the intracellular gene expression machinery of a genome (host), by computing its tendency to include long substrings that appear in its coding sequences; the second version, named chimeramap, engineers the codons of a protein such that it will include long substrings of codons that appear in the host coding sequences, improving its adaptation to a new hosts gene expression machinery. we demonstrate the applicability of the new approach for analysing and engineering heterologous genes and for analysing endogenous genes. specifically, focusing on escherichia coli, we show that it can exploit information that cannot be detected by conventional approaches (e.g. the caicodon adaptation index), which only consider single codon distributions; for example, we report correlations of up to 0.67 for the chimeraars measure with heterologous gene expression, when the cai yielded no correlation. availability and implementation: for non-commercial purposes, the code of the chimera approach can be downloaded fromthe inherent redundancy of the genetic code, where 61 codons encode only 20 amino acids, is a widely studied phenomenon . in recent years, it has been shown that various gene expression regulatory aspects are interleaved in this redundancy. specifically, during its lifetime the messenger rna (mrna) sequence interacts with various intracellular molecules and complexes, such as the spliceosome , pre-initiation complex ( and ribosomal rna composing it , trnas , micro-rnas (mirnas;), other mrnas , proteins (including transcription factors;), and the mrna sequence itself via its folding . the affinity of these interactions is affected by the nucleotide composition in various parts of the transcript (; zur and tuller, 2013a, b), and can usually be described by markovian models and/or position-specific scoring matrices . however, there are debates regarding the nature and the efficiency of some of these interactions . the studies mentioned earlier support the conjecture that it is possible to accurately predict gene expression aspects based solely on the coding sequence, and that by manipulating synonymous aspects of the coding sequence itself, it is possible to affect all gene expression stages. there are three major drawbacks to the current measures for inferring gene expression based on the coding sequence (orf):first, most of the conventional methods for estimating the adaptiveness of a transcript to the gene expression regulatory machinery are based on the independent distribution of single codons in the coding sequence (i.e. single codon usage bias). although there are dozens of measures based on single codon distributions (dos), these methods often fail to exhibit meaningful relations with the (usually heterologous) expression levels of genes . it is clear that such indexes cannot fully capture all the gene expression information encoded in the orf as some of it is not directly related to codon decoding. for example, the binding site of mirnas is around 22 nt, information not fully described by the independent distribution of single codons. thus, a simple approach that can capture various aspects of gene expression regulation is needed; we term this type of statistical information as high-dimensional information as it is related to substrings of nucleotides longer than codons. this type of statistic has the potential to encapsulate all known and unknown intracellular interactions. second, currently most of the models related to the biophysical nature of the various interactions of macro-molecules with the orf are based on the analyses of gene expression measurements (e.g. mrna levels, protein levels, ribosomal densities, etc.) (, b); specifically, this information can be used for inferring the parameters of the simulative and/ or predictive gene expression models. however, today there are around 26 000 genomes of different organisms (http://www.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/genome), but large-scale gene expression information [e.g. protein abundance (pa) measurements] is available for only a few dozen . thus, we aim to develop an unsupervised measure that is based solely on the genome of the analysed organism, without the necessity of additional gene expression measurements. third, there is a growing surge of new studies reporting novel rules related to the ways various aspects of gene expression are encoded in the transcript. one relatively simple rule suggests that the distribution of codon pairs affects gene expression and the fitness of organisms and viruses ; however, many of these rules are more complicated and complex (, b) (see also supplementary material). thus, it is apparent that numerous additional rules are yet to be deciphered. moreover, many of the established rules are organism specific and/or condition/tissue specific, and may not hold in different organisms/conditions than the ones used for their inference. thus, we aim at developing a measure that can exploit hidden (i.e. unexplored) gene expression information encoded in the orf, which may be related to yet unknown gene expression rules. in the following sections, we describe an approach which encapsulates all the three points mentioned above. additionally, we devise a novel approach for engineering genes for heterologous gene expression based on the aforementioned concepts. in section 2 (and supplementary material), we will describe our new computationally efficient approach for exploiting hidden highdimensional information interleaved in the redundancy of the genetic code without prior knowledge. since our approach is based on engineering new genes or analysing genes based on patterns that appear in different endogenous genes, we named it chimera, which is a mythological creature composed of three different animals. in section 3, we will show that indeed such high-dimensional information appears in the coding regions of the analysed organisms, and that we can at least partially infer it with our approach. as a model organism we analyse escherichia coli, which is the only organism with large-scale measurements of heterologous gene expression.the following analysis further demonstrates the relation described above between the chimeramap algorithm and the chimeraars scores. we uniformly selected 100 e.coli genes according to their pa levels and created the following variations: (i) performing 100 randomizations of these genes while maintaining the encoded protein, the amino acid bias, and the codon usage bias per gene (supplementary material). (ii) we optimized them according to the cai rationale, replacing every synonymous codon with its most abundant version, which we termed mfsc (most frequent synonymous codon), a variation representing the encapsulation of single codon distribution. (iii) we engineered them according to the chimeramap. the results of this analysis can be seen in, where clearly and significantly the chimeramap engineered genes obtain the highest chimeraars scores compared with both the randomized and mfsc versions.  
