sequence analysis exploiting maximal dependence decomposition to identify conserved motifs from a group of aligned signal sequences bioinformatics research often requires conservative analyses of a group of sequences associated with a specific biological function (e.g. transcription factor binding sites, micro rna target sites or protein post-translational modification sites). due to the difficulty in exploring conserved motifs on a large-scale sequence data involved with various signals, a new method, mddlogo, is developed. mddlogo applies maximal dependence decomposition (mdd) to cluster a group of aligned signal sequences into subgroups containing statistically significant motifs. in order to extract motifs that contain a conserved biochemical property of amino acids in protein sequences, the set of 20 amino acids is further categorized according to their physicochemical properties, e.g. hydrophobicity, charge or molecular size. mddlogo has been demonstrated to accurately identify the kinase-specific substrate motifs in 1221 human phosphorylation sites associated with seven well-known kinase families from phospho.elm. moreover, in a set of plant phosphorylation data-lacking kinase information, mddlogo has been applied to help in the investigation of substrate motifs of potential kinases and in the improvement of the identification of plant phosphorylation sites with various substrate specificities. in this study, mddlogo is comparable with another well-known motif discover tool, motif-x.the conservative analysis of a group of sequences associated with a specific biological function such as the investigation of protein post-translational modification (ptm) sites, analysis of micro rna (mirna) target sites, or the identification of transcription factor binding sites is often required in bioinformatics research. sequence logos were first proposed by tom schneider and mike stephens in 1990 to display patterns in sequence conservation, and to assist in discovering and analyzing such patterns . in 2004, a web-based sequence logo generator, weblogo, was developed for creating graphical representations of the patterns within a multiple sequence alignment . several to whom correspondence should be addressed. extensions of sequence logo have also been developed, e.g. rna structure logos , pssm logos , energy normalized sequence logos , subfamily logos , 3d sequence logos of dna or rna and rna structural alignment logos . in the case of functionally associated sequence patterns (e.g. protein phosphorylation sites), two sample logo has been developed for generating graphical representations of statistically significant position-specific differences in amino acid compositions between phosphorylated sequences and non-phosphorylated sequences. with regard to motif discovery, a wealth of popular approaches have been proposed, such as meme , teiresias , gibbs motif sampler and emotif . additionally, an iterative statistical approach, motif-x , has been proposed for identifying motifs from large-scale datasets. motif-x has demonstrated results that outperform other methods based on the identification of phosphorylation motifs. according to the basic concept of sequence conservation, a sequence logo displays the nucleotide or amino acid composition for each position in a group of aligned signal sequences. however, it is difficult to explore conserved motifs for large-scale sequence data; for instance, a sequence logo for all phosphorylation data involved with various catalytic kinases fails to obviously present the kinasespecific substrate specificity. thus, a new method is developed, mddlogo, which applies maximal dependence decomposition (mdd) to cluster a group of aligned signal sequences into subgroups containing statistically significant motifs. assuming that each position in a set of aligned sequences is a sample of symbols (nucleotides or amino acids) generated according to a probability distribution, a null hypothesis is based on the assumption that the symbol distribution of two positions are mutually independent. mdd is a recursive methodology that adopts the chi-square test to capture the most significant dependencies between each position. in a previous study , mdd was proposed to group the splice sites during the identification process of splice-site prediction. in order to extract motifs containing conserved biochemical properties of amino acids in protein sequences, the set of 20 amino acids is further categorized according to their physicochemical properties, e.g. hydrophobicity, charge or molecular size. after mdd clustering, each subgroup, containing statistically significant motifs, is graphically visualized using weblogo . with the exponential increase of protein ptm sites identifiedmddlogo has been demonstrated to accurately identify kinasespecific substrate motifs for 1221 human phosphorylation sites associated with seven well-known kinase families from phospho.elm. the ability of mddlogo to discover motifs is comparable with another well-known motif discovery tool, motif-x. the importance of phosphorylation has been indicated in the regulation of protein functions and cell signaling in plants, but the state of research in this field is hindered by experimental difficulties, especially for the investigation of substrate specificity in various catalytic kinases. due to the limitation in experimental data regarding protein kinases that phosphorylate substrates in plants, mddlogo has been adopted to investigate the substrate specificity of various plant kinases. after the application of mdd clustering, a total of 9, 6 and 6 groups are detected for pser, pthr and ptyr, respectively. interestingly, some of the groups are similar to the substrate motifs of known kinase groups from the non-plant organisms in phospho.elm. although the newly identified motifs could not be experimentally verified, it is important how mddlogo can help biologists to further investigate the substrate specificity of potential catalytic kinases in plants. a more noteworthy benefit is that mdd-clustered motifs can be applied to improve the predictive power of computationally identifying plant phosphorylation sites with various substrate specificities, especially for pser and pthr sites with a sufficient data size. furthermore, the acquisition of additional experimentally verified plant phosphorylation data will allow the re-calibration of more robust mdd clusters. in analyzing protein sequences, the grouping of amino acids can be defined by the users. the user can group amino acids according to various physicochemical properties. basically, mdd clustering without the grouping of 20 amino acids is provided.;everal major grouping methods have been given. also, in applying mdd clustering, it is important to optimize the value of the maximum cluster size. in general, mdd clustering could help users investigate the conserved motifs behind a large-sized sequence data. however, in some cases, more groups could produce more noise. therefore, users need to optimize the value of the maximum cluster size to produce more meaningful clusters from a set of uncharacterized sequence data. mddlogo can be freely accessed at http://csb.cse.yzu.edu.tw/mddlogo/; a stand-alone program is available as well. dna and rna sequences are both allowed for use in mddlogo.  
