exploiting ontology graph for predicting sparsely annotated gene function motivation: systematically predicting gene (or protein) function based on molecular interaction networks has become an important tool in refining and enhancing the existing annotation catalogs, such as the gene ontology (go) database. however, functional labels with only a few (10) annotated genes, which constitute about half of the go terms in yeast, mouse and human, pose a unique challenge in that any prediction algorithm that independently considers each label faces a paucity of information and thus is prone to capture non-generalizable patterns in the data, resulting in poor predictive performance. there exist a variety of algorithms for function prediction, but none properly address this overfitting issue of sparsely annotated functions, or do so in a manner scalable to tens of thousands of functions in the human catalog. results: we propose a novel function prediction algorithm, clusdca, which transfers information between similar functional labels to alleviate the overfitting problem for sparsely annotated functions. our method is scalable to datasets with a large number of annotations. in a cross-validation experiment in yeast, mouse and human, our method greatly outperformed previous state-of-the-art function prediction algorithms in predicting sparsely annotated functions, without sacrificing the performance on labels with sufficient information. furthermore, we show that our method can accurately predict genes that will be assigned a functional label that has no known annotations, based only on the ontology graph structure and genes associated with other labels, which further suggests that our method effectively utilizes the similarity between gene functions. availability and implementation: https://github.com/wangshenguiuc/clusdca.automated annotation of gene (or protein) function has become a critical task in the post-genomic era . fortunately, an increasing compendium of genomic, proteomic and interactomic data allows us to extract patterns from functionally well-characterized genes (or proteins) to accurately infer functional properties of lesser-known ones. in particular, recently developed high-throughput experimental techniques, such as yeast two-hybrid screens and genetic interaction assays, have helped to build molecular interaction networks in bulk. topological structures of these networks can be exploited for function prediction using the guilt-byassociation principle, which states that genes (or proteins) that share similar neighbors or other topological properties in interaction networks are more likely to be functionally related. to this end, a variety of graph-theoretic and machine learning algorithms have been developed to provide a way of refining and enhancing existing functional annotations [e.g. gene ontology (go) database (based on network data. a popular class of graph-theoretic algorithms uses a diffusion process to examine the local topology of nodes, exploiting both direct and indirect linkages . alternatively, the number of occurrences of different elementary subgraphs (known as graphlets) in the neighborhood can be used to characterize each node and to establish pairwise affinity scores . more sophisticated machine learning algorithms, such as genemania , have also been proposed. genemania uses label propagation on an integrated network specifically constructed for each functional label, and is currently available as the state-of-the-art web interface for gene function prediction in multiple organisms. despite the success of existing algorithms, a major difficulty that has not been sufficiently addressed is that of predicting rare labels. because many molecular functions (mfs) are inherently specific in their scope, a large number of functional labels have only a few annotated genes (or positive annotations); for instance, in the human go annotation database , there are currently 8626 go labels with at least 3 annotations, 4178 of which have 10 annotated genes and 7905 labels have 100 genes. the distributions of go labels with different numbers of annotations in yeast and human are shown in. nearly half of the go labels have 10 annotations in both species. predicting new associations for these sparsely annotated labels is substantially more challenging than those for labels with a lot of annotations, because patterns extracted from the few known genes are more likely to be statistical artifacts that cannot be generalized, which is commonly known as the overfitting problem in machine learning and statistics. one way to mitigate overfitting is to take similarities between labels into account. for instance, if we have a priori knowledge that two labels reflect similar mfs (e.g. they are both children of the same parent in the ontology graph), we would also expect the two corresponding sets of genes (or proteins) to be similar. if one of the gene sets contains only a few genes, then the other may provide valuable information about missing associations. thus, by propagating information along the edges in the ontology graph, one can pool available data together for increased robustness to overfitting. notably, previous efforts to incorporate label similarity into function prediction algorithms have largely been unsuccessful. they formulated the problem as a single structured-output hierarchical classification (hc) instead of binary classification, but its predictive performance for sparsely annotated functional labels is far from satisfactory . another related work exploited the similarity between 17 munich information center for protein sequences (mips) functional categories via a regularization scheme. however, this approach does not scale to tens of thousands of sparse go annotations in human, as it employs a computationally expensive optimization. our approach to this problem is based on diffusion component analysis (dca) , a recently developed algorithm that combines network diffusion, such as random walk with restart (rwr) , with dimensionality reduction to obtain low-dimensional vector representations of nodes in a graph that capture topological properties. topological features extracted from interaction networks in this manner can be used in conjunction with k-nearest neighbors (knns) or support vector machines (svms) to outperform the corresponding state-of-the-art for predicting hundreds of mips labels in yeast . however, dca also suffers from overfitting for sparsely annotated labels when predicting go labels for a larger human interactome, if we want to train label-wise classifiers for all labels. in this work, we introduce clusdca, an improved function prediction algorithm based on dca (we attached a two-page abstract of dca in the supplementary data), which (i) incorporates the similarity between functional labels and (ii) scales to a large number of annotations. the key idea of clusdca is to perform dca also on the ontology graph to obtain compact vector representations of labels. the gene vectors from the original method are then projected onto the space of label vectors so that the projections of positively annotated genes are geometrically close to their assigned labels. because labels that are similar to each other in the ontology graph are co-localized in the label vector space, classifiers for sparsely annotated labels will now favor genes associated with other similar labels in the neighborhood. this is how information is transferred between labels to avoid overfitting in our approach. when compared with state-of-the-art methods that do not incorporate label similarity, our experiments on yeast, mouse and human datasets demonstrate that our method substantially improves the predictive accuracy of sparsely annotated labels while achieving comparable performance for go labels with sufficiently many genes. we also demonstrate the performance improvement of clusdca over an alternative approach to utilizing the ontology graphs based on hc. furthermore, our method can be used to predict new genes for a given go label, even in the extreme case where there are no existing gene annotations and the only information available is the labels position in the ontology graph and the genes associated with other labels. in addition to improving function prediction on its own, this demonstrates the potential for our method to be used in conjunction with recent methods that extract new ontology terms from data to provide an improved way of refining and extending our knowledge of gene or protein function.we introduced a novel algorithm, clusdca, for gene function prediction. the major idea of clusdca is to leverage similarity between functional labels in addition to similarity between genes to prevent overfitting of sparsely annotated go labels. we achieve this goal by learning low-dimensional vector representations of genes and functions and matching gene vectors to function vectors via a projection that best preserves known gene-function associations. similar labels are co-localized in the vector space, which allows the transfer of information between neighboring functions when genes are assigned to them. since learning the projection solves the prediction of all labels simultaneously, our method has the added benefit of being scalable to datasets with a large number of annotations. although based on dca, clusdca is a substantial advance, as evidenced by its superior performance over dca, as well as genemania and hc, on sparsely annotated go labels, while maintaining a comparable performance on labels with many genes. moreover, we demonstrated clusdcas ability to identify putatively associated genes for newly created go labels without any annotations, which suggests that our method can be used to improve poorly annotated labels and thus takes a significant step towards more comprehensive understanding of gene or protein function in various organisms.  
