gene expression exploiting prior knowledge and gene distances in the analysis of tumor expression profiles with extended hidden markov models motivation: changes in gene expression levels play a central role in tumors. additional information about the distribution of gene expression levels and distances between adjacent genes on chromosomes should be integrated into the analysis of tumor expression profiles. results: we use a hidden markov model with distance-scaled transition matrices (dshmm) to incorporate chromosomal distances of adjacent genes on chromosomes into the identification of differentially expressed genes in breast cancer. we train the dshmm by integrating prior knowledge about potential distributions of expression levels of differentially expressed and unchanged genes in tumor. we find that especially the combination of these data and to a lesser extent the modeling of distances between adjacent genes contribute to a substantial improvement of the identification of differentially expressed genes in comparison to other existing methods. this performance benefit is also supported by the identification of genes well known to be associated with breast cancer. that suggests applications of dshmms for screening of other tumor expression profiles.chromosomal mutations like amplifications and deletions of dna segments are one of the key genetic mechanisms leading to changes of gene expression levels in tumors. different studies have shown that between 40 and 60 of genes in highly amplified regions tend to be overexpressed . also epigenetic changes of dna methylation or histone modifications are known to locally bias expression levels on chromosomes . due to such mutations, gene expression levels of adjacent genes on chromosomes tend to be positively correlated. moreover, gene to whom correspondence should be addressed.. distance-based spatial correlations of log-ratios measured for directly adjacent genes on chromosomes in the breast cancer gene expression dataset by . adjacent genes on each chromosome were grouped into distance classes between 100 and 1500 kb in steps of 100 kb. the pearsons correlation coefficient has been computed for the log-ratios of all pairs of adjacent genes in one distance class for the tumor data (red) and for 100 random permutations of log-ratios per chromosome of the tumor data (black). expression levels of adjacent genes in close chromosomal proximity tend to be higher correlated than those of adjacent genes in greater distance. this is illustrated infor breast cancer gene expression data from . in recent years, different approaches have been proposed for the analysis of gene expression data in the context of chromosomal locations of genes. the human transcriptome map was the first large-scale approach to study genome-wide human gene expression profiles. this mapping of gene expression data to chromosomal locations revealed a complex organization of the human genome in which highly expressed genes tend to be localized in clusters. besides this, methods like cgma , or macat , and lap , both modeling chromosomal distances of genes, have been developed to improve the analysis of gene expression profiles in the context of chromosomal locations. a common characteristic of all these methods is the requirement of replicates of two defined separate samples (e.g. tumor and healthy tissue) for the identification of differentially expressed chromosomal regions based on specific test statistics coupled with permutation tests. these methods cannot be applied to studies designed to analyze individual tumor expression profiles using two-color microarrays without replicates (e.g.). in this situation, oftenpage: 1646 16451652  
