genome analysis exploiting sequence similarity to validate the sensitivity of snp arrays in detecting fine-scaled copy number variations motivation: high-density single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) genotyping arrays are efficient and cost effective platforms for the detection of copy number variation (cnv). to ensure accuracy in probe synthesis and to minimize production costs, short oligonucleotide probe sequences are used. the use of short probe sequences limits the specificity of binding targets in the human genome. the specificity of these short probeset sequences has yet to be fully analysed against a normal reference human genome. sequence similarity can artificially elevate or suppress copy number measurements, and hence reduce the reliability of affected probe readings. for the purpose of detecting narrow cnvs reliably down to the width of a single probeset, sequence similarity is an important issue that needs to be addressed. results: we surveyed the affymetrix human mapping snp arrays for probeset sequence similarity against the reference human genome. utilizing sequence similarity results, we identified a collection of fine-scaled putative cnvs between gender from autosomal probesets whose sequence matches various loci on the sex chromosomes. to detect these variations, we utilized our statistical approach, dectecting recurrent copy number change using rank-order statistics (drecs), and showed that its performance was superior and more stable than the t-test in detecting cnvs. through the application of drecs on the hapmap population datasets with multi-matching probesets filtered, we identified biologically relevant snps in aberrant regions across populations with known association to physical traits, such as height, covered by the span of a single probe. this provided empirical confirmation of the existence of naturally occurring narrow cnvs as well as the sensitivity of the affymetrix snp array technology in detecting them. availability: the matlab implementation of drecs is available atthe importance of copy number variation (cnv) in influencing phenotypic differences and disease susceptibility has been well-established in a number of studies . in determining cnvs that are more likely to have a causal association with phenotypes and disease predisposition, it is important to focus on recurrent copy number (cn) changes present in multiple samples. recurrent cn changes are those that are consistent in an assumed homogeneous population, as well as those that stratify heterogeneous sub-populations. an ongoing challenge is the reliable and efficient detection of these changes, both variations and aberrations, down to the resolution provided by the microarray technology. high-throughput microarrays based on single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) are an effective platform for analysing cnv. in recent years, the resolution of snp arrays has grown exponentially while the cost of experiments continued to fall, making these a feasible high-resolution platform to conduct cnv studies involving a large number of samples. snp arrays such as those by affymetrix typically limit the length of probe sequences to 25mers to ensure accuracy in probe synthesis as well as to keep manufacturing costs down. a probeset consists of a collection of probes at a short distance offset from each other covering typically a span of 33mers. the use of short probeset sequences results in reduced specificity towards the targeted genomic locus and this in turn degrades the signal quality of the intended target in proportion to the number of unintended loci matched. however, the uniqueness or similarity of each probeset sequence on existing snp arrays with respect to the reference human genome is not a fully explored aspect of snp array quality. this is the focus of our first contribution in this article. we determined the sequence similarity for each and every probeset on all affymetrix snp array variants by sequence matching the two allelic versions of each flanking probeset sequence against the reference human genome assembly (ncbi 36). the result provides an interesting insight in terms of target uniqueness, and can be used directly as a quality filter to remove multi-matching probesets prior to performing cn analysis. in assessing the performance of various methods for the detection of recurrent cnv, it is often useful to have a set of ground truth labels that serve as an approximate gold standard. our second contribution in this article is the derivation of a set of approximate ground truth labels from probeset sequence similarity for the detection of putative cnv in normal gender samples. the advantage of using this set of labels is that they are based on naturally occurring cn imbalances in gender and are not based on artificially implanted peaks or spikes against simulated gaussian noise as a background. additionally, the labels of putative cnv cover both narrow as well as longer contiguous regions of cn change, which provides some form of natural diversity in the data that may not be captured as closely in synthetically simulated data. finally, since these labels are based on dna sequence similarity, the putative cnvs across gender will be recurrent in the majority of samples and not just a small subset of samples. this essentially is a perfect fit for the nature of cn change that we aim to detect. our third contribution is dectecting recurrent copy number change using rank-order statistics (drecs), a statistical approach for the detection of recurrent cn variation/aberration in multiple samples. it is based on a normalized rank transformation of raw log 2 ratios (i.e. replacing raw log 2 ratios with their cumulative probability density) to reduce the impact of outlying measurements. this effectively transforms the distribution of the raw log 2 ratios to a discrete uniform distribution for consistent estimation of variance and computation of statistical significance. we have evaluated the effectiveness of drecs in terms of: @bullet its sensitivity, specificity, accuracy and area under the roc curve (auc) in detecting putative cn difference across gender as described previously, using the t-test as a benchmark;@bullet its consistency in performance on both raw log 2 and segmented cn as inputs;@bullet its scalability to sample size and array resolution; and @bullet its ability to identify fine-scaled regions of cnv with known biological significance.in our final contribution, we show the existence of recurrent cnv in the hapmap populations, e.g. in single snps with known association to physical traits, such as height and freckles. this empirically validates the effectiveness of drecs in identifying recurrent cnv that stratify populations down to the resolution of the microarray, and also highlights the sensitivity of the snp microarray in detecting regions of narrow cnv. in section 2, we describe our approach in identifying the extent of sequence similarity to the human genome across every variant of the affymetrix snp array. in section 3, we use the knowledge of sequence similarity to derive ground truth labels of putative cn change to help us assess the performance of our statistical approach, drecs (section 4), in detecting recurrent cnv. in section 5, we evaluate the performance of drecs under various experimental conditions with the t-test as a benchmark and apply drecs to detect known cn polymorphisms. we conclude the section with a short discussion on two biologically relevant cnvs identified.  
