exploring genome characteristics and sequence quality without a reference motivation: the de novo assembly of large, complex genomes is a significant challenge with currently available dna sequencing technology. while many de novo assembly software packages are available, comparatively little attention has been paid to assisting the user with the assembly. results: this article addresses the practical aspects of de novo assembly by introducing new ways to perform quality assessment on a collection of sequence reads. the software implementation calculates per-base error rates, paired-end fragment-size distributions and coverage metrics in the absence of a reference genome. additionally, the software will estimate characteristics of the sequenced genome, such as repeat content and heterozygosity that are key determinants of assembly difficulty. availability: the software described is freely available online (https:// github.com/jts/sga) and open source under the gnu public license.the availability of inexpensive dna-sequence data has led to a vast increase in the number of genome projects. for example, the genome10k project (genome 10 k community of) aims to sequence 10 000 vertebrate genomes in the upcoming years. despite the advances in the production of dnasequence data, performing de novo assembly remains a significant challenge. this challenge was highlighted by the recent assemblathon2 project . in this competition sequence data was obtained for three vertebrate genomes. twenty-one teams contributed assemblies of the three genomes, producing 43 assemblies in total. the quality of the assemblies was highly variable both between submissions for the same genome and within individual software packages across the three species. in our view, this variability stems from the practical difficulty of designing an assembly strategy (for instance, selecting software and its parameters) when little is known about the structure of the underlying genome and the quality of the available data. this article aims to address this uncertainty. most current genome assemblers are based on constructing a graph representing the relationship between sequence reads or their subsequences. the sequence of the underlying genome is modeled as a walk (or a set of walks) through the graph. the properties of the sequenced genome and quality of the input data is reflected by the structure of the graph; repeats, sequence variation (in a diploid or polyploid genome) and sequencing errors cause branches in the graph. these branches increase the difficulty of the assembly by obscuring the true walks that represent the sequence of the genome with many false alternatives. below, we will show how we can estimate the individual contribution of sequence variants, repeats and sequencing errors to the branching structure of an assembly graph and we will discuss how the branching structure impacts assembly difficulty. additionally, we will develop methods to perform rich quality assessment without a reference genome, complementing previously developed approaches (fastqc, http:// www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) by estimating sequence coverage, per-base error rates, insert size distributions and providing a visual method to assess coverage biases due to sequence composition . our software is open source under the gnu public license (version 3) and freely available online (https://github.com/jts/ sga). the implementation uses the fm-index data structure, which allows queries to be performed over a large text collection while limiting memory usage. this framework allows our analysis pipeline to be run on 170 gb of human genome data in 24 h using 56 gb of memory on a single multi-core computer. the output of our software is a pdf report that allows the properties of the genome and data quality to be visually explored. by providing more information to the user at the start of an assembly project, this software will help increase awareness of the factors that make a given assembly easy or difficult, assist in the selection of software and parameters and help to troubleshoot an assembly if it runs into problems.while the development of new genome assembly methods continues, comparatively little attention has been paid to assisting the user from a practical standpoint. our program, along with tools like velvetoptimiser (http://bioinformatics.net.au/software. velvetoptimiser.shtml) and kmergenie , attempts to fill this gap. the program we developed helps the user perform quality checks on their data while simulatenously assessing the difficulty of the assembly by measuring the branching structure of a de bruijn graph. by helping the user better understand their data, our program makes progress towards the goal of making assembly an easier and more consistent process. the ability to identify low quality data early in the assembly process will help to avoid effort wasted on unsuitable data, and guide the application of optional preprocessing steps like quality trimming the reads. the pdf report generated by the software provides a medium for discussing a given assembly problem, for instance when getting help on a mailing list or online. the methods described in this article are our initial attempt at assessing data quality and genome characteristics. there are two promising ways to extend this work. first, we have limited our model to diploid genomes. extending the model to higher ploidly would increase the range of genomes that could be characterized. second, we only describe methods to assess short insert pairedend libraries. many assembly projects use a range of paired end libraries including multi-kilobase insert sizes. the addition of methods to perform quality controls on these libraries would be a valuable addition to our program.  
