a graphical method for reducing and relating models in systems biology motivation: in systems biology, an increasing collection of models of various biological processes is currently developed and made available in publicly accessible repositories, such as biomodels.net for instance, through common exchange formats such as sbml. to date, however, there is no general method to relate different models to each other by abstraction or reduction relationships, and this task is left to the modeler for re-using and coupling models. in mathematical biology, model reduction techniques have been studied for a long time, mainly in the case where a model exhibits different time scales, or different spatial phases, which can be analyzed separately. these techniques are however far too restrictive to be applied on a large scale in systems biology, and do not take into account abstractions other than time or phase decompositions. our purpose here is to propose a general computational method for relating models together, by considering primarily the structure of the interactions and abstracting from their dynamics in a first step. results: we present a graph-theoretic formalism with node merge and delete operations, in which model reductions can be studied as graph matching problems. from this setting, we derive an algorithm for deciding whether there exists a reduction from one model to another, and evaluate it on the computation of the reduction relations between all sbml models of the biomodels.net repository. in particular, in the case of the numerous models of mapk signalling, and of the circadian clock, biologically meaningful mappings between models of each class are automatically inferred from the structure of the interactions. we conclude on the generality of our graphical method, on its limits with respect to the representation of the structure of the interactions in sbml, and on some perspectives for dealing with the dynamics. availability: the algorithms described in this article are implemented in the open-source software modeling platform biocham available atin our algorithm, the set of all morphisms, or a proof of nonexistence, are obtained by backtracking. in the experiments reported below, the computation time was limited with a timeout of 20 min but most of the problems were solved in 5 s on standard pc quadcore at 2.8 ghz.constraint-based graph-matching algorithms have shown their effectiveness and efficiency to analyze and automatically relate biochemical reaction models on a large scale, namely among the 241 curated models of the systems biology repository biomodels.net. of course, such an automatic correspondence between models inferred solely from the structure of the reaction graph may be biologically erroneous in some cases. in particular, small reaction graphs can be recognized as motifs of biologically unrelated large reaction graphs. nevertheless, the search for subgraph epimorphisms between all models of the biomodels.net repository revealed connected components roughly corresponding to the different models of similar biological systems for the mapk signaling cascade, the circadian clock and the calcium oscillation models, automatically exhibiting morphisms, corresponding to model reductions, as well as isomorphisms, corresponding to variants of the same model with different parameter values. on the other hand, the cell-cycle models of this repository often originate from ode models that have been transcribed in sbml rules without correctly reflecting the structure of the interactions. as a result, many model reductions could not be detected as graph morphisms. more work is thus needed to curate the expression of these models in sbml, and also to restrict mappings by considering the information on molecular species present in the annotations, for instance. although necessarily imperfect, this approach opens a new way to query systems biology model repositories and study model reductions as subgraph epimorphism problems, before taking into account constraints on the stoichiometry and the dynamics of the reactions. as a perspective for future work, the formal ground presented here in terms of graph operations and graph morphisms is currently used to investigate mathematical conditions under which the kinetics are compatible with graph reduction operations, such as for instance: @bullet reaction deletions for slow reverse reactions, @bullet reaction mergings for reaction chains with a limiting reaction, @bullet molecular species deletions for species in excess, @bullet molecular mergings for quasi-steady state approximations.  
