databases and ontologies exportaid: database of rna elements regulating nuclear rna export in mammals motivation: regulation of nuclear mrna export or retention is carried out by rna elements but the mechanism is not yet well understood. to understand the mrna export process, it is important to collect all the involved rna elements and their transacting factors. results: by hand-curated literature screening we collected, in exportaid database, experimentally assessed data about rna elements regulating nuclear export or retention of endogenous, heter-ologous or artificial rnas in mammalian cells. this database could help to understand the rna export language and to study the possible export efficiency alterations owing to mutations or polymorphisms. currently, exportaid stores 235 and 96 rna elements, respectively, increasing and decreasing export efficiency, and 98 neutral assessed sequences. availability and implementation: freely accessible without registration at http://www.introni.it/exportaid/exportaid.html. database and web interface are implemented in perl, mysql, apache and javascript with all major browsers supported.the major challenge of the post-genomic era is to understand the meaning of the genomic sequences, i.e. to decipher the languages used by different molecular processes such as transcription, rna and protein folding, rna splicing, rna export, microrna regulation and so on. unfortunately, this research is demanding because each language has a wide set of possible words, they are not placed in fixed positions in genes, the words of different languages could overlap and many words have more than one meaning because of the cellular context. for example, genetic, rna splicing, rna folding and rna export codes can coexist in exons . a highly conserved process among eukaryotes but not yet well understood is the rna export. it occurs at the end of transcripts maturation, finely regulating their nuclear export, retention or import . small rnas are bound directly by the mobile export receptors that bring rnas through the nuclear pore complex, whereas mrnas assemble into ribonucleoprotein particles and recruit their exporter receptors, such as tapp15 and crm1, via adaptor proteins like aly/ref and sr proteins . most of the adaptors are part of the exon junction complex (ejc), which, binding non-specific sequences near exonic junctions, mediates the mrna export . however, the ejc role is not completely clear; in fact, one could wonder if transcripts with many introns are exported in a more efficient manner, as, owing to splicing, they manage to recruit more ejc proteins. alternatively, more ejc proteins would be needed to carry out the export of long mrnas. as also transcripts that do not undergo splicing can be exported, this suggests that further cis-acting rna elements provide for the mrna export. actually, by studying mammalian intronless rnas and some viral transcripts, mainly in retroviruses , new rna export elements have been discovered. it emerges that a comprehensive knowledge of all the rna sequences involved in nuclear export, and of their trans-acting factors, is crucial for a better understanding of the transcripts nuclear export process and functions. in particular, collecting all this information, scattered throughout the literature, in a unique resource would help to explain the export of transcripts, such as intronless genes, some long non-coding rnas (lncrnas) and viral genomes that do not undergo splicing, or the retention of transcripts that undergo splicing. moreover, to shed light on this mechanism, it would be useful to study the possible export efficiency alterations owing to mutations or polymorphisms. by hand-curated literature screening, we collected, in exportaid database, experimentally assessed data about rna elements regulating nuclear export or retention of endogenous, heterologous or artificial rnas in mammalian cells. this specialized resource constitutes a repository, including information on functional sequences, their genomic location, experimental data and involved export pathways. exportaid is freely accessible at www.introni.it/exportaid/exportaid.html and currently stores 235 and 96 rna elements, respectively, increasing and decreasing export efficiency, and 98 neutral assessed sequences. to whom correspondence should be addressed. for pubmed searches, we entered the words rna export, export rna element or other similar terms or the name of the known rna export elements, including their synonyms. we included all papers reporting mammalian, viral, mutated or artificial rna elements reported to be functional for the rna export in mammalian cell lines. for each paper, we annotated the reported sequences and related information, such as the name of the rna functional elements lying in the sequences, the organism to which the sequences belong and the genomic coordinates along with the genbank accession numbers. we also extracted the experimental conditions, such as the cell lines used to test the sequence functionality, and the structure of the genetic constructs used in transfections. in particular, we annotated whether the constructs were produced by joining sequences from different parts of the same genome or from different genomes, whether constructs were built by putting together different functional elements and whether the sequences belonged to known genes. as constructs are usually cited in papers by name, to be easily recognized, we also collected their name, or when missing, the name of the used vector. as in all papers the authors quantified the export efficiency of each rna element, by the percentage of relative cytoplasmic accumulation by assessing the rna or the activity level of a reporter gene, we thought it would have been useful to annotate these functionality levels. therefore, for each paper, we scaled them from 1 to 10 and assigned a score ranging from 10 to +10 for each sequence. this score describes the functional effect of an rna element in terms of tendency to increase or decrease the nuclear export efficiency. we annotated (0) neutral effect to those sequences for which insertion or deletion in a construct did not alter the export efficiency. we assigned a positive or a negative score to the functional elements that, respectively, increased or decreased the rna export efficiency. the user has to consider that an rna element with score +10 does not confer 100 export efficiency of the construct, but only that it has the maximum effect in increasing the export among the sequences assessed in the same paper. the same goes for a score of 10. finally, to assure the database quality, we established guidelines for the literature review and annotation of records, and performed an inter-annotator analysis carried out by post-doctoral researchers, phd students and a senior researcher.  
