extending knime for next-generation sequencing data analysis knime (konstanz information miner) is a user-friendly and comprehensive open-source data integration, processing, analysis and exploration platform. we present here new functionality and workflows that open the door to performing next-generation sequencing analysis using the knime framework. availability: all sources and compiled code are available via the knime update mechanism. example workflows and descriptions are available through http://tech.knime.org/community/next-generation-sequencing.knime (konstanz information miner;) distinguishes itself from other workflow management systems like mobyle , galaxy , taverna , kepler , geworkbench , conveyor and many others by not being a domain-specific solution, but an integration backbone with strong data preprocessing and data analytics capabilities. it is mainly used in the customer relationship management and financial sector and, through a list of commercial and non-commercial vendors, in the cheminformatics area. (see participation of recent knime conferences.) the focus has been on providing functionality for building professional reports, statistical analysis, cheminformatics and very recently, high-throughput/highcontent (hcs/hca) image analysis and scripting using languages such as perl, python, matlab, r and java. here, we introduce new nodes that allow next-generation sequencing (ngs) data analysis to be performed using knime. these nodes take advantage of some of knimes general features including memory management, allowing the handling of billions of rows on a standard desktop computer with only about 4 gb of ram. the workflows can be executed from the command line where all variables can be manipulated if desired. this enables the administrator to easily incorporate workflows in web-based tools such as mobyle or galaxy. knime is based on eclipse and java 1.6; the workflows are stored in plain-text xml files and can be executed on basically any modern operating system, and also easily exchanged with or without data. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
