sequence analysis extreme: an online em algorithm for motif discovery motivation: identifying regulatory elements is a fundamental problem in the field of gene transcription. motif discoverythe task of identifying the sequence preference of transcription factor proteins, which bind to these elementsis an important step in this challenge. meme is a popular motif discovery algorithm. unfortunately, memes running time scales poorly with the size of the dataset. experiments such as chip-seq and dnase-seq are providing a rich amount of information on the binding preference of transcription factors. meme cannot discover motifs in data from these experiments in a practical amount of time without a compromising strategy such as discarding a majority of the sequences. results: we present extreme, a motif discovery algorithm designed to find dna-binding motifs in chip-seq and dnase-seq data. unlike meme, which uses the expectation-maximization algorithm for motif discovery, extreme uses the online expectation-maximization algorithm to discover motifs. extreme can discover motifs in large data-sets in a practical amount of time without discarding any sequences. using extreme on chip-seq and dnase-seq data, we discover many motifs, including some novel and infrequent motifs that can only be discovered by using the entire dataset. conservation analysis of one of these novel infrequent motifs confirms that it is evolutionarily conserved and possibly functional. availability and implementation: all source code is available at the github repositorytranscription factors (tfs) are proteins that play an important role in transcriptional regulation by promoting or blocking the recruitment of rna polymerase ii. they can bind specifically to recognition sequences on the genome or to other tfs in a complex. high-throughput assays generate a rich amount of information on the sequence preference of tfs. chip-seq can provide the genome-wide binding sites of a single tf. dnase-seq, which sequences open chromatin regions in the genome, can provide single nucleotide resolution for the binding sites of many tfs . when sequenced deep enough, binding sites appear as dips, or footprints (fps), in the dnase-seq signal. fps only identify the locations of the tf binding sites; they do not identify the proteins that are bound there. these assays can provide functional information for thousands to millions of base pair regions in the genome. the task of identifying the sequence preference of a tf is called motif discovery. motif discovery algorithms can be classified as either search-based or probabilistic. search-based algorithms infer motifs as consensus sequences. probabilistic algorithms infer motifs as position frequency matrices (pfms), which specify the frequency of nucleotides for each position in the binding site. while pfms provide more information about a tfs binding specificity than consensus sequences, inferring pfms is not always practical. probabilistic motif discovery programs usually use algorithms such as expectation-maximization (em) for inference. these algorithms scale poorly with dataset size. search-based algorithms are therefore preferred for large datasets. dreme is an example of a search-based algorithm designed for large datasets. meme is a popular probabilistic motif discovery program . it uses the em algorithm to infer pfms. since its inception in 1994, it has gone through several versions. however, meme scales poorly with large datasets. one strategy to improve memes performance is to discard many of the sequences. this is the strategy used by memechip . however, discarding sequences can decrease the chance of discovering motifs corresponding to infrequent cofactors. another strategy, as used in steme, applies suffix trees to accelerate meme . however, steme is only practical for finding motifs of up to width 8 on large datasets because its efficiency tails off quickly as the motif width increases. other strategies for accelerating meme involve specialized hardware such as parallel pattern matching chips on pci cards . however, these implementations require hardware not available to most researchers. to overcome these issues, we propose an online implementation of the meme algorithm that we have named extreme. the online em algorithm sticks closely to the original em algorithm (hereafter referred to as the batch em algorithm) . normally, the online em algorithm is designed for cases where not all data can be stored at once. although most computers have enough memory to store entire sequence datasets at once, the online em algorithm is still advantageous for motif discovery because, for large sample sizes, the online em algorithm is more efficient, from a computational point of view, than the batch em algorithm. we show that many of the features of the original meme algorithm can be adapted to whom correspondence should be addressed. to the online methodology. furthermore, we show that extreme can achieve similar results to meme in a fraction of the execution time. we also show that using the entire dataset is necessary to discover infrequent motifs, which is not always practical to do with meme. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first application of the online em algorithm to motif discovery.meme is a popular motif discovery algorithm. it has been a valuable tool in the ongoing challenge of identifying regulatory elements. however, its performance scales poorly with large datasets. experiments such as chip-seq and dnase-seq generate data that are too large for meme to process in a practical amount of time without discarding most of the data. to overcome this challenge, we have developed extreme, a motif discovery algorithm that can process chip-seq and dnase-seq data efficiently without discarding any data. we first show, using simulated datasets, that memes running time scales much faster than extremes running time with respect to dataset size. using a chip-seq dataset and a dnase-seq dataset, we demonstrate that using the entire dataset of sequences is necessary to discover infrequent motifs. we also show that the motifs discovered by extreme are similar in quality to the motifs discovered by meme.  
