gene expression fabia: factor analysis for bicluster acquisition motivation: biclustering of transcriptomic data groups genes and samples simultaneously. it is emerging as a standard tool for extracting knowledge from gene expression measurements. we propose a novel generative approach for biclustering called fabia: factor analysis for bicluster acquisition. fabia is based on a multiplicative model, which accounts for linear dependencies between gene expression and conditions, and also captures heavy-tailed distributions as observed in real-world transcriptomic data. the generative framework allows to utilize well-founded model selection methods and to apply bayesian techniques. results: on 100 simulated datasets with known true, artificially implanted biclusters, fabia clearly outperformed all 11 competitors. on these datasets, fabia was able to separate spurious biclusters from true biclusters by ranking biclusters according to their information content. fabia was tested on three microarray datasets with known subclusters, where it was two times the best and once the second best method among the compared biclustering approaches. availability: fabia is available as an r package on bioconductorrecent technologies such as the affymetrix array plates and next-generation sequencing open up new possibilities for highthroughput expression profiling. these technologies in turn require advanced analysis tools to extract knowledge from the huge amount of data. if the experimental conditions are known, supervised techniques such as support vector machines are suitable to extract the dependencies between conditions and gene expression or to identify condition-indicative genes. however, conditions may not be known or biologists and medical researchers are interested in dependencies to whom correspondence should be addressed. within or across conditions. for instance, it could be possible to refine pathways across conditions or to identify new subgroups within one condition. for these tasks, unsupervised methods such as clustering are required, which are usually insufficient, because samples may only be similar on a subset of genes and vice versa. in drug design, for example, researchers want to reveal how compounds affect gene expression; the effects of compounds, however, may be similar only on a subgroup of genes. under such circumstances, biclustering is the proper unsupervised analysis technique. a bicluster in a transcriptomic dataset is a pair of a gene set and a sample set for which the genes are similar to each other on the samples and vice versa. if multiple pathways are active in a sample, it belongs to different biclusters. if a gene participates in different pathways for different conditions, it belongs to different biclusters, too. thus, biclusters can overlap. a survey of biclustering approaches has been given by. in principle, there exist four categories of biclustering methods: (1) variance minimization methods, (2) two-way clustering methods, (3) motif and pattern recognition methods and (4) probabilistic and generative approaches. transcriptomic data are usually supplied as a matrix, where each gene corresponds to one row and each sample to one column; the matrix entries themselves are the expression levels. (1) variance minimization methods: define clusters as blocks in the matrix with minimal deviation of their elements. this definition has been already considered byand extended by. the -cluster methods search for blocks of elements having a deviation (variance) below . one example are -ks clusters , where the maximum and the minimum of each row need to differ less than on the selected columns. a second example are -pclusters , which are defined as 22 submatrices with pairwise edge differences less than . a third example are the cheng and church (2000) -biclusters having a mean squared error below after fitting an additive model with a constant, a row and a column effect. flexible overlapped biclustering (floc;) extend chengchurch -biclusters by dealing with missing values via an occupancy threshold and by using both l 1 and l 2 norms. (2) two-way clustering methods apply conventional clustering to the columns and rows and (iteratively) combine the results. coupled two-way clustering (ctwc;) iterativelypage: 1521 15201527we have introduced a novel biclustering method that is a generative multiplicative model. it assumes realistic non-gaussian signal distributions with heavy tails. the generative model allows to rank biclusters according to their information content. model selection is performed by maximum a posteriori via an em algorithm based on a variational approach. on 100 simulated datasets with known true biclusters, fabia clearly outperformed all 11 competing methods. on three gene expression datasets with previously verified subclusters, it was once page: 1527 15201527 fabia the second best and twice the best performing method. the biological relevance of the fabia biclusters has been demonstrated by go and kegg analyses. finally, fabia has been successfully applied to drug design to find compounds with similar effects on gene expression.  
