structural bioinformatics falcon@home: a high-throughput protein structure prediction server based on remote homologue recognition the protein structure prediction approaches can be categorized into template-based modeling (including homology modeling and threading) and free modeling. however, the existing threading tools perform poorly on remote homologous proteins. thus, improving fold recognition for remote homologous proteins remains a challenge. besides, the proteome-wide structure prediction poses another challenge of increasing prediction throughput. in this study, we presented falcon@home as a protein structure prediction server focusing on remote homologue identification. the design of falcon@home is based on the observation that a structural template, especially for remote homologous proteins, consists of conserved regions interweaved with highly variable regions. the highly variable regions lead to vague alignments in threading approaches. thus, falcon@home first extracts conserved regions from each template and then aligns a query protein with conserved regions only rather than the full-length template directly. this helps avoid the vague alignments rooted in highly variable regions, improving remote homologue identification. we implemented falcon@home using the berkeley open infrastructure of network computing (boinc) volunteer computing protocol. with computation power donated from over 20 000 volunteer cpus, falcon@home shows a throughput as high as processing of over 1000 proteins per day. in the critical assessment of protein structure prediction (casp11), the falcon@home-based prediction was ranked the 12th in the template-based modeling category. as an application, the structures of 880 mouse mitochondria proteins were predicted, which revealed the significant correlation between protein half-lives and protein structural factors. availability and implementation: falcon@home is freely available at http://protein.ict.ac.cn/ falcon/.the protein structure prediction problem is concerned with the prediction of three-dimensional structure of a protein from its primary sequence of residues. based on whether homologous templates exist for the query protein, the prediction approaches can be categorized into template-based modeling (tbm, including homology modeling and threading) and free modeling (fm). specifically, a threading approach recognizes the most likely fold of the query protein and reports its alignments to known structural templates as output. this strategy has been relatively successful for various proteins; however, the existing threading approaches have performed poorly for remote homologous proteins. thus, improving the fold recognition for remote homologous proteins remains a challenge to protein structure prediction . in addition, currently available prediction servers, such as rosetta, i-tasser and raptorx are far from meeting the needs of high-throughput structure prediction from the community. more servers supporting proteomewide structure prediction are in high demand. in general, the sequences of remote homologous proteins show a relatively weak signal of native structures. however, this does not indicate a lack of sequence conservation features for structure. in fact, during the evolutionary process of homologous proteins, some regions are conserved while some regions are relatively variable in term of structure and sequence. the conserved regions are known as common structural frameworks that are shared by homologous proteins. note thatsuccessfully utilized the concept of conserved region in the design of raptor. this observation is also supported by the success of multiple-templates threading strategy . thus, based on this observation, we have proposed a novel threading approach to improving remote homologue identification and further developed a high-throughput protein structure prediction server called falcon@home.  
