genetics and population analysis famagg: an r package to evaluate familial aggregation of traits in large pedigrees familial aggregation analysis is the first fundamental step to perform when assessing the extent of genetic background of a disease. however, there is a lack of software to analyze the fa-milial clustering of complex phenotypes in very large pedigrees. such pedigrees can be utilized to calculate measures that express trait aggregation on both the family and individual level, providing valuable directions in choosing families for detailed follow-up studies. we developed famagg, an open source r package that contains both established and novel methods to investigate familial aggregation of traits in large pedigrees. we demonstrate its use and interpretation by analyzing a publicly available cancer dataset with more than 20 000 participants distributed across approximately 400 families. availability and implementation: the famagg package is freely available at the bioconductor repository , http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/famagg.the investigation of whether a disease or symptom trait recurs more often among close relatives than in the general population is a deeply rooted subject in genetic epidemiology, often termed as familial aggregation analysis . while segregation analysis was the tool of choice to identify patterns of mendelian diseases, there is no unique method to highlight familial clusters for complex diseases, especially in situations involving very large pedigrees lacking a regular family structure. in this setting, more than three decades ago, a computational method was first developed to highlight familial aggregation of various cancer types . the method was based on the kinship coefficient u ij , which is the probability that two subjects i and j share the same allele identical-by-descent at one locus, and represents a suitable measure to quantify the relationship between two individuals in the pedigree . in this early approach, the average kinship between all affected pairs was compared to the mean kinship of multiple sets of randomly selected matched controls . this and other kinship-based methods have been successfully applied to very large pedigrees to assess whether diseases such as autism or parkinsons disease showed evidence of familial aggregation. the kinship-based approach was also extended to be used with time-to-event data: the presence of familial clustering is assessed based on disease incidence rates, thus accounting for the time to disease onset . driven by the lack of open access tools for familial aggregation analyses in large pedigrees, we have developed an r package providing this functionality. besides basic pedigree analysis, sub-setting and plotting methods, it implements the previously published methods based on average kinship and disease incidence rates as well as two novel approaches to detect familial aggregation employing statistics based on kinship coefficients combined with monte carlo simulation techniques.  
