genetics and population analysis famcnv: copy number variant association for quantitative traits in families downloaded from a program package to enable genome-wide association of copy number variants (cnvs) with quantitative phenotypes in families of arbitrary size and complexity. intensity signals that act as proxies for the number of copies are modeled in a variance component framework and association with traits is assessed through formal likelihood testing. availability and implementation: the java package is made available at copy number variants (cnvs) have recently attracted increasing interest as a source of phenotypic variation in humans, with both rare and common cnvs being associated with different complex diseases (e.g. diskin et al., 2009; walters et al., 2010) and gene expression levels (henrichsen et al., 2009). the availability of high-coverage snp arrays and the development of methods for making cnv calls from snp data are now being exploited to evaluate genome-wide association with cnvs (e.g. glessner et al., 2009). at present, fbat (ionita-laza et al., 2008) is the only other available algorithm that performs association test of normalized signal intensity measurement variations, reflecting cnvs in family-based datasets. the family-based association test implemented in fbat uses only the within-family variation. although that is one of the possible approaches to control for population stratification, disregarding the between-family variation might lead to decreased statistical power (aulchenko et al., 2007). famcnv uses information from both within-and between-family variations, while population stratification issues can be detected and corrected using standard methods. although qualitative cnv calls from existing algorithms can be incorporated as multiallele loci in a family-based association test, direct testing of the underlying quantitative cnv measurement to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. has been shown to be more robust in identifying genuine associations in many cases (mccarroll and altshuler, 2007; stranger et al., 2007). moreover, quantitative trait designs are less likely to be affected by differential errors that can arise in case-control studies. we have implemented a java program, famcnv, that uses intensity signals such as the log 2 ratio from array comparative genomic hybridization (acgh) or the log ratio of observed to expected signal intensity (lrr) from illumina genotyping arrays. the quantitative trait of interest is analysed in a variance component framework to model the resemblance among relatives and to remove possible bias from familiality (abecasis et al., 2000). a linear mixed model is fitted to data to partition the total phenotypic variance into a polygenic component 2 a determined by additive genetic effects and a residual variance 2 e determined by the unique individual environment, including measurement errors. the variance covariance matrix for the subjects in each family is = 2 2 a +l 2 e , where 2 is the matrix of the expected proportion of alleles that are identical-by-descent among the family members used to correct for the sample structure and l is an identity matrix. variance component analysis allows simultaneous modeling of the trait mean as = +a, where is the trait mean, a is a matrix of covariate effects and the corresponding regression coefficients. the test is evaluated by comparing the likelihood of the full model, where signal intensities are included in the mean model and the likelihood of the null model where the effect of the signal intensities is constrained to zero. twice the difference between the logarithms of the full and the null likelihoods asymptotically follows a chi-square distribution with one degree of freedom and can be used to evaluate the difference in goodness-of-fit between the two models (amos, 1994). when using data from genotype arrays, the b allele frequency (bafrepresenting the proportion of the total signal deriving from the b allele) can also be included in both the full and null models, to control for misleading differences in an lrr distribution between genotypes that may have arisen due to errors during the array normalization process (peiffer et al., 2006). the identified loci, either via the reported p-value or via meeting a threshold for the false discovery rate (fdr; storey and tibshirani, 2003), are expected to reflect probes that are both genuinely copy  
