genetic and population analysis a haplotype-based framework for group-wise transmission/disequilibrium tests for rare variant association analysis downloaded from motivation: a major focus of current sequencing studies for human genetics is to identify rare variants associated with complex diseases. aside from reduced power of detecting associated rare variants, controlling for population stratification is particularly challenging for rare variants. transmission/disequilibrium tests (tdt) based on family designs are robust to population stratifi-cation and admixture, and therefore provide an effective approach to rare variant association studies to eliminate spurious associations. to increase power of rare variant association analysis, gene-based collapsing methods become standard approaches for analyzing rare variants. existing methods that extend this strategy to rare variants in families usually combine tdt statistics at individual variants and therefore lack the flexibility of incorporating other genetic models. results: in this study, we describe a haplotype-based framework for group-wise tdt (gtdt) that is flexible to encompass a variety of genetic models such as additive, dominant and compound heterozygous (ch) (i.e. recessive) models as well as other complex interactions. unlike existing methods, gtdt constructs haplotypes by transmission when possible and inherently takes into account the linkage disequilibrium among variants. through extensive simulations we showed that type i error was correctly controlled for rare variants under all models investigated, and this remained true in the presence of population stratification. under a variety of genetic models, gtdt showed increased power compared with the single marker tdt. application of gtdt to an autism exome sequencing data of 118 trios identified potentially interesting candidate genes with ch rare variants. availability and implementation: we implemented gtdt in c and the source code and the detailed usage are available on the authors website (https://medschool.next generation sequencing is routinely employed to identify rare variants, e.g. variants with minor allele frequency (maf) 0.01, associated with complex traits. although there are examples of studies implicating rare variants in complex diseases/traits , it is clear that such studies remain underpowered, and elucidating the contribution of low-frequency variants to disease etiology should benefit from additional methodology advances. major challenges include the low power of traditional analysis methods and the severe multiple testing problem. for casecontrol studies, group-wise methods, such as cast and cmc, collapse rare variants into a single genetic unita gene, region or pathwayto test the association of multiple rare variants as a whole. the underlying rationale of collapsing approaches is that if multiple variants at a locus confer disease risk independently, aggregating individual variants strengthens the overall signal and avoids multiplicity in single-and multi-marker tests, resulting in increased power for association analysis of rare variants . a more powerful approach is to take a weighted sum of rare variants, with weights reflecting the genetic effects of the corresponding variants . such a strategy has the potential to achieve much improved power by assigning weights proportional to the genetic effect of corresponding variants. a variety of methods have been developed with varying ways of selecting and weighting rare variants in an effort to increase power of rare variant association studies and new methods continue to emerge (see reviewsfor more details). this rationale in group-wise strategy to increase power, however, is able to aggregate and amplify spurious association signals as well, if such undesired signals exist. such spurious association can be due to population stratification. for common variants, this confounding has been long recognized and can be effectively accounted for by existing methods . most rare variants are relatively young and often show differential allelic spectra in populations traditionally considered as homogeneous; 85 of rare variants are population specific . population stratification effects due to rare variants can be stronger than that due to common variants, and methods routinely used for controlling population stratification in association studies of common variants may fail for rare variants . family-based analysis, such as the transmission/disequilibrium test (tdt) , uses only transmission information from parents to offspring and is therefore robust to such confounding. the collapsing approaches of rare variants originally developed for unrelated samples have been extended to gene-based tdt and show improved power over single marker tdt while controlling for population stratification/admixture , providing a robust approach to rare variant analysis. the general strategy of these methods involves initial analysis done based on single variants, and statistics across all rare variants are then aggregated, usually in a linear fashion, to form a gene-or group-wise statistic . these methods essentially implement additive genetic models, and are unable to model interactions among rare variants in a gene or pathway. such interactions may play important roles in complex disease . for example, the compound heterozygous (ch) model of loss of function variants has been implicated in autism . given that causal rare variants may act in complex mechanisms at different loci for different diseases, it is critical to develop methods that can encompass flexible models in a unified framework, and to provide tools that enable the community to carry out such analyses. in this study, we describe a general framework for group-wise tdt (gtdt) for rare variants and implement a few classical genetic models in a user-friendly and computationally efficient tool. the gtdt is haplotype-based and models the transmission of rare variant carrying haplotypes rather than single variants. directly modeling haplotypes is advantageous because (i) the transmission unit is haplotype and therefore it is the logical unit to model, and (ii) gene products originate from haplotypes, so it is biologically meaningful to model haplotypes , (iii) it is straightforward to model interactions among variants along haplotypes or between father or mothers haplotypes and (iv) linkage disequilibrium (ld) among variants is precisely accounted for without explicit estimation of ld. given the flexibility of the framework, a variety of models can be implemented. for example, models implemented in our tool include not only simple models such as additive and ch models but also a hybrid that fuses ch and weighted additive models to test for recessive effects while incorporating prior knowledge on different variants. it is straightforward to extend to other customized models tailored to specific diseases or genes to meet specific needs. through extensive simulations, we showed that type i error was correctly controlled for rare/low-frequency variants (e.g. up to maf 0.1) under a variety of scenarios, including various levels of population stratification. we evaluated the power of gtdt for different underlying genetic models, and gtdt significantly outperformed single marker tdt. for additive models we were able to compare gtdt with other methods and observed comparable power. overall our gtdt provides a flexible framework and an efficient computational tool to identify rare variants implicated in diseases.identifying genes harboring rare variants associated with human complex traits is of great interest. on the other hand, it is also intrinsically challenging, owing to the dramatically reduced power as well as the difficulty to account for rare variant population stratification/ admixture. the framework we described in this study tackles this problem by aggregating rare variants in a group and uses a haplotype-based tdt to control for population stratification/admixture. compared with existing methods, our framework is better able to deal with complex genetic models. given the ubiquity of allelic heterogeneity in disease etiology, it is natural to assume that there exist complex interactions between causal variants. our work provides a framework that enables the exploration of such complex models. in addition, customized weighting schemes can be readily provided to gtdt so that effective weights, such as functional prediction scores or the weights based on the clever use of controls , can be incorporated to various models in gtdt to take advantage of specialized weights. if the focus is on rare variants (e.g. maf 0.05), our results show that it is adequate to use phasing by transmission implemented in gtdt. we believe that this is the most commonly employed strategy so that gtdt is able to handle the majority of situations. for variants with maf 0.1 we recommend using ld-based methods to phase genotypes before gtdt analysis.t/(t n), transmission/(transmission non-transmission).  
