genetics and population analysis farvat: a family-based rare variant association test motivation: individuals in each family are genetically more homogeneous than unrelated individuals, and family-based designs are often recommended for the analysis of rare variants. however, despite the importance of family-based samples analysis, few statistical methods for rare variant association analysis are available. results: in this report, we propose a family-based rare variant association test (farvat). farvat is based on the quasi-likelihood of whole families, and is statistically and computationally efficient for the extended families. farvat assumed that families were ascertained with the disease status of family members, and incorporation of the estimated genetic relationship matrix to the proposed method provided robustness under the presence of the population substruc-ture. depending on the choice of working matrix, our method could be a burden test or a variance component test, and could be extended to the skat-o-type statistic. farvat was implemented in c++, and application of the proposed method to schizophrenia data and simulated data for gaw17 illustrated its practical importance. availability: the software calculates various statistics for the analysis of related samples, and it is freely downloadable from http:// healthstats.snu.ac.kr/software/farvat. contact:advances in genotyping technology have enabled researchers to conduct large-scale genetic analyses, and during the last decade, genome-wide association studies have identified 41000 common genetic loci associated with many phenotypes. however, heritabilities for most phenotypes are only partially explained by these significant findings , and relatively small proportions of variance explained by common variants have revealed the importance of association analyses with rare variants . contrary to the analysis of common variants, single genetic association analysis with rare variants is often associated with large false-negative results unless sample sizes or effect sizes are very large. thus, association analysis with the collapsed genotype scores for a set of rare variants has been suggested . for instance, minor alleles for all rare variants in a gene or a region are counted, and the disease status is regressed on minor allele counts (mac). alternatively, the collapsed amount of variance inflation for rare variants can be compared between affected and unaffected individuals . the former is often called a burden test, while the latter is a variance component test. the burden test is statistically more efficient than variance component methods such as c-alpha and skat if most of the rare alleles have similar effects on the disease. however, if rare variants with deleterious and protective effects are combined, the collapsed genotype scores for affected and unaffected individuals are similar, and genetic association analysis with a burden test becomes inefficient, whereas the variance component method become more robust. both methods can be combined into robust statistical strategies such as the skat-o approach , which is statistically efficient in both situations. however, despite these improvements in statistical methods, the high cost of sequencing still prevents large-scale genome-wide rare variant association studies. the common disease rare variant hypothesis assumes genetic heterogeneity between affected individuals, and selecting genetically homogeneous subjects obviously increases the rate of true-positive findings. in particular, family members are genetically more homogeneous than random samples, and rare variant analysis with extended families can lead to identification of more disease-susceptibility variants . for instance, it has been shown that the enrichment of rare alleles in 100 affected sib pairs can be equal to that of 200 casescontrol pairs . therefore, rare variant association analysis with to whom correspondence should be addressed the author 2014. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com carefully ascertained families seems to be an efficient strategy, and the development of statistical methods for family-based samples is necessary. recently, family based association tests (fbat) statistics have been extended for application in rare variant association analysis: the burden test and the variance component test have been proposed. according to the nature of fbat, these tests are robust against the population substructure and can be combined with rank-based p-values based on the between-family component .proposed rare variant extensions of the transmission disequilibrium test (rv-tdt) methods, which were extensions of the tdt . fbat and rv-tdt methods were shown to be robust and powerful for exploration of rare variant association in the population substructure. however, even though robustness against the population substructure can be provided, those approaches do not take into account the parental phenotypes, and power loss can be substantial for extended family designs. alternatively, studies have proposed the functional principal component analysis (fpca) and pedigree-based combined multivariate and collapsing statistic (pedcmc) tests , which are extended cochranarmitage tests for family-based samples. these tests use data from the whole family for rare variant association analysis and are expected to be more efficient than fbat/tdt-type statistics. however, if the effects of rare variants are proportional to mac or the protective and deleterious variants are mixed in a gene, these approaches can be less efficient. in this report, we propose a family-based rare variant association test (farvat). we provide a burden test and a variance component test for extended families, and these approaches are extended to the skat-o-type statistic. the proposed method assumes that families are ascertained based on the disease status of family members, and minor allele frequencies (mafs) between affected and unaffected individuals are compared. mafs for each rare variant are estimated with the best linear unbiased estimators . farvat is implemented with c++ and is computationally efficient for the analysis of rare variants with extended families. with extensive simulations, we compared the proposed methods with existing methods , and results showed that the proposed methods were the most efficient in the considered scenarios. application of the proposed method to schizophrenia and gaw17 illustrated its practical value in real analyses.in this article, we proposed burden-type, c-alpha-type and skat-o-type statistics for the association analysis of rare variants for binary traits with extended families. the proposed methods were compared with results of pedcmc, fpca and rvtdt methods , and with extensive simulations, we showed that the proposed method was more efficient than existing approaches. in particular, we found that the most efficient statistic among the proposed statistics differed according to the disease model. however, they were usually followed by the skat-o-type statistic in such scenarios, and the power differences between the most efficient statistic and the skat-o-type statistic were small. therefore, farvat o seemed to be a robust choice for the analysis of rare variants in extended families. furthermore, the proposed method was very rapid computationally, and the farvat software for the proposed methods was implemented with c++ to enhance computational efficiency. the time complexity for the proposed method was, and we found that analysis of the whole genome sequence data for 1000 individuals in the extendedfamily design could be conducted within a few hours. farvat can handle various input file formats, such as the ped, bed and vcf files, and multithreaded genome-wide association analyses can be conducted. the software calculates various statistics for the analysis of extended families, and it is freely downloadable from http://biostat.cau.ac.kr/farvat/. however, despite the analytical flexibility of the proposed method, it has some limitations. first, the proposed method could be less efficient if some covariates associated with disease status or phenotypes of interest were continuous. our recent investigation found that the power improvement of the analysis with phenotypes adjusted by blup could be substantial if each family was randomly selected . under certain scenarios, however, power loss may be expected, and the further investigation is necessary. second, we showed that incorporation of the estimated correlation matrix to the proposed statistics provided sufficient robustness for the proposed method against the presence of population substructure. however, if large-scale common variants were not available or the level of population substructure depended on the genomic location, the proposed adjustment with the estimated correlation matrix did not perform appropriately , and different strategies would be necessary according to the level of population substructure. if large-scale common variants are not available, the fbat or tdt statistics, based on so-called within-family components, is uniquely robust to population substructure, and the burdentype test for the fbat statistic or rv-tdt methods can be used . if the genomic ancestry for each individual differs for some genomic locations, the socalled hybrid-analysis strategy can be a suitable alternative. the proposed method can simply be extended to the statistic based on the between-family component , and its rank-based p-value can be combined with the fbat burden-type test or skat-o-type test. advances in genotyping technology will lead to substantial cost reductions for genome sequencing, and it is expected that whole genome sequencing may be feasible for less than a few hundred u.s. dollars in the near future. importantly, most of human genome consists of rare variants, and thus, we expect that the genetic background for missing heritability can be determined by rare variant association analysis . however, rare variant association analysis is disrupted by genetic heterogeneity, and in this context, the importance of rare variant analysis with extended families has often been raised . the proposed method enables the analysis of rare variants within extended families, and its application to extended families may provide a breakthrough for the success of genetic association analysis.  
