genome analysis fasd-somatic: a fast and accurate somatic snv detection algorithm for cancer genome sequencing data recent advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies have enabled us to sequence large number of cancer samples to reveal novel insights into oncogenetic mechanisms. however, the presence of intratumoral heterogeneity, normal cell contamination and insufficient sequencing depth, together pose a challenge for detecting somatic mutations. here we propose a fast and an accurate somatic single-nucleotide variations (snvs) detection program, fasd-somatic. the performance of fasd-somatic is extensively assessed on various types of cancer against several state-of-the-art somatic snv detection programs. benchmarked by somatic snvs from either existing databases or de novo higher-depth sequencing data, fasd-somatic has the best overall performance. furthermore, fasd-somatic is efficient, it finishes somatic snv calling within 14 h on 50x whole genome sequencing data in paired samples. availability and implementation: the program, datasets and supplementary files are available at http://jjwanglab.org/fasd-somatic/.next-generation sequencing and third-generation sequencing are widely used to detect genetic mutations from tumor tissues and their paired normal tissues (from the same individual), providing an immense power for understanding the cause of cancer. besides the inherited germ line mutations, the newly acquired somatic mutations constitute the majority of genetic mutations that cause cancer . increasing evidences show that tumoral heterogeneity exists not only in intertumoral level but also in intratumoral level . when the sequencing depth is insufficient, the minor clones, which may harbor the meaningful positively selected mutations, could be easily concealed by the dominant clones. furthermore, owing to the presence of non-tumor cells in the bulk of tumor, the proportion of effective covered reads with somatic mutations will decrease, therefore making somatic mutation detection more difficult. finally, the germ line variants can outnumber somatic variants by several orders of magnitudes ; this further complicates the difficulty of somatic mutation detection. efforts have been made by both biologists and bioinformaticians ato overcome those challenges, but the methods to call somatic single-nucleotide variations (snvs) directly from sequencing data with accuracy and efficiency are still in demand. (supplementary section 1).  
