structural bioinformatics fast accessibility-based prediction of rna–rna interactions motivation: currently, the best rnarna interaction prediction tools are based on approaches that consider both the inter-and intramolecular interactions of hybridizing rnas. while accurate, these methods are too slow and memory-hungry to be employed in genome-wide rna target scans. alternative methods neglecting intramolecular structures are fast enough for genome-wide applications, but are too inaccurate to be of much practical use. results: a new approach for rnarna interaction was developed, with a prediction accuracy that is similar to that of algorithms that explicitly consider intramolecular structures, but running at least three orders of magnitude faster than rnaup. this is achieved by using a combination of precomputed accessibility profiles with an approximate energy model. this approach is implemented in the new version of rnaplex. the software also provides a variant using multiple sequences alignments as input, resulting in a further increase in specificity.the status of rna in molecular biology has changed dramatically over the last decade. instead of taking on a rather marginal role as messenger of genomic information, they are now considered as key regulatory elements in a wide spectrum of cellular processes. as of 2008, the number of known non-coding rna sequences reached an overwhelming 29 million grouped into 1300 distinct families . non-coding rnas (ncrnas) frequently function by binding to other rnas. for example, snornas mediate pseudouridylation and methylation of rrnas and snrnas and can influence the splicing of pre-mrnas . ncrnas are also involved in the editing of other rna sequences (benne, to whom correspondence should be addressed. 1992), transcription and translation control (sirna, mirna, strna) or plasmid replication control . while sirnas are often fully complementary to their targets, most other ncrnas interact in a more intricate manner, which does not involve perfect hybridization. for example in escherichia coli., oxys, which is involved in oxidative stress response, interacts with its target mrna, fhla, through formation of a two sites kissing complex . although there is statistical evidence that a plethora of ncrnas interacts with other rnas (the athanasius f.), targets remain unknown for most of them. the prediction of rnarna interactions, therefore, has become an important field in computational biology. rnarna interactions are primarily governed by the same types of hydrogen bonds and stacking interactions as rna secondary structure formation. the problem can, therefore, be tackled by similar algorithmic approaches and the same parametrization of the interaction energies. we may distinguish two distinct ways of addressing the rnarna interaction problem. the most straightforward way consists in concatenating both sequences and subsequently folding them as a pseudo-single sequence. the precision of this kind of approach depends greatly on how the concatenation is handled. the crudest approaches use linker sequences to connect both rna strands . this can lead to erroneous structure prediction as the linker may interfere with the interacting sequences. alternatively, a small modification of the folding algorithm keeps track of the concatenation point(s) and uses adjusted energy parameters for the loops in which the junctions occur . a combinatorially different model, known as rnarna interaction problem (rip), covers a larger set of possible structures . the second type of approaches conceptually decomposes the rna hybridization process into two stages: (i) the unfolding of the interacting regions of the two partners and (ii) the direct interaction of the exposed binding sites. in practice, one first computes the probability of being unpaired for each region (sequence interval) in both sequences. these probabilities are equivalent to the free energy necessary to expose the regions. in the second step, the interaction energy between each combinations of regions is evaluated . this approach was,of the ompamica hybrids predicted with and without considering intramolecular structures. (a) hybrid structure predicted with rnaplex without considering the intramolecular structures of the rna sequences. the hybrid extends over 67 and 69 nucleotides on ompa and mica, respectively, and has an hybridization energy of 42.3 kcal/mol. still the energy needed to unfold both binding regions on ompa and mica amounts 22.7+26.8 = 49.5 kcal/mol, larger than the energy gained through binding. (b) ompamica interaction predicted by rnaup. ompamica hybrid is shown on the right hand side, with the mica sequence represented by a bold line. even though the hybrid is much smaller than the interaction in (a), it has a lower total interaction energy (ddg) of 12.25 kcal/mol, due to the fact that the interacting regions are less structured. in particular, applied successfully to srnamrna interactions in bacteria. while both types of algorithms proved useful in predicting the correct interaction structure of a ncrna with its (known) target, they are computationally expensive, requiring at least o((n+m) 3 ) operations, where n and m are the size of the target and query sequences, respectively, and hence are impractical for genome-wide target predictions. a drastic reduction in computational complexity can be achieved by omitting the computation of secondary structures within the monomers, as demonstrated by rnahybrid , which runs in o(mnl 2 ) when restricting the maximum loop length to l. rnaplex, a conceptually very similar approach , further reduces the time complexity to o(mn) by using a modified energy model. neglecting the internal structure of the interacting sequences leads to a drastic decrease in specificity; however, see. this issue is roughly addressed by rnaplex in that it mimics the effect of the competition between intra-and intermolecular interactions by adding a fixed per-nucleotide penalty . currently, one therefore has to choose between precise but impractically slow methods or fast but imprecise methods for ncrna target search, a situation that is quite unsatisfactory. in this contribution, we extend the rnaplex approach tafer and hofacker (2008) to tackle this problem. we mimic the effect of the competition between intra-and intermolecular interactions by adding a position-dependent per-nucleotide penalty instead of a fixed penalty. this penalty is derived from precomputed accessibility profiles produced by rnaplfold or rnaup . more explicitly, these profiles contain the probabilities that any subsequence of arbitrary length is unpaired in thermodynamic equilibrium. these probabilities are converted to free energies that then enter as position-dependent penalties in the computation of the interaction energies, preserving rnaplex o(mn) run time. the main advantage is that the accessibility profiles can be precomputed and stored, making this approach particularly attractive for largescale screening studies. in addition, we extended rnaplex so that it can also handle multiple alignment. this inclusion of comparative information into the target prediction process leads to a substantial increase in specificity.as an application example, we consider the genome-wide prediction of srna targets in e.coli. as a reference set, we use the experimentally confirmed interactions published by. we expect that, for a given srna, the number of predicted interactions with other (false positive) targets should decrease when accessibility of the target mrna in included. ideally, it should reach the low levels observed for rnaup . for each srna, the amount of false positives was estimated by counting genome wide the number of srna-target interactions that are more stable than the experimentally reported srna-target duplex. for each 4463 e.coli genes, a mrna of length 1200 nt, including 200 nt upstream and 1000 nt downstream of the start codon were defined. accessibility profiles were computed with rnaplfold, with a folding windows (option-w) of 240 nt and a maximal base pair distance of 160 (option-l). an interaction was reported if the corresponding srnamrna interaction energy is smaller than the experimentally confirmed interaction, and if it occurs in region encompassing 80 nt, 50 nt upstream and 30 nt downstream of the start codon. the inclusion of the accessibility profiles in the new version of rnaplex leads to a substantial improvement as can be seen from. all native interaction sites are among the predictions, and the detailed target site localization is improved. most importantly, the number of predictions with better interaction energies, i.e. the false positives, is reduced to a level similar to that of rnaup. in order to better assess the number of false positives, the same method was applied on the dinucleotide-shuffled srnas and mrnas. to this end, we compared the interaction energy of the non-shuffled, experimentally confirmed interactions, to the energy distribution of the shuffled sequences. interestingly, in seven out of nine cases, the number of false positives is smaller (see supplementary material) in the shuffled case than in the non-shuffled one. this can be explained by the fact that in various bacteria, the region around the ribosomal entry site, which is also the preferred region of srna binding, is more accessible than the rest of the mrna (see supplementary material). this in turn implies that compared with shuffled sequences, srnas have a greater chance to bind to the region around the start codon in non-shuffled mrnas. depending on the ncrnas, one can expect between 7.510 7 false positives per nucleotide for micc and 1.5104 false positives for gcvb (see supplementary material).we presented a new version of rnaplex, a tool designed to rapidly and reliably predict rnarna interactions. compared with the previously published version, rnaplex now considers target site accessibility, by using accessibility profiles generated by rnaplfold to approximate the energy of removing a nucleotide from all intramolecular interactions. the introduction of positionspecific, structure-dependent extension cost allows to greatly improve the specificity of rnaplex, bringing it close to that of rnaup, without modifying the linear run time of the original rnaplex. clearly, the main feature of rnaplex is its run time efficiency. on a dataset of 19 ncrnas and 100 target mrnas on length 1200, rnaplex runs 2400 faster than rnaup without noticeably loss of specificity, thus making ncrnas target searches more affordable. in its present implementation, rnaplex can be used not only to predict ncrna targets in small genomes, but can also be used to find mirna targets and sirna off-targets in large mammalian genomes and transcriptomes and it can be applied to microarray probes design. in contrast to rnaup or rnahybrid, rnaplex can return suboptimal solutions efficiently on the fly without the need of recomputing the full recursion matrix. the ability of rnaplex to perform comparative target search allows to discard poorly conserved interaction and to lend further credibility to interactions showing compensatory mutations. based on a dataset of experimentally confirmed interactions, we show that rnaplex in its present form is an useful tool to predict new srna targets. we further show that suboptimal predictions from rnaplex may actually be real targets. application of the comparative version  
