systems biology fast and efficient dynamic nested effects models motivation: targeted interventions in combination with the measurement of secondary effects can be used to computationally reverse engineer features of upstream non-transcriptional signaling cascades. nested effect models (nems) have been introduced as a statistical approach to estimate the upstream signal flow from downstream nested subset structure of perturbation effects. the method was substantially extended later on by several authors and successfully applied to various datasets. the connection of nems to bayesian networks and factor graph models has been highlighted. results: here, we introduce a computationally attractive extension of nems that enables the analysis of perturbation time series data, hence allowing to discriminate between direct and indirect signaling and to resolve feedback loops.reverse engineering of biological networks is a key for the understanding of biological systems. the exact knowledge of interdependencies between proteins in the living cell is crucial for the identification of drug targets for various diseases. however, due to the complexity of the system a complete picture with detailed knowledge of the behavior of individual proteins is still out of reach. nonetheless, the advent of gene perturbation techniques like rna interference (rnai) , opened new perspectives for network reconstruction by boosting the ability to subject organisms to well-defined interventions. in general, biological networks are represented mathematically by a graph in which the nodes represent biological entities and the edges encode functional relations (of various kinds) between these entities. a number of approaches have been proposed in the literature for estimating networks from perturbation effects. many of these aim at reconstructing a network from directly observable effects. for example,build a directed disruption graph by drawing an edge (i,j), if gene i results in a significant expression to whom correspondence should be addressed. change at gene j.uses such disruption networks as a starting point for a further graph-theoretic method, which removes indirect effects , hence making the network more parsimonious.enhance this approach by additionally making use of edge probabilities and signs to make the network consistent with the observed biological effects. moreover, bayesian networks have been used to model the statistical dependency between perturbation experiments . for this purpose pearl (2000) introduces his do calculus, an idealized model of interventions. other probabilistic graphical models that have been proposed to model interventional data comprise factor graphs and dependency networks . in genetics, epistasis analysis is often been applied for learning from indirect downstream effects. for example,use expression profiles from single and double knockdowns to partly reconstruct a developmental pathway in dictyostelium discoideum via a simple cluster analysis.embedds epistasis analysis into a statistical framework.propose a special kind of bayesian network to infer pathway structures from genetic interaction data. all of these approaches deal with static data. however, with the increasing availability of time-resolved data, it is desirable and helpful to model the temporal aspects of signaling. to this end, differential equation systems have been suggested e.g. by. our approach is an expansion of nested effects models (nems) . nems are specifically designed to learn the signaling flowon a transcriptional as well as non-transcriptional levelbetween perturbed genes from indirect, high-dimensional effects, typically monitored by dna microarrays. nems use a graphical modeling framework to compare a given network hypothesis with the observed nested structure of downstream effects. in conclusion, nems estimate an interaction network between hidden entities from a set of observable downstream effects. nems have been applied successfully to a number of datasets, e.g. the immune response in drosophila melanogaster , a transcription factor network in saccharomices cerevisiae , the er- pathway in human breast cancer cells , a synthetic lethality interactions network in s.cerevisiae , murine stem cell development in mice and the rosetta dataset for s.cerevisiae .page: 239 238244we developed a novel approach to infer signaling cascades from high-dimensional perturbation time series measurements via dynonems, hence allowing to discriminate direct from indirect perturbation effects and to resolve feedback loops. our approach directly extends the nems framework introduced bythe static to the dynamic case by unrolling the network structure over time. this idea allows for a fast and efficient computation of the likelihood function without any time consuming gibbs sampling. our simulations revealed a high accuracy of network reconstruction for sufficiently small networks (up to 15 nodes). thanks to the incorporated network structure prior, we achieved a consistantly high specificity, i.e. low false positive rate. applying our dynonems to estimate the network between six proteins (five transcription factors) playing a key role in murine stem cell development, we found a good agreement with results published by achang et al. and with the biological literature. we therefore believe that our approach can serve as a useful tool to generate datadriven hypotheses about signaling and/or transcriptional networks based on high-dimensional perturbation effects.  
