bioinformatics-btq057.tex] sequence analysis fast and snp-tolerant detection of complex variants and splicing in short reads motivation: next-generation sequencing captures sequence differences in reads relative to a reference genome or transcriptome, including splicing events and complex variants involving multiple mismatches and long indels. we present computational methods for fast detection of complex variants and splicing in short reads, based on a successively constrained search process of merging and filtering position lists from a genomic index. our methods are implemented in gsnap (genomic short-read nucleotide alignment program), which can align both single-and paired-end reads as short as 14 nt and of arbitrarily long length. it can detect short-and long-distance splicing, including interchromosomal splicing, in individual reads, using probabilistic models or a database of known splice sites. our program also permits snp-tolerant alignment to a reference space of all possible combinations of major and minor alleles, and can align reads from bisulfite-treated dna for the study of methylation state. results: in comparison testing, gsnap has speeds comparable to existing programs, especially in reads of 70 nt and is fastest in detecting complex variants with four or more mismatches or insertions of 19 nt and deletions of 130 nt. although snp tolerance does not increase alignment yield substantially, it affects alignment results in 78 of transcriptional reads, typically by revealing alternate genomic mappings for a read. simulations of bisulfite-converted dna show a decrease in identifying genomic positions uniquely in 6 of 36 nt reads and 3 of 70 nt reads. availability: source code in c and utility programs in perl are freely available for download as part of the gmap package atnumerous programs have been developed to date for the alignment of short reads from next-generation sequencing technologies, such as illumina/solexa (hayward, ca, usa) and abi/solid (foster city, ca, usa), to a reference genome or transcriptome. because of the large numbers of short reads that can be produced from a given sample, much emphasis has placed on speed. accordingly, recent to whom correspondence should be addressed.programs, such as bowtie , bwa and soap2 , have shown how suffix arrays , compressed using a burrows wheeler transform (bwt;), can rapidly map reads that are exact matches or have a few mismatches or short insertions or deletions (indels) relative to the reference. in addition to speed, it is also important to broaden the range of possible variants that can be detected in reads, since interesting biology is likely to be revealed not merely as single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) or mutations from the reference, but also as more complex phenomena, such as multiple mismatches, long indels and combinations thereof. such complex variants represent a substantial source of genetic diversity. for example, indels represent 78 of human polymorphisms, with 25 of coding indels being longer than 3 nt . long indels that affect multiple amino acids may have significant biological consequences. moreover, as reads continue to lengthen, from their original 30 nt to their current 75100 nt, they are more likely to have multiple or complex differences from the reference, making detection of complex variants even more critical. other important biological phenomena arise from splicing events, which provide insights into gene structure, alternative splicing, gene fusions and chromosomal rearrangements. although splicing can be determined readily in long est and cdna sequences using generalpurpose genomic mapping and alignment programs such as blat or gmap , short reads pose a challenge because they often align to numerous places in a genome, and because they often lack insufficient sequence specificity on one or both ends of the exonexon junction to accurately define the junction. one solution for detecting splicing in short reads has been to align them to a reference transcriptome, possibly augmented with artificially constructed exonexon segments . however, such an approach will identify only known or predicted combinations of exons, and not unexpected exon pairs that occur through exon skipping, cryptic splicing or gene fusions. another approach, taken by the tophat program , analyzes an entire dataset of mapped reads to identify splice site junctions between exons in a given neighborhood. however, that approach requires exons to have sufficiently high expression and will miss splicing events that are spanned by individual reads at a low level. a third approach, provided by the qpalma program , can align individual reads across exonexon junctions using smithwaterman-type alignments and a specifically trained splice site model. all of these approaches are limited topage: 874 873881  
