sequence analysis a hidden markov model to identify combinatorial epigenetic regulation patterns for estrogen receptor target genes motivation: many studies have shown that epigenetic changes, such as altered dna methylation and histone modifications, are linked to estrogen receptor (er)-positive tumors and disease prognoses. several recent studies have applied high-throughput technologies such as chip-seq and mbd-seq to interrogate the altered architec-tures of er regulation in tamoxifen (tam)-resistant breast cancer cells. however, the details of combinatorial epigenetic regulation of er target genes in breast cancers with acquired tam resistance have not yet been fully examined. results: we developed a computational approach to identify and analyze epigenetic patterns associated with tam resistance in the mcf7-t cell line as opposed to the tam-sensitive mcf7 cell line, with the goal of understanding the underlying mechanisms of epigen-etic regulatory influence on resistance to tam treatment in breast cancer. in this study, we used chip-seq of er, rna polymerase ii, three histone modifications and mbd-seq data of dna methylation in mcf7 and mcf7-t cells to train hidden markov models (hmms). we applied the bayesian information criterion to determine that a 20-state hmm was best, which was reduced to a 14-state hmm with a bayesian information criterion score of 1.21291 10 7. we further identified four classes of biologically meaningful states in this breast cancer cell model system, and a set of er combinatorial epigenetic regulated target genes. the correlated gene expression level and gene ontology analyses showed that different gene ontology terms were enriched with tam-resistant versus sensitive breast cancer cells. our study illustrates the applicability of hmm-based analysis of genome-wide high-throughput genomic data to study epigenetic influences on e2/er regulation in breast cancer.the dysfunction of estrogen receptor (er), an estrogen (e2)inducible transcription factor, accounts for the growth of $70 of breast tumors . treatment with tamoxifen (tam), an estrogen antagonist and a selective er modulator, has been successful; however, $25 of the patients that respond to antihormonal therapy relapse within 10 years . many studies have shown that epigenetic changes, such as altered dna methylation and histone modifications, are linked to er-positive tumors and prognoses of the disease . other recent studies, including ours , have applied high-throughput technologies such as chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (chip-seq) and methyl binding domain sequencing (mbd-seq) to interrogate the altered architectures of er regulation in tam-resistant cells. however, the details of combinatorial epigenetic regulation of er target genes in breast cancers with acquired tam resistance have not yet been fully examined. we sought to develop a computational approach to identify and analyze these epigenetic patterns to gain insight into the epigenetic changes associated with tam resistance in the mcf7-t cell line compared with the tam-sensitive mcf7 cell line, and ultimately to understand the underlying mechanisms of epigenetic regulatory influence on tam resistance in breast cancer. the hidden markov model (hmm), originally developed for computerized speech recognition, is a widely used statistical method for computational modeling and analysis of various biological questions . the basic principle of a markov model is that it is a form of a markov chain (a type of stochastic finite-state machine) in which each state has been extended with a set of outputs and probabilities to emit each output. in an hmm, the state sequence giving rise to the outputs is not visible, but the output sequence is known. ernst et al. used hmms to find epigenetic states in several human cell types on the basis of epigenetic data .used hmms to identify differential histone modification sites between two chip-seq samples. given these successful applications of hmms, we applied the hmm to study epigenetic mechanisms underlying tam resistance. in this study, we used chip-seq of er, rna polymerase ii (polii), three histone modification marks and mbd-seq data of dna methylation in both mcf7 and mcf7-t cells to train a first-order hmm. these datasets were used because they were the only datasets available in both mcf7 and mcf7-t at the time this study was begun. we then applied the bayesian information criterion (bic) to determine a best number of combinatorial epigenetic states. we further identified a set of er-regulated combinatorial epigenetic states, including promoter states and several levels of transcription, by their probability of emitting er/e2. finally, gene ontology (go) analysis was performed through the web-based tool david on the genes in each list to find functional enrichments (, b) . to whom correspondence should be addressed.using a hmm, we have identified states reflecting combinatorial epigenetic patterns for er regulated target genes in mcf7 and mcf7-t. we have interpreted each of the states to determine their biological significance. with our results, we have determined lists of genes affected by er binding with e2 in both mcf7 and mcf7-t, considering a variety of other epigenetic effects. although these results do not conclusively elucidate the epigenetic mechanisms underlying tam resistance, they nonetheless illustrate the applicability of hmm-based analysis of genome-wide high-throughput genomic data to study epigenetic influence on e2/er regulation in breast cancer. although the application of go analysis did not yield statistically significant terms for every gene list, the results of this study nonetheless suggest several possible future directions. for instance, this study was confined to hmm analysis and gene listing. perhaps, application of gene network analysis could reveal key genes responsible for the regulation of the genes in the lists formulated by this study. the lists of genes may provide a starting point for further analyses, such as microarray assays of tumor samples focusing on these genes. the methods used here should be applicable in cases other than tam resistance in mcf7-t, using other genome-wide epigenetic datasets than those used in this study. the hmm training and identification of combinatorial regulated genes is extensible to more than two cell lines [o(n) in hmm training time and space, where n number of cell lines, but this is parallelizable with a sufficient number of compute cores]. for example, this can be used to interrogate combinatorial epigenetic regulation patterns in multiple types of cancer, or multiple patient samples with the same type of cancer. in the hmm implementation used in this study, each possible combination of marks is enumerated as a possible output of the hmm. this permits more straightforward analysis of combinatorial marks (for example, whether marks x and y are found together more often or not), which is critical to this study. ernst et al. used a multivariate hmm approach, in which the output probabilities of each mark are considered independently of each other . although multiple marks are allowed in each bin with this model, it does not directly model the frequency with which marks co-occur (which would be calculated after viterbi decoding). for example, consider a toy hmm with two marks and one state, learned over a sequence of two bins. if bin 1 has mark 1 and bin 2 has mark 2, the state in both an ernst hmm and one of our hmms would have an emission probability of 50 for each mark. however, if bin 1 has both marks 1 and 2, and bin 2 has no marks, the ernst hmm would be the same, and our hmm would have an emission probability of 100 for both marks and 0 for each mark alone. future studies could greatly benefit from the incorporation of additional data in the hmm. although many mcf7 datasets are available, datasets were available for only the eight epigenetic marks used in this study in both mcf7 and mcf7-t at the time this study was begun (a dataset must be available in all cell lines studied to be usable in the hmm). histone acetylation data could broaden the context of the hmm analysis by providing histone epigenetic data separate from the methylations analyzed in this study. for example, h3k27ac data could support the h3k4me2 data and possibly allow the detection of enhancers enriched in both marks , as well as better differentiation between active promoter and weak promoter states. h3k9me3 data may permit differentiation between constitutive and facultative heterochromatin. h3k36me3 data could allow differentiation between exons and introns. chip-seq of er and polii with tam and e2 treatment would allow more direct investigation of tam resistance. the potential utility of further next-generation sequencing (ngs) data is most powerfully demonstrated by the scope of the work of), in which the authors were able to define 51 hmm states by using datasets of 18 acetylations, 20 methylations and 3 other marks. though it would undoubtedly be impractical with current technology to perform 41 ngs experiments each in two cell lines, it is clear that the addition of other carefully selected datasets can improve the discriminatory power of hmm-based methods such as those used by ernst et al. and this study. additionally, the usage of additional datasets can reduce the impact of biases in individual datasets produced by differing experimental protocols, as the contribution of each dataset to the observation sequences used for hmm training is reduced. this may allow the state sequences in each cell line to be directly compared instead of comparing state-associated genes, as well as reduction of the 1000-bp bin size for higher resolution. the addition of further ngs datasets may be complicated by the increased computational and memory requirements potentially necessitated by additional data. additional datasets may require additional states to be included in hmms. as the computational and memory costs of our implementation of the baumwelch algorithm (in particular, the gamma values) grow according to o(nb 2 ), where n number of bins and b number of states, this would become prohibitive with increasing numbers of states. for example, the gamma values for 20 states, 1000-bp bins and two cell lines with long double precision (16 bytes with gcc on the x64 architecture) would require about 36 gb of memory (3022656 2 16 20 20 bytes). with 30 states, this increases to $81 gb. although not all of this must be allocated at once (as forwardbackward is performed separately on each chromosome to allow it to be parallelized), this would nonetheless require a computer with a great deal of available memory. however, given the historical decrease of the cost of memory, this may become less of an issue in the future. in addition, there are many subjective parameters in this study. for example, 1000-bp bins were used, primarily to mitigate chip-seq noise. reducing the bin size can potentially increase the resolution of the state assignments; however, it would increase the sensitivity of state assignment to chip-seq noise. the cutoff of p510 4 for the number of reads in a bin required to call that mark present was selected solely because of its successful use in previous work . this cutoff may potentially be overly strict or overly permissive in this study. we chose to select states with at least a 0.1 probability of emitting er/e2 for further analysis. although we used this threshold to choose states with some relation to er binding, it is admittedly arbitrary. perhaps a statistical method could be devised to select states for gene identification in future work. additional data files are available at http://motif.bmi.ohiostate.edu/erhmm.  
