faster and more accurate graphical model identification of tandem mass spectra using trellises tandem mass spectrometry (ms/ms) is the dominant high throughput technology for identifying and quantifying proteins in complex biological samples. analysis of the tens of thousands of fragmentation spectra produced by an ms/ms experiment begins by assigning to each observed spectrum the peptide that is hypothesized to be responsible for generating the spectrum. this assignment is typically done by searching each spectrum against a database of peptides. to our knowledge , all existing ms/ms search engines compute scores individually between a given observed spectrum and each possible candidate peptide from the database. in this work, we use a trellis, a data structure capable of jointly representing a large set of candidate peptides, to avoid redundantly recomputing common sub-computations among different candidates. we show how trellises may be used to significantly speed up existing scoring algorithms, and we theoretically quantify the expected speedup afforded by trellises. furthermore, we demonstrate that compact trellis representations of whole sets of peptides enables efficient discriminative learning of a dynamic bayesian network for spectrum identification, leading to greatly improved spectrum identification accuracy.a critical problem in medicine and biology is accurately identifying the proteins in a complex mixture, such as a drop of blood. solutions to this problem have many important applications, including the early detection of diseases and congenital defects . the most widely used high throughput technology to identify proteins in complex mixtures is tandem mass spectrometry (ms/ms), whose output is a collection of tens of thousands of fragmentation spectra, each of which ideally corresponds to a single generating peptide. the core problem in the interpretation of ms/ms data involves identifying the peptide responsible for generating each observed spectrum, which we call the spectrum identification problem. the most accurate methods to solve the spectrum identification problem employ a database of peptides (reviewed in). given an observed spectrum, peptides in the database are scored, and the top scoring peptide is assigned to the spectrum. the pair consisting of an observed spectrum and a peptide sequence is referred to as a peptide-spectrum match (psm).in this work, we show how trellises may be used to make this database search significantly more efficient and accurate. a trellis is a data structure capable of representing an exponential size collection of strings in polynomial space. trellises have been used to speed up inference in hidden markov models , dynamic bayesian networks (dbns) and dynamic graphical models (dgms;). in the context of ms/ms, we use a trellis to compactly represent the collection of candidate peptides associated with an observed fragmentation spectrum, i.e. peptides whose masses are close to the observed peptide mass associated with the spectrum. using the trellis allows for the sharing of computation across candidate peptides. we describe how to apply trellises to any scoring function expressible as a dgm. this includes linear scoring functions such as the sequest xcorr , the score functions employed by x!tandem , morpheus , ms-gf and omssa , as well non-linear methods such as our recently proposed dbn for rapid identification of peptides (drip;). for common ms/ms application settings, we prove and quantify the extent to which, in expectation, determining the top scoring data instance in a trellis is substantially more efficient than scoring each data instance individually. we then demonstrate empirically that trellises provide a significant reduction in the computational costs of the xcorr and drip scoring functions, ranging from 12-to 16-fold speedups in the low-resolution and high-resolution datasets examined here. next, we show that trellises may be used to discriminatively train dbns for ms/ms, leading to significantly improved peptide identification accuracy. in particular, we modify the drip model, which was originally trained via maximum likelihood estimation, to instead employ discriminative training via maximum mutual information (mmi) estimation . maximum likelihood estimation maximizes the log-likelihood given a set of high-confidence psms, whereas mmi estimation maximizes the conditional log-likelihood between the highconfidence psms and a large background collection of alternative psms. thus, mmi estimation encourages learned parameters which both explain the high-confidence labels well and discriminate against the background labels. however, mmi estimation is costly because it requires computing denominator quantities over whole sets of peptides before being able to take a single gradient step in the parameter space; this is infeasible if considering each peptide in the set individually. we demonstrate that using trellises renders the discriminative training procedure feasible. furthermore, we present empirical evidence that this discriminative approach significantly improves identification accuracy relative to the generatively trained drip model (section 7.2), resulting in 11.2 and 6.2 more correct identifications at a stringent false discovery rate (fdr) of 0.5 for two datasets. the general trellis-based discriminative training procedure used herein is applicable to any dgm for any class of problem, but we are unaware of any previous work that does this. the article is organized as follows. in section 2, we formally define the spectrum identification problem and introduce the two database search scoring functions, xcorr and drip. we then define trellises in section 3, which we utilize to compress the theoretical spectra of candidate peptides to be scored during database search. we show how graphical models may be used to efficiently traverse elements in a trellis (section 3.3), enabling easy combination with any scoring function represented as a graphical model. thus, in section 4, we show how the vastly different scoring functions, xcorr and drip, may be represented as graphical models. the combination of trellises with these graphical model scoring functions (section 5) allows for significantly faster database search (section 7.1). the highly compressed trellises allow feasible discriminative training for drip (section 6), providing significantly more accurate peptide identification accuracy (section 7.2).a significant challenge in evaluating the quality of a spectrum identification algorithm is the absence of a ground truth dataset where the generating peptide is known for each observed spectrum. we, therefore, follow the standard approach of using decoy peptides (which in our case correspond to randomly shuffled versions of each real target peptide) to estimate the number of incorrect identifications in a given set of identified spectra. in this work, targets and decoys are scored separately and used to estimate the number of identified matches at a particular fdr, i.e. the fraction of spectra improperly identified at a given significance threshold. we estimate fdr using the target-only variant of target-decoy competition, ttdc . because the fdr is not monotonic with respect to the underlying score, we instead use the q-value, defined to be the minimum fdr threshold at which a given score is deemed to be significant. since datasets containing more than 10 incorrect identifications are generally not practically useful, we only plot qvalues in the range 0; 0:1.we have proven that, for many practical settings, the expected runtime when using a trellis with beam pruning for viterbi decoding is significantly faster than considering sequences independently. we have also empirically shown that trellises may be used to significantly improve the speed and accuracy of peptide identification in tandem mass spectrometry. using the drip model and a dbn implementation of xcorr, we have shown how to apply trellises to dramatically speed up inference (6-to 15-fold), both for lowresolution and high-resolution precursor mass spectra. we further note that the algorithmic speedup afforded by using trellises may, in future work, be combined with previous work on improving xcorr runtime, which focused on constant-factor improvements . we also note that trellises constructed from peptides with variable modifications can be potentially more efficient as variable modifications produce a lot redundancy among peptides. our ms/ms trellises support traversing all subsequences of a data instance, allowing jumps over whole subsequences, a novel feature in contrast to traditional trellises (such as those used for speech recognition), which only allow data instances to be sequentially traversed. as in drip, where jumps correspond to deletions, this feature may be used to model noise or missing data. furthermore, the jump feature enriches the hypothesis space representation, allowing more sophisticated models to be expressed and evaluated efficiently. with this feature and the ability to compactly represent entire sets of peptides, we have extended drips learning framework to discriminative training, significantly improving its performance relative to previous training strategies. in future work, we plan to further explore using trellises for improved ms/ms identification. using trellises to efficiently evaluate and score peptides beyond those in the given database, we will investigate ways to take thresholds with respect to dbn-based scoring functions to compute p-values, similar to the p-value calculations done via dynamic programming by ms-gf and xcorr p-value. by improving score calibration, we expect this approach to greatly improve drips performance.  
