systems biology fastgapfill: efficient gap filling in metabolic networks motivation: genome-scale metabolic reconstructions summarize current knowledge about a target organism in a structured manner and as such highlight missing information. such gaps can be filled algorithmically. scalability limitations of available algorithms for gap filling hinder their application to compartmentalized reconstructions. results: we present fastgapfill, a computationally efficient tractable extension to the cobra toolbox that permits the identification of candidate missing knowledge from a universal biochemical reaction database (e.g. kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes) for a given (compartmentalized) metabolic reconstruction. the stoichiomet-ric consistency of the universal reaction database and of the metabolic reconstruction can be tested for permitting the computation of biologically more relevant solutions. we demonstrate the efficiency and scalability of fastgapfill on a range of metabolic reconstructions. availability and implementation: fastgapfill is freely available from http://thielelab.eu.a biomolecular network reconstruction summarizes biochemical, physiological and genomic knowledge in a mathematically structured electronic format . it can be converted into a computational model, and predictions have been used to accelerate biotechnological and biomedical discoveries . the predictive capacity and accuracy of a model depend on the comprehensiveness and biochemical fidelity of the reconstruction, with respect to the underlying biochemistry. the comprehensiveness of a genome-scale metabolic reconstruction can be improved by using the model to detect and fill network gaps . similarly, reconstruction fidelity can be improved by using the model to detect reconstruction stoichiometry inconsistent with biochemistry or reactions inconsistent with steady state flux . existing gap-filling algorithms, reviewed by orth and palsson (2010), become intractable in high dimensions. decompartmentalization of genome-scale compartmentalized metabolic networks reduces their dimension, rendering gap filling tractable . however, this approach underestimates the amount of missing information because it connects reactions that would normally not co-occur in the same cellular compartment. we present fastgapfill, the first scalable algorithm capable of efficiently detecting and filling network gaps in compartmentalized genome-scale models. fastgapfill draws on, and extends, fastcore , an algorithm to approximate the cardinality function to identify a compact flux consist ent model, in which all reactions carry a non-zero flux in at least one flux distribution. fastgapfill allows integrating all three notions of model consistency, namely, gap-filling, flux consistency and stoichiometric consistency in a single tool.  
