fast integration-based prediction bands for ordinary differential equation models motivation: to gain a deeper understanding of biological processes and their relevance in disease, mathematical models are built upon experimental data. uncertainty in the data leads to uncertainties of the models parameters and in turn to uncertainties of predictions. mechanistic dynamic models of biochemical networks are frequently based on nonlinear differential equation systems and feature a large number of parameters, sparse observations of the model components and lack of information in the available data. due to the curse of dimensionality, classical and sampling approaches propagating parameter uncertainties to predictions are hardly feasible and insufficient. however, for experimental design and to discriminate between competing models, prediction and confidence bands are essential. to circumvent the hurdles of the former methods, an approach to calculate a profile likelihood on arbitrary observations for a specific time point has been introduced, which provides accurate confidence and prediction intervals for nonlinear models and is computationally feasible for high-dimensional models. results: in this article, reliable and smooth point-wise prediction and confidence bands to assess the models uncertainty on the whole time-course are achieved via explicit integration with elaborate correction mechanisms. the corresponding system of ordinary differential equations is derived and tested on three established models for cellular signalling. an efficiency analysis is performed to illustrate the computational benefit compared with repeated profile likelihood calculations at multiple time points. availability and implementation: the integration framework and the examples used in this article are provided with the software package data2dynamics, which is based on matlab and freely available at http://www.data2dynamics.org.one major task in systems biology is to infer knowledge about biological processes via mathematical representations of the underlying biochemical reactions. at the beginning, information given in experimental data is exploited to build a suitable model, either biologydriven or by reverse-engineering algorithms . an important step of this process is the model selection. for this purpose, reliable confidence intervals on the models of choice are crucial. subsequently, predictions about the models unobserved components or extrapolation to different experimental conditions are desired. in systems biology, mechanistic models based on ordinary differential equations (odes), i.e. where each model component has a biological process as counterpart, are frequently used to describe the dynamics of biological interactions. thus, calculation of confidence intervals typically has to deal with nonlinear, stiff ode systems with a large number of parameters and v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com sparse observations of the model components. in the case of linear models, propagation of uncertainties is well studied. yet, in odes, parameter transformations to link the model responses linearly to its parameters are in general not achievable. as a consequence, the classical approach based on fisher-information is insufficient. alternatively, sampling approaches like markov chain monte carlo can be applied to infer knowledge about the model behaviour through dense sampling of the parameter subspace which is in agreement with the measured data. nevertheless, a dense sampling is not feasible for high-dimensional spaces, known as curse of dimensionality . in addition, prior information which is essential for some sampling methods is normally not given in the context of biochemical models, which often results in a weakly confined parameter space from which samples have to be taken. to remedy these deficiencies, the validation and prediction profile likelihood for arbitrary model observables have been introduced in, based on theoretical foundations made in hinkley (1979) and bjornstad (1990). while the prediction profile likelihood determines confidence intervals on the model response, the validation profile likelihood includes the noise of a potential validation measurement. both are generated without sampling of a high-dimensional space. instead, the one-dimensional model prediction space is evaluated and parameters are computed via penalized maximum likelihood estimation. thereby, an efficient and reliable propagation of uncertainties from the experimental data to the model response is accomplished and predictions as well as confidence intervals are attained. in this study, we exploit that prediction intervals (pis) for different time points are connected through an implicit function. this enables us to calculate a fast approximation of point-wise prediction bands (pbs) for a certain confidence level. the term point-wise will be omitted from here on. to obtain pbs, a system of odes for the time propagation of a specified point on the validation profile will be derived and a dedicated explicit integration scheme is applied together with elaborate correction mechanisms. in contrast to pbs, which includes the uncertainty of an additional measurement , point-wise confidence bands (cbs) represent the uncertainty of the current model, only. to deduce the latter, pbs can be calculated for the limit case of a decreasing uncertainty of the additional measurement, r ! 0 . the presented method is tested and verified on three established models for cellular signalling, published inand bachmann et al. (2011).one of the main purposes of mathematical modelling is to acquire knowledge about the outcome of perturbed experimental conditions or not yet measured model components, which includes arbitrary functions like the integral of time courses, total concentrations or the recurrence time after stimulation. this constitutes a challenging task for large non-linear models with sparse observations, as they typically arise in biological applications. sampling approaches like mcmc have serious drawbacks in this setup due to the curse of dimensionality. they are feasible within low parameter dimensions or if appropriate prior knowledge is present. in contrast, models in systems biology often possess non-identifiable parameters where the search space is weakly confined. the nonlinearity also hampers translation of one-dimensional parameter profiles into pbs . thereby, the trajectories associated to the optimized parameter sets for each point on the parameter profiles (see equation 6) are utilized. subsequently, the envelopes of these trajectories constitute an approximation of the pbs. yet the uncertainty is in general underestimated, because comprehensive sampling of the model prediction space is not guaranteed by evaluation along onedimensional parameter manifolds (see section 2.1). to resolve the mentioned impediments, a new approach based on re-optimization of the likelihood with a varying constraint or an auxiliary data point was introduced in. therein, the one-dimensional prediction space is evaluated to directly infer the prediction and confidence intervals from the measured data. apart from a constraint on the model response, the confidence interval can be obtained through decreasing the standard deviation of the auxiliary data point , too. as a result, pbs can be obtained by interpolation between pis for multiple time points. in this article, a fast integration method based on the validation profile likelihood approach is developed in order to attain accurate pbs. the integration starts from an arbitrary point in time on the corresponding pi, e.g. the 95 thresholds for t 0, leading to the 95 pbs for the observable of interest. in the context of statistical testing, the pbs enclosing the confidence region control the probability of errors of type 1, hence they specify the probability that a single validation measurement at a specific time point is within the interval. if pbs with high precision are desired, the integration procedure can be performed coupled with a correction at every step. thereby, robust and precise pbs, still faster than distinct validation profile likelihood computations, are achieved. the superiority originates from the relationship between two adjacent time points, expressed in equation (11) and because only the auxiliary data point on the specified confidence level a is required. in contrast, the validation profile likelihood approach provides a number of possible validation measurements with their corresponding v 2 value, which can be used to compute pis to arbitrary confidence levels a. the efficiency advantage compared with distinct validation profiles is eliminated when only a rough estimate of the pbs is desired, or when the linear taylor approximation of the required sensitivities breaks down or requires a very small step size. in addition, the methods mentioned above can be faster and still reliable if the model is in the so-called asymptotic setting and behaves approximately linear . an explicit integration scheme was chosen for the integration of pbs, since the computation of second derivatives arising within the jacobian matrix of the right-hand side of equation (11b) is not efficient. to circumvent the latter, automatic differentiation was carried out for comparison, yet it was significantly slower compared with the implemented explicit integration followed by elaborate correction mechanisms. the scope of pis is to provide a powerful tool for experimental design and model selection as well as to determine observability of different model components. through integration, pbs are available for the whole time span of an observable. the latter comprises experimentally measured conditions as well as extrapolation to new experimental conditions and new arbitrary functions of both, e.g. ratios or sums. in addition, availability of smooth pbs provides new possibilities for those functions, like the duration for the recurrence to the initial (steady-state) concentration or the area under the curve. the information provided by pbs can also be included in reverse engineering algorithms for the inference of ode systems, e.g. for the description of gene regulatory networks via genetic programming . for this purpose, the observability and width of pbs for specified model components can be included in the applied fitness functions . for the special case of fixed model parameters, the width of the pbs will be exclusively determined by the uncertainty r of the auxiliary data point, i.e. the penalty term in equation (7). therefore, 2 r provides a lower bound to the width of pbs for a 95. for experimental design and the improvement of model observability, regions with pi ) 2 r indicate that the current model exhibits vast uncertainty there. in such a case, a measurement would provide additional information for reducing parameter and prediction uncertainties. on the contrary, a pi approaching its minimum characterizes an informative observable to discriminate the current from alternative model structures.precise integration labels an integration with initiated correction at every step. the respective models are published inthe propagation of parameter uncertainties to model predictions is non-trivial for large, non-linear models. yet besides systems biology, various areas in science apply computer-aided simulations based on large non-linear differential equations to study a systems behaviour. all attempts to attain model prediction uncertainties are hampered by the curse of dimensionality and a weakly confined parameter space. also, the non-linear dependence of parameters results in an arbitrarily complex shape of confidence regions for parameter estimates, which cannot be translated into pis through error propagation. to elude sampling of a high-dimensional parameter space, the validation profile likelihood approach was introduced in kreutz et al. (2012) to compute data-based pis. thereby, statistically accurate pis are obtained by continuous variation of an auxiliary data point, whereby parameters are re-optimized. in this article, reliable and smooth pbs over time are achieved via integration techniques with elaborate correction mechanisms, which detect non-observabilities of the model during the integration. the idea is related to the validation profile likelihood and takes the auxiliary data point at the threshold of a specified confidence level a as starting point. by decreasing the error of the data point, the integrated pbs converge into cbs. the efficiency and applicability of the integration method was successfully demonstrated on three established ode models for cellular signalling. the results of the validation profile likelihood approach for distinct time points were reproduced and an accurate integration could be executed roughly five times faster. the introduced approach helps to resolve a main impediment in current applications of system biology, namely an accurate and efficient computation of pbs and cbs, which help to perform experimental design, model selection and network inference through e.g. reverse engineering. the presented framework and the examples used in this article are available within the software package data2dynamics , which is matlab based, open source and freely available at http://www.data2dynamics.org. further instructions to execute the presented framework therein are given in supplementary section s3.  
