fast metabolite identification with input output kernel regression motivation: an important problematic of metabolomics is to identify metabolites using tandem mass spectrometry data. machine learning methods have been proposed recently to solve this problem by predicting molecular fingerprint vectors and matching these fingerprints against existing molecular structure databases. in this work we propose to address the metabolite identification problem using a structured output prediction approach. this type of approach is not limited to vector output space and can handle structured output space such as the molecule space. results: we use the input output kernel regression method to learn the mapping between tandem mass spectra and molecular structures. the principle of this method is to encode the similarities in the input (spectra) space and the similarities in the output (molecule) space using two kernel functions. this method approximates the spectra-molecule mapping in two phases. the first phase corresponds to a regression problem from the input space to the feature space associated to the output kernel. the second phase is a preimage problem, consisting in mapping back the predicted output feature vectors to the molecule space. we show that our approach achieves state-of-the-art accuracy in metabolite identification. moreover, our method has the advantage of decreasing the running times for the training step and the test step by several orders of magnitude over the preceding methods.metabolomics is a science which concerns the study of small molecules, called metabolites, and their interactions in the cell. an important problem of metabolomics is the identification of the metabolites present in a sample. information on metabolites can be obtained using tandem mass spectrometry. this technology allows to obtain a tandem mass spectrum, also called ms/ms spectrum, by fragmenting a compound. a ms/ms spectrum is a plot containing a set of peaks, where each peak corresponds to a fragment. these peaks represent the relative abundance of the different fragments, also called intensity, in function of their mass-to-charge ratio. the identification of the metabolite from its mass spectrum is then needed for a more detailed biological interpretation. in general this step consists in a research of the obtained spectrum in databases of reference spectra, followed by an analysis by experts of the domain. computational approaches for interpreting and predicting ms/ ms data of small molecules date back to the 1960s . however, the early approaches were hampered by the unavailability of large scale data on molecular structures as well as reference spectra. the introduction of molecular structure databases such as pubchem as well as open mass spectral reference databases (da) has in recent years fuelled the development of novel methods. several novel strategies have been proposed, including simulation of mass spectra from molecular structure , combinatorial fragmentation and prediction of molecular fingerprints . methods based on machine learning (we evaluated and compared our approach on a subset of 4138 ms/ ms spectra extracted from the gnps (global natural products social) public spectral library (https://gnps.ucsd.edu/proteosafe/ libraries.jsp) in d hrkop et al. (2015).in this article, we have proposed for the first time to solve the metabolite identification problem using a structured output prediction method, namely iokr. we have shown that our method improves the metabolite identification rate comparing to competing methods with considerable shorter running time, in practise allowing training the models on a single computer instead of a large computing cluster. in addition, the structured output approach provides a more streamlinedand thus more easy to maintainone-step prediction pipeline, as opposed to two-step pipelines of csi:fingerid and fingerid which call for predicting and scoring fingerprints as an intermediate step.. heatmap of the percentage of correctly identified metabolites (top 1) with iokr. the rows correspond to the different output kernels built on fingerprints (linear, polynomial and gaussian) and the columns to the 24 input kernels derived from spectra and fragmentation trees, as well as the two multiple kernel combination schemes alignf and unimklfor future work, the most important direction is to address the prediction of the dark matter in metabolomics (da): the metabolites that fall outside the compounds in molecular structure databases. there, we need to design better kernels and preimage algorithms for molecular structures. finally, it is important to note that the recent breakthroughs in machine learning methodologies for metabolite identification rely heavily on the existence off community efforts building open reference databases such as gnps and massbank. at the same time, the reference databases still cover a small fraction of relevant metabolite space. although machine learning can generalize and extrapolate beyond the training data, as also shown in this article, the scarceness of training data still imposes limits on how accurate models can be built. to really push metabolomics forward, we should widen and make more systematic the community efforts in building and utilizing reference databases.. identified metabolites with iokr in function of the size of candidate sets. we considered the candidate sets of size smaller than 8000, which corresponds to 98.8 of the sets, and divided them in 30 bins according to their sizes. (a) indicates the number of test metabolites that have a candidate set size in the corresponding size bin. the percentage of metabolites that are ranked in top 1 position, top 10 or above is shown on the (b) for the test metabolites falling in each size bin. scatter plot of classes in chebi ontology with shortest paths of length 7 from the class chemical entity. x-axis corresponds to the median number of candidates associated with the compounds in each class and y-axis to the proportion of correct compounds with rank less or equal to 10 for each class. the size of the point is proportional to the number of compounds in gnps dataset that belong to that class and we only show classes with at least 10 compounds. the classes we can identify well are shown in red and the classes we cannot are shown in blue with chebi id and name next to themmetabolite identification with iokr i35  
