genetics and population analysis fast pairwise ibd association testing in genome-wide association studies motivation: recently, investigators have proposed state-of-the-art identity-by-descent (ibd) mapping methods to detect ibd segments between purportedly unrelated individuals. the ibd information can then be used for association testing in genetic association studies. one approach for this ibd association testing strategy is to test for excessive ibd between pairs of cases (pairwise method). however, this approach is inefficient because it requires a large number of permutations. moreover, a limited number of permutations define a lower bound for p-values, which makes fine-mapping of associated regions difficult because, in practice, a much larger genomic region is implicated than the region that is actually associated. results: in this article, we introduce a new pairwise method fast-pairwise. fast-pairwise uses importance sampling to improve efficiency and enable approximation of extremely small p-values. fast-pairwise method takes only days to complete a genome-wide scan. in the application to the wtccc type 1 diabetes data, fast-pairwise successfully fine-maps a known human leukocyte antigen gene that is known to cause the disease.identity by descent (ibd) is a fundamental concept in genetics. two individuals are ibd at a locus if they have identical alleles inherited from a common ancestor. investigators have put tremendous efforts to map the ibd segments between purportedly unrelated individuals . the current state-of-the-art methods such as germline and beagle can detect even small (several megabases) ibd segments shared between individuals. one promising application of ibd mapping is to use discovered ibd segments in the association testing . investigators usually test single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) for association, but snps may not tag low frequency causal variations well . imputation also performs poorly on rare variants . association testing based on the ibd information, or ibd association testing, can complement standard association testing methods . there are two categories of ibd association testing method. the first method is the pairwise method , where one compares the ibd rate of case/case pairs with the background ibd rate to detect excessive ibd between cases. the rationale is that if a rare causal variation has occurred in a relatively recent ancestor, cases will likely share an ibd segment containing the causal variant. the second method is the clustering method , where one divides individuals into clusters based on the ibd information and then test each cluster for association assuming the cluster tags a rare causal variation. in this article, we focus on the pairwise method. the pairwise method has two computational challenges. the first challenge is computational efficiency. in the pairwise method, one uses permutation to approximate p-values because it is difficult to analytically obtain the asymptotic distribution of the statistic. because the p-value threshold for genome-wide association studies (gwas) is necessarily low due to multiple testing , one must perform a large number of permutations, which can be computationally demanding. the second challenge is fine-mapping. after one identifies significant loci, it is important to pinpoint the most significant peak within the loci to further follow up candidate genes. the permutation is limited for this purpose because the smallest p-value it can approximate is constrained by the number to whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. of permutations, often resulting in many snps having the same minimal p-values in the region. in this article, we present a new method, fast-pairwise, to overcome the computational challenges of the traditional pairwise method. fast-pairwise uses importance sampling to improve efficiency and to enable approximation of extremely small p-value. to devise an importance sampling procedure, we introduce a new statistic that has two properties; it can approximate the pairwise method statistic, and it can be conveniently used for designing a sampling procedure. we show that the new statistic has a close relationship with the pairwise method statistic through the properties of the graph representation of ibd. fast-pairwise is efficient and takes only days to complete a genome-wide scan. to demonstrate the utility in fine-mapping, we apply our method to the type 1 diabetes dataset of the wellcome trust case control consortium (2007). in this dataset, the traditional pairwise method can identify a significant region in chromosome 6 , but it gives the same minimal p-value for a wide region (26.735.5 mb), including all eight classical human leukocyte antigen (hla) genes. among these, fast-pairwise pinpoints hladqb1, which is known to cause the disease . fast-pairwise is publicly available at http://genetics.cs.ucla. edu/graphibd.we have developed a new efficient method for pairwise ibd association testing called fast-pairwise. fast-pairwise uses importance sampling and can perform the pairwise method more efficiently than the traditional method based on permutation. moreover, unlike permutation, fast-pairwise can approximate extremely small p-values beyond the genome-wide threshold. using the wtccc type 1 diabetes data, we show that fastpairwise can successfully pinpoint a gene known to be associated to the disease within the mhc region. the true utility of the ibd association testing is on finding novel loci where there are potentially multiple rare variants that cannot be found using single snp tests . an important advantage of ibd association testing is its wide applicability. the analysis can be performed using the same genotype data collected for single snp tests without incurring additional cost. for this reason, we feel that many investigators will apply our method to search for these additional loci bearing rare causal variants. what is preventing researchers from applying this approach is an efficient method for ibd association testing, which we provide in this article. we expect that a b c. accuracy of importance sampling. in simulations using the hapmap encode region, we assess the p-values of pairwise (cn) method using both the standard permutation and fast-pairwise (importance sampling). we compare 10 000 samples of fast-pairwise to (a) 10 000, (b) 100 000, and (c) 1 000 000 permutations. the vertical dashed line denotes the lower bound of p-value that permutation can approximate given the number of permutations. the dots along the vertical line denote the simulations where none of the permutations exceeds the observed statistic, and therefore the lower bound of p-value is reported by the permutation test. the triangles in (c) are the p-values that we performed extra permutations (410 6 ) our new method will promote the wide use of ibd association testing and facilitate further research on the power and utilities of ibd association testing.  
