fast protein binding site comparisons using visual words representation motivation: finding geometrically similar protein binding sites is crucial for understanding protein functions and can provide valuable information for proteinprotein docking and drug discovery. as the number of known proteinprotein interaction structures has dramatically increased, a high-throughput and accurate protein binding site comparison method is essential. traditional alignment-based methods can provide accurate correspondence between the binding sites but are computationally expensive. results: in this article, we present a novel method for the comparisons of protein binding sites using a visual words representation (pbsword). we first extract geometric features of binding site surfaces and build a vocabulary of visual words by clustering a large set of feature descriptors. we then describe a binding site surface with a high-dimensional vector that encodes the frequency of visual words, enhanced by the spatial relationships among them. finally, we measure the similarity of binding sites by utilizing metric space operations, which provide speedy comparisons between protein binding sites. our experimental results show that pbsword achieves a comparable classification accuracy to an alignment-based method and improves accuracy of a feature-based method by 36 on a non-redundant dataset. pbsword also exhibits a significant efficiency improvement over an alignment-based method. availability: pbsword is available atproteinprotein interaction, as an essential aspect of biological processes, plays a significant role in determining protein functions and forming protein complexes. the protein complexes consist of multiple subunits (domains or chains) that interact via protein protein interfaces (ppis)). the ppis are composed of geometrically and physicochemically complementary binding sites from the respective subunits. in a protein complex, each binding site corresponds to a to whom correspondence should be addressed. region of residues that are in close spatial proximity and can interact with residues from another subunit. with the development of high-throughput experimental techniques (e.g. yeast-two-hybrid screens), the size of data repositories of proteinprotein interactions has dramatically increased, which makes a comprehensive understanding of the protein interaction network feasible . several proteinprotein interactionrelated databases have been constructed, such as scoppi , pibase , intact , ipfam and dommino . particularly, the scoppi database provides an evolutionary and structural classification of ppis based on scop family , sequence similarity and geometric features of binding sites. to analyze the proteinprotein interaction mechanisms, an efficient method for comparing protein binding sites is an indispensible tool, with a potential impact on protein function prediction, proteinprotein docking, drug discovery and evolutionary studies . methods for comparing the protein binding sites can be generally classified into two categories: (i) alignment-based and (ii) featurebased. early research works on alignment-based methods focused on comparing binding sites by aligning the corresponding c atoms from different protein complexes using global structural alignment tools . this group of methods works well when sequence and structure are well conserved. however, as shown in an earlier work , the limitation of global protein structure alignment is that it cannot usually produce accurate interface alignment since the true interface may not be the first priority for a global structure alignment method. to overcome this issue, ialign was developed to align the residues from ppis . another method, i2isiteengine, supports alignment of two binding sites based on the similarity of physicochemical properties and the shapes of surfaces . the alignment-based methods can provide accurate correspondence between two binding sites but are usually computationally expensive, which makes them infeasible when working with very large datasets. feature-based methods, on the other hand, make comparison based on feature descriptor, which may be structural and/or geometric properties of the binding site. typically, the structural descriptors are distributions of distances between different types of functional atoms of the binding sites , whereas the geometric descriptors include spin-image (merellithe inputs include a query binding site and a database of binding sites. the outputs are similarity scores between the query and the database binding sites. for each binding site, geometric features are extracted and assigned to the nearest visual word from a vocabulary which is generated by a huge set of features collected from the entire database. thus, each binding site can be represented by a histogram of occurrence of visual words. two binding sites can be compared by the similarity of two visual words vectors. a color version of this figure is available as supplementary), 3d-zernike , shape distribution , moment invariants and many others . after generating surface features, two binding sites can be compared using various metric functions in the feature space to perform high-throughput surface comparisons without explicit alignments. existing featurebased methods mainly focus on proteinligand binding sites, which have not been extensively applied or evaluated on proteinprotein binding site classification and related applications. this is important as proteinprotein binding sites are known to have some unique characteristics, such as relatively large areas and flat binding site surfaces . to deal with very large datasets, one can employ the classic method from the information retrieval area of comparing the similarity between word frequency profiles of two documents, which has been successfully utilized in web search engines. recently, this idea has been extended to the matching and retrieval of 3d objects , in which a word is represented by a cluster of similar features. in the bioinformatics area, this technique has been applied in the alignment-free genome sequence comparisons and in the retrieval of similar protein structures . in this article, we further extend the text comparison method and propose a novel approach, pbsword, for characterizing protein binding sites with a collection of visual words such that similar binding sites from the database can be efficiently and accurately identified. we conduct experiments to evaluate the performance of pbsword-based classification and retrieval of protein binding sites. the experimental results show that pbsword can achieve comparable performance to an alignment-based method, ialign, and significantly outperforms a feature-based method using moment invariant descriptors . more importantly, comparing pbsword vectors is orders of magnitude faster than the alignment-based methods. thus, pbsword can be used to quickly identify geometrically similar candidates of a query protein binding site from a large dataset.to demonstrate the significance of this work, we compare the performance to current methods in terms of accuracy and efficiency. the current methods include an alignment-based method, ialign , which is designed for ppi comparison based on the local substructures of subunits, and a feature-based method, mi , which describes the geometric shape of a binding site using a feature vector based on moment invariants. we apply pbsword, ialign and mi to a non-redundant dataset from scoppi to evaluate classification and retrieval performance for proteinprotein binding sites. during the experiment, a query dataset is selected and used to retrieve similar binding sites from the entire database. to evaluate classification accuracy, we use a general metric, the correct classification rate (ccr), which is defined as follows:in addition, for each query, we identify the top results whose scoppi group matches the querys group. the ranks of these top results are then accumulated with summary statistics reported.we also use the auc (area under curve) in the roc (receiver operator characteristics) curve to measure how well each method identifies the other binding sites from the querys group. an auc of 1.0 would correspond to perfect classification, which would rank the binding sites from the same group as the querys before all other binding sites, whereas an auc of 0.5 would be expected for a random classifier.  
