fast randomization of large genomic datasets while preserving alteration counts motivation: studying combinatorial patterns in cancer genomic data-sets has recently emerged as a tool for identifying novel cancer driver networks. approaches have been devised to quantify, for example, the tendency of a set of genes to be mutated in a mutually exclusive manner. the significance of the proposed metrics is usually evaluated by computing p-values under appropriate null models. to this end, a monte carlo method (the switching-algorithm) is used to sample simulated datasets under a null model that preserves patient-and gene-wise mutation rates. in this method, a genomic dataset is represented as a bipartite network, to which markov chain updates (switching-steps) are applied. these steps modify the network topology, and a minimal number of them must be executed to draw simulated datasets independently under the null model. this number has previously been deducted empirically to be a linear function of the total number of variants, making this process computationally expensive. results: we present a novel approximate lower bound for the number of switching-steps, derived analytically. additionally, we have developed the r package birewire, including new efficient implementations of the switching-algorithm. we illustrate the performances of birewire by applying it to large real cancer genomics datasets. we report vast reductions in time requirement, with respect to existing implementations/bounds and equivalent p-value computations. thus, we propose birewire to study statistical properties in genomic data-sets, and other data that can be modeled as bipartite networks. availability and implementation: birewire is available on bioconductor atin the past few years, next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies have progressed swiftly, and currently hundreds of genomes can be simultaneously sequenced in a matter of weeks, at more affordable costs. this opens a wide range of new avenues in biological and biomedical research. in particular, because of the established impact of the genomic background on disease progression and response to drug treatment, cancer research has significantly benefited from these advances. comprehensive catalogues of mutations in multiple cancer types have been assembled and fruitfully used to identify new diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic targets . existing large-scale projects, such as the cancer genome atlas (tcga;), the international cancer genome consortium data portal and, recently, the genomics of drug sensitivity in cancer and the cancer cell line encyclopedia , provide invaluable opportunities to explore molecular alterations that could potentially play a crucial role in a plethora of different cancer types and their response to therapy . a key task in these projects is to distinguish between driver mutations (i.e. those conferring selective clonal growth advantage) and functionally neutral passenger mutations (which do not contribute to tumour development) . once key driver mutated genes are identified, a fruitful analysis is to consider them in the context of the pathways where they operate. this allows the identification of cancer driver biological networks, whose altered functionality results in the acquisition of a cancer hallmark . one of the ideas exploited to identify these networks is based on the assumption that sets of mutations exhibiting statistically significant levels of mutual exclusivity (me) are likely to alter genes involved in a common biological process that drives cancer development. it has been noted that driver mutations in cancer occur in a limited number of pathways and driver lesions in the same pathway do not tend to occur in the same patient . a possible biological explanation is that if a crucial node is altered in an oncogenic pathway, a secondary mutation on the same pathway is unlikely to provide further selective advantage to the cancer cell, thus it does not tend to be selected during somatic evolution. hence, sets of mutations exhibiting statistically significant levels of me are likely to alter genes involved in a common biological process that drives cancer development. on the other hand, mutations of genes participating in different biological pathways may exert a synergistic effect in conferring growth advantages to tumour cells. therefore, investigations have been devoted to searching for groups of genes that are simultaneously mutated more often than expected by random chance . to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
