sequence analysis fast scaffolding with small independent mixed integer programs motivation: assembling genomes from short read data has become increasingly popular, but the problem remains computationally challenging especially for larger genomes. we study the scaffolding phase of sequence assembly where preassembled contigs are ordered based on mate pair data. results: we present mip scaffolder that divides the scaffolding problem into smaller subproblems and solves these with mixed integer programming. the scaffolding problem can be represented as a graph and the biconnected components of this graph can be solved independently. we present a technique for restricting the size of these subproblems so that they can be solved accurately with mixed integer programming. we compare mip scaffolder to two state of the art methods, sopra and sspace. mip scaffolder is fast and produces better or as good scaffolds as its competitors on large genomes. availability: the source code of mip scaffolder is freely available atpresent high-throughput sequencing machines can produce hundreds of millions of short reads in a single run. initially, this technology was targeted at resequencing applications but is nowadays also deployed in de novo sequencing projects. apart from single reads, the sequencing machines can also produce mate pairs, i.e. pairs of reads whose approximate distance in the target genome is known. although there are good methods to assemble reads produced by the older sanger technology, new approaches are needed to deal with data from the second-generation sequencing machines, because the characteristics of the data like read length and sequencing errors are different . in a de novo sequencing project, the read data is typically first quality trimmed and filtered to ensure high-quality data for subsequent processing. a method to correct sequencing errors may also be used. the next step is to assemble the reads into contigs, which are gapless sequences of nucleotides. in the last step, the contigs are ordered into scaffolds based on mate pair reads . here we consider the scaffolding problem. the input to the scaffolding problem is the contigs produced by a contig assembler, the mappings of the mate pair reads to the contigs and the insert to whom correspondence should be addressed. sizes of the mate pair libraries. the objective is to find a linear ordering of the contigs, which maximizes the number of mate pairs whose pairwise distance equals the insert size. in practise, a linear ordering of all the contigs is not achieved, because the data may be incomplete and the organism may have several chromosomes. instead each contig is assigned to a scaffold and given an orientation and position within the scaffold.have shown that even determining the orientation of the contigs is np-hard. therefore, all practical methods to solve the scaffolding problem use heuristics and achieve only an approximate solution. many assemblers like velvet , allpaths and soapdenovo contain a scaffolding module. some stand-alone scaffolders have also been developed. bambus is designed for sanger data, and sopra and sspace are developed for second-generation sequencing data. bambus and sspace are based on a greedy method, whereas sopra relies on statistical optimization and partitioning the scaffolding problem. our new approach uses a partitioning scheme similar to sopra but unlike sopra we restrict the size of the partitions and thus we can solve the subproblems exactly with mixed integer programming. the rest of the article is outlined as follows. in section 2, we present a theoretical framework for scaffolding based on mixed integer programming and partitioning the scaffolding problem. section 3 presents a practical implementation of this framework. we compare the new scaffolder to sopra and sspace in section 4. finally, we conclude in section 5.we have presented mip scaffolder which partitions the scaffolding problem into subproblems of restricted size and solves these subproblems exactly with mixed integer programming. we compared mip scaffolder to sopra and sspace on four datasets. on two of the datasets, mip scaffolder produced longer scaffolds that are not quite as accurate as those produced by the other two methods. for the human dataset, mip scaffolder produced slightly shorter but more accurate scaffolds than sspace and on the e.coli dataset sopra outperformed mip scaffolder. our experiments also showed that our approach is fast allowing the user to try out different parameter combinations easily to optimize for long scaffolds. it is also possible to optimize for accurate scaffolds if, for example, est data or the sequence of a close relative species can be used to measure the correctness of scaffolding.  
