genetics and population analysis fastsimcoal: a continuous-time coalescent simulator of genomic diversity under arbitrarily complex evolutionary scenarios motivation: genetic studies focus on increasingly larger genomic regions of both extant and ancient dna, and there is a need for simulation software to match these technological advances. we present here a new coalescent-based simulation program fastsimcoal, which is able to quickly simulate a variety of genetic markers scattered over very long genomic regions with arbitrary recombination patterns under complex evolutionary scenarios. availability and implementation: fastsimcoal is a c++ program compiled for windows, macosx and linux platforms. it is freely available at cmpg.unibe.ch/software/fastsimcoal/, together with its detailed user manual and example input files. contact:coalescent theory has revolutionized the field of population genetics by providing a very powerful and intuitive framework for the study of molecular diversity within and between species . it has also provided very efficient ways to simulate diversity under complex evolutionary scenarios . a variety of coalescent-based simulation programs have been developed in the past few years (e.g.), allowing one to generate genetic data much more quickly than with classical forward approaches [see e.g.for a review of recent coalescent and forward genetic simulators]. however, many standard simulation programs now have problems in generating polymorphisms over long genomic regions, like those now produced by new generation sequencing technologies (e.g.). in this article, we present fastsimcoal, a completely rewritten continuous-time implementation of simcoal2 , with a fast sequential markovian coalescent (smc) model for recombining dna sequences . fastsimcoal retains simcoal2 full flexibility in setting up complex demographic scenarios, arbitrary recombination distances between markers, arbitrary migration rates between populations and historical events. in addition, fastsimcoal allows users to specify the to whom correspondence should be addressed. sampling times of different population samples making it suitable for serial sampling  
