structural bioinformatics fast tomographic reconstruction on multicore computers tomo3d implements a multithreaded vectorized approach to tomographic reconstruction that takes full advantage of the computer power in modern multicore computers. full resolution tomograms are generated at high speed on standard computers with no special system requirements. tomo3d has the most common reconstruction methods implemented, namely weighted back-projection (wbp) and simultaneous iterative reconstruction technique (sirt). it proves to be competitive with current graphic processor unit solutions in terms of processing time, in the order of a few seconds with wbp or minutes with sirt. the program is compatible with standard packages, which easily allows integration in the electron tomography workflow.electron tomography (et) allows visualization of complex specimens in its native cellular context at near-molecular resolution . a series of projection images is taken with an electron microscope from a unique biological sample at different orientations around a single tilt axis. tomographic reconstruction algorithms then combine those images so as to derive the 3d structure of the specimen. the number of images in the series usually ranges from 60 to 200. due to the resolution needs, the image size generally ranges between 10241024 and 20482048 pixels, though 40964096 can now be used as well. weighted backprojection (wbp) is the standard reconstruction method. iterative methods, such as simultaneous iterative reconstruction technique (sirt), exhibit better performance in et . however, they demand much longer processing time, which has prevented their extensive use so far. the complexity of the algorithms along with the data size turns 3d reconstruction into a computational intensive problem. traditionally, high performance computing has been used to cope with the demands in et . recently, the use of graphics processor units (gpus) has revolutionized the field as they provide exceptional performance-to-cost ratio , though a relatively specific to whom correspondence should be addressed. hardware component, the gpu, is still necessary. current standalone computers present tremendous power, thanks to technological and architectural advances , but they still have not been fully exploited in the field. we present a program, tomo3d, that implements an approach to tomographic reconstruction based on the full use of the computational power within modern multicore computers. it takes advantage of the multiple cores and of the vector instructions within the cores, and also uses general code optimization techniques to make the most of the computers. the program significantly accelerates the 3d reconstruction methods wbp and sirt, and even outperforms current gpu solutions. furthermore, this program enables real-time tomography on standard multicore computers, without the need for clusters or gpus.the multithreaded-vectorized approach to tomographic reconstruction in tomo3d allows computation of full resolution tomograms at high speed on standard computers. there are no special system requirements to run the program and, furthermore, it is fully compatible with standard packages in the field. all these are the major contributions of tomo3d from the users point of view. the good performance of tomo3d stems from the full exploitation of the computing power latent in modern multicore computers. the processing time required by the methods implemented in tomo3d, wbp and sirt, turns out to be competitive with gpus.  
