feral: network-based classifier with application to breast cancer outcome prediction motivation: breast cancer outcome prediction based on gene expression profiles is an important strategy for personalize patient care. to improve performance and consistency of discovered markers of the initial molecular classifiers, network-based outcome prediction methods (nops) have been proposed. in spite of the initial claims, recent studies revealed that neither performance nor consistency can be improved using these methods. nops typically rely on the construction of meta-genes by averaging the expression of several genes connected in a network that encodes protein interactions or pathway information. in this article, we expose several fundamental issues in nops that impede on the prediction power, consistency of discovered markers and obscures biological interpretation. results: to overcome these issues, we propose feral, a network-based classifier that hinges upon the sparse group lasso which performs simultaneous selection of marker genes and training of the prediction model. an important feature of feral, and a significant departure from existing nops, is that it uses multiple operators to summarize genes into meta-genes. this gives the classi-fier the opportunity to select the most relevant meta-gene for each gene set. extensive evaluation revealed that the discovered markers are markedly more stable across independent datasets. moreover, interpretation of the marker genes detected by feral reveals valuable mechanistic insight into the etiology of breast cancer. availability and implementation: all code is available for download at: http://homepage.tudelft.nl/ 53a60/resources/feral/feral.zip.breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed type of cancer and one of the leading causes of death in women . the main cause of death in these patients is, however, not the primary tumor, but its metastases at distant sites (e.g. in bone, lung, liver and brain) . typical risk factors such as lymph node status and tumor size are insufficient to accurately predict the risk of metastasis in patients . over the last few years, substantial efforts have been made on deriving molecular classifiers to predict clinical outcome based on gene expression profiles obtained from the primary tumor (vant). a fundamental limitation of breast cancer outcome prediction is that it has proved very difficult to obtain a robust classifier performance across different datasets. it was found that, despite properly cross-validated classifier training, prediction performance decreases dramatically when a classifier trained on one dataset is applied to another one . moreover, the prognostic gene signatures identified using these classifiers have poor concordance across different studies . this points to a lack of a unified mechanism through which clinical outcome can be explained from gene expression profiles, which is still a major hurdle in clinical cancer biology. several studies ascribe the lack of classification robustness to insufficient patient sample size . other causes may be the inherent measurement noise in microarray experiments or heterogeneity in the samples . to mitigate these issues, breast cancer datasets are often v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.in this work, we proposed a network-based outcome prediction method feral that exploits network information in molecular classification of breast cancer outcome. our method deviates from traditional nops in two important aspects. first, feral includes several different integration strategies to construct meta-genes, including a novel supervised integration strategy. our results indicate that the final classification model frequently uses meta-genes produced by these constructors, often even multiple meta-genes based on the same gene set. this underscores the importance of extending traditional meta-genes based on a simple average. the second important improvement is that feral performs simultaneous selection and training of the classifier by employing the sgl. this mitigates the need for pre-ranking of genes and/or meta-genes, which is likely to severely reduce the stability of selected genes. feral reached a significant performance increase compared with all standard nops, including those that contained significant improvements made by us. this improvement was also obtained using a random network, leading to the conclusion that the biological knowledge encoded in the network is not used to obtain these improvements. the stability of marker genes improves substantially as a result of the procedure implemented in feral. this improvement was not observed when the random network was used, indicating that the biological knowledge contributes to the stability of the gene signatures. this improvement was exclusively observed for the ppi network and not for the co-expression network. because feral attains robust performance and stable marker gene selection, the selected genes and gene sets might reveal insight into the underlying aberrant processes that play a role in this complex disease. we find that almost all the gene sets used in the final model were enriched for cancer related processes. the four gene sets that were studied in more detail revealed very strong suggestive evidence for their involvement in breast cancer, with clear links to mapk, pi3k and akt signaling and regulation by stathmin1. in summary, although classification performance of breast cancer outcome obtained with nops is unlikely to improve beyond $70 auc, we have shown that feral achieves much more stable marker gene selection that enables valuable mechanistic insight into the etiology of breast cancer.  
