genome analysis filling annotation gaps in yeast genomes using genome-wide contact maps motivations: de novo sequencing of genomes is followed by annotation analyses aiming at identifying functional genomic features such as genes, non-coding rnas or regulatory sequences, taking advantage of diverse datasets. these steps sometimes fail at detecting non-coding functional sequences: for example, origins of replication, centromeres and rdna positions have proven difficult to annotate with high confidence. here, we demonstrate an unconventional application of chromosome conformation capture (3c) technique, which typically aims at deciphering the average 3d organization of genomes, by showing how functional information about the sequence can be extracted solely from the chromosome contact map. results: specifically, we describe a combined experimental and bio-informatic procedure that determines the genomic positions of centro-meres and ribosomal dna clusters in yeasts, including species where classical computational approaches fail. for instance, we determined the centromere positions in naumovozyma castellii, where these coordinates could not be obtained previously. although computed centromere positions were characterized by conserved synteny with neighboring species, no consensus sequences could be found, suggesting that centromeric binding proteins or mechanisms have significantly diverged. we also used our approach to refine centromere positions in kuraishia capsulata and to identify rdna positions in debaryomyces hansenii. our study demonstrates how 3c data can be used to complete the functional annotation of eukaryotic genomes. availability and implementation: the source code is provided in the supplementary material. this includes a zipped file with the python code and a contact matrix of saccharomycesde novo sequencing of genomes is typically followed by analyses aiming to identify functional genomic features such as genes, non-coding rnas or regulatory sequences. this important socalled annotation step raises non-trivial questions, and led to the development of complex bioinformatics approaches taking advantage of multiple datasets. for instance, transcriptome analysis is conveniently used to annotate expressed coding sequences , and synteny conservation between related species can reveal or confirm the presence of regulatory elements . complementary to automated annotation through comparative approaches, experimental approaches such as chip-seq or mnase-seq have been conveniently used to map epigenetic marks, replication origins or other functional elements of the genome . however, such tools are sometimes unable to detect noncoding functional sequences: for example, origins of replication, centromeres and rdna positions have sometimes proven difficult to annotate with a high degree of confidence in genomes. a compelling example is the failure of comparative genomics to identify the centromeres of the hemiascomycetes species naumovozyma castellii through comparative genomics . as another example, the number of rdna clusters in the genome of debaryomyces hansenii is not known precisely, but only estimated to lie between one and three and not currently annotated in the genomic sequence . genomic chromosome conformation capture (3c) assays measure the physical contact frequencies between dna sequences , providing important insights into both genomic organization and topological changes of chromatin domains that accompany cell differentiation or development. 3c data are typically analyzed in light of epigenetic marks and other genomic annotations. in an alternative application, 3d contact can be interpreted as an indicator of co-linearity of two dna segments, and was recently used to improve the scaffolding of the human genome (; kaplan and ythe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. to whom correspondence should be addressed.). here, we use genome-wide 3c data to unveil functional elements of eukaryotic genomes that escape comparative genomic analysis. specifically, we take advantage of nuclear architecture features to precisely determine the positions of centromeres in the yeast species n.castellii . we show that this bioinformatic approach discriminates ambiguous results from bioinformatics analysis, such as in k.capsulata. finally, it also allowed us to complete the annotation of rdna in the d.hansenii genome and confirm its centromere annotation .  
