data and text mining filtus: a desktop gui for fast and efficient detection of disease-causing variants, including a novel autozygosity detector filtus is a stand-alone tool for working with annotated variant files, e.g. when searching for variants causing mendelian disease. very flexible in terms of input file formats, filtus offers efficient filtering and a range of downstream utilities, including statistical analysis of gene sharing patterns, detection of de novo mutations in trios, quality control plots and autozygosity mapping. the autozygosity mapping is based on a hidden markov model and enables accurate detection of autozygous regions directly from exome-scale variant files. availability and implementation: filtus is written in python and runs on windows, mac and linux. binaries and source code are freely available atrecent years have seen a revolution in mendelian disease gene identification thanks to high-throughput sequencing (hts) methods, in particular whole-exome sequencing (wes). most of the released software for downstream analysis is aimed at bioinformatically trained users, thus posing a challenge for many medical researchers wanting to do hands-on analysis of hts data. to accommodate this, we introduce a program (filtus) offering advanced tools for identifying disease-causing variants in an easy-to-use graphical environment. several programs for manipulating variant files have been published, including varsifter and the web-based eva . in addition to efficient browsing and filtering, filtus offers several specialized analysis tools aimed at mendelian disease projects. these include statistical evaluation of variant sharing among patients, de novo detection in trios and autozygosity mapping. filtus accepts virtually any variant files, in contrast to most existing programs which are limited to variant call format (vcf) or other specific input formats. typical examples of non-standard formats are vcf files with additional columns, and files produced by annovar . although filtus is primarily intended for wes-scale data, whole-genome data can be analyzed by using the built-in prefiltering functionality. some countries have strict regulations requiring offline handling of all human sequencing data, thus making it impossible to use webbased tools or to download information during analysis. filtus is ideal for such working conditions, requiring no installation, being completely self-contained and offline. in summary, the main features of filtus include:  
