gene expression finding consistent disease subnetworks using pfsnet motivation: microarray data analysis is often applied to characterize disease populations by identifying individual genes linked to the disease. in recent years, efforts have shifted to focus on sets of genes known to perform related biological functions (i.e. in the same pathways). evaluating gene sets reduces the need to correct for false posi-tives in multiple hypothesis testing. however, pathways are often large, and genes in the same pathway that do not contribute to the disease can cause a method to miss the pathway. in addition, large pathways may not give much insight to the cause of the disease. moreover, when such a method is applied independently to two data-sets of the same disease phenotypes, the two resulting lists of significant pathways often have low agreement. results: we present a powerful method, pfsnet, that identifies smaller parts of pathways (which we call subnetworks), and show that significant subnetworks (and the genes therein) discovered by pfsnet are up to 51 (64) more consistent across independent datasets of the same disease phenotypes, even for datasets based on different platforms, than previously published methods. we further show that those methods which initially declared some large pathways to be insignificant would declare subnetworks detected by pfsnet in those large pathways to be significant, if they were given those sub-networks as input instead of the entire large pathways.discovering the mechanisms regulating a disease requires researchers to understand the cascade of events leading to a particular phenotype. these mechanisms are often depicted in biological pathways in the literature. while microarray technology provides researchers a glimpse of the underlying characteristics that differentiate phenotypese.g. normal samples versus diseased samplesit has been shown that methods for microarray analysis often produce results that are inconsistent and unreproducible when applied independently on independent datasets and, in some cases, are even no better than randomly produced gene signatures . clearly, a method that produces a higher agreement between two datasets of the same disease lends more confidence to the real cause of the disease. snet is one of the rare exceptions in gene-expression-analysis methods that produce pathways and genes that are consistently significant when independently applied to multiple independent datasets of the same disease phenotypes, even when these datasets are not restricted to the same platform. the percentage of agreement is higher than other methods compared. in this article, we identify some shortcomings of snet, and present two refinements which we incorporate in the new method pfsnet. we have tested pfsnet on six datasets from three disease types. our method produces an improvement of 2564 and 3151 in gene agreement and pathway agreement, respectively, when compared to snet, and even more when compared to earlier methods like gsea, ggea, sam and t-test.we use pathways from pathwayapi , a database that unifies popular pathway databases like kegg , wikipathways and ingenuity . for each of the three disease types studied hereleukemia , childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (all subtype) and duchenne muscular dystrophy (dmd) we obtain two independent datasets which are produced using different microarray platforms. for each disease type, we run pfsnet, fsnet, snet, gsea, ggea, sam and t-test on the two datasets independently and obtain two corresponding outputs. we compare the results from the two datasets using two measures of jaccard-like agreement, defined below. we use the subnetwork generation procedure mentioned in section 3.1 to generate the subnetworks in dataset 1. we then test these subnetworks for statistical significance using the procedure mentioned in sections 3.when testing gsea, which identifies pathways instead of subnetworks, we measure the pathway-level agreement which is defined analogously. we also measure the agreement between the genes in the output generated by the two independent datasets. let the genes in sn 1 and sn 2 be g sn1 and g sn2 , respectively, then the gene-level agreement is defined asrecent methods for analyzing microarray data that focus on identifying biological processes and pathways are superior tonote: for pfsnet and fsnet, threshold values of 1 5, 2 15 are used. for gsea, the leading edge genes were used. for sam and t-test, we took genes at 5 significance level and also the top n genes indicated in brackets. d, subnetworks enriched in phenotype d; :d, subnetworks enriched in phenotype :d.the traditional method of testing individual genes for two main reasons. first, gene sets represented by pathways make discovery more interpretable. second, the ability to identify gene sets whose members might have only slight changes in individual gene expression values. however, pathways become too generalized when they are large. such a pathway may also be missed even when a subnetwork within it is indeed important for the disease . breaking down pathways to subnetworks provides even better interpretability. moreover, we discover that previous methods used in microarray data analysis produce significant gene sets or pathways that are not very consistent across datasets of the same disease. methods that analyze subnetworks like snet also have their shortcomings that it is hard to decide what thresholds to use because a too-relaxed threshold will include some non-relevant genes and a too-stringent threshold will exclude some relevant genes. in this article, we have introduced two improvements to snet: by incorporating the fuzzification technique (fsnet), and by computing paired t-statistic based on the fuzzy score of two phenotypes (pfsnet). we have found that subnetworks identified by fsnet and pfsnet shows higher consistency across independently obtained datasets than other methods.pathways that were missed by gsea.  
