finding optimal interaction interface alignments between biological complexes motivation: biological molecules perform their functions through interactions with other molecules. structure alignment of interaction interfaces between biological complexes is an indispensable step in detecting their structural similarities, which are keys to understanding their evolutionary histories and functions. although various structure alignment methods have been developed to successfully access the similarities of protein structures or certain types of interaction interfaces, existing alignment tools cannot directly align arbitrary types of interfaces formed by protein, dna or rna molecules. specifically, they require a blackbox preprocessing to standardize interface types and chain identifiers. yet their performance is limited and sometimes unsatisfactory. results: here we introduce a novel method, prosta-inter, that automatically determines and aligns interaction interfaces between two arbitrary types of complex structures. our method uses sequentially remote fragments to search for the optimal superimposition. the optimal residue matching problem is then formulated as a maximum weighted bipartite matching problem to detect the optimal sequence order-independent alignment. benchmark evaluation on all non-redundant proteindna complexes in pdb shows significant performance improvement of our method over tm-align and ialign (with the blackbox preprocessing). two case studies where our method discovers, for the first time, structural similarities between two pairs of functionally related proteindna complexes are presented. we further demonstrate the power of our method on detecting structural similarities between a proteinprotein complex and a proteinrna complex, which is biologically known as a proteinrna mimicry case. availability and implementation: the prosta-inter web-server is publicly available at http://www. cbrc.kaust.edu.sa/prosta/.structure alignment refers to the process of aligning two or more molecular structures based on their three-dimensional conformations. due to the correlation between the structure and the function of molecules, structure alignment is an important step towards understanding the evolutionary histories and the functions of the molecules of interest, especially when only low sequence similarity exists between molecules . with recent experimental advances in solving complex structures composed of multiple molecules, different types of interaction interfaces have been extensively studied, including proteinprotein interfaces , proteindna interfaces and proteinrna interfaces . biological molecules perform their functions through interactions with other molecules. therefore, pairwise alignment of individual molecules, without considering their interacting partners in biological complexes, may not capture the comprehensive structural similarities between two complexes. pairwise protein structure alignment, the most widely studied task of structure alignment , has been addressed by a variety of methods . one limitation shared among these methods is that the output alignment always obeys the sequence order of the input complex structures. however, the sequence order cannot be used safely in interface alignments becausein this article, we propose a novel structure alignment method, prosta-inter, for aligning interaction interfaces formed by protein, dna or rna molecules. our method naturally handles multiple types of interfaces, multiple chains and multiple interfaces in complexes. after employing remote fragments and the mwbm algorithm , statistical benchmark evaluation on proteindna complex dataset demonstrates significant improvements over state-of-the-art alignment methods. moreover, unreported interface similarities in two pairs of proteindna complexes are discovered. we finally illustrate the generic nature of our method through a proteinrna mimicry study. we are currentlydeveloping new scoring functions and applying our method to discover structural relevance of different types of interaction interfaces.  
