finding recurrent copy number alterations preserving within-sample homogeneity motivation: copy number alterations (cnas) represent an important component of genetic variation and play a significant role in many human diseases. development of array comparative genomic hybridization (acgh) technology has made it possible to identify cnas. identification of recurrent cnas represents the first fundamental step to provide a list of genomic regions which form the basis for further biological investigations. the main problem in recurrent cnas discovery is related to the need to distinguish between functional changes and random events without pathological relevance. within-sample homogeneity represents a common feature of copy number profile in cancer, so it can be used as additional source of information to increase the accuracy of the results. although several algorithms aimed at the identification of recurrent cnas have been proposed, no attempt of a comprehensive comparison of different approaches has yet been published. results: we propose a new approach, called genomic analysis of important alterations (gaia), to find recurrent cnas where a statistical hypothesis framework is extended to take into account within-sample homogeneity. statistical significance and within-sample homogeneity are combined into an iterative procedure to extract the regions that likely are involved in functional changes. results show that gaia represents a valid alternative to other proposed approaches. in addition, we perform an accurate comparison by using two real acgh datasets and a carefully planned simulation study. availability: gaia has been implemented as r/bioconductor package. it can be downloaded from the following pagerecently, the impact of copy number alterations (cnas) in human diseases is increasingly being recognized . cnas are genomic regions, 1 kb, in which copy number differences are observed between two or more genomes . acgh technology to whom correspondence should be addressed. allows the measurement of copy number for hundreds of thousands locations (probes) in the genome, where copy number is expressed by the logr ratio (lrr), which gives an indirect measure of copy number of each probe, computed as the ratio of observed to expected hybridization intensity. the potential of acgh has been exploited in a large number of publications aimed at the identification of functional genetic mutations involved in cancer . for example in, the genomes of a cohort of patients are analyzed to extract the cnas that are common to a significant number of subjects. these analyses are based on the fact that cnas functionally related to the disease under study (driver alterations) will be present in many of the analyzed genomes (recurrent cnas); in contrast, random somatic mutations (passenger alterations) are subject-specific and they will be present only in a small number of subjects. we can define a cna as a set of continuous probes that show a high enough evidence to being altered in at least some samples . of course, rare cnas also hold a very important role in cancer development , but most studies based on acgh are designed to find recurrent cnas. for this reason, discovery of recurrent cnas represents a current challenge in bioinformatics. several algorithms aimed at the discovery of recurrent cnas have been proposed. in this work, we refer to this class of algorithm as rcna-algorithms. rcna-algorithms differ in many aspects: input data, model, preprocessing step, output and execution time (an overview of rcna-algorithms is reported in section 2). indeed, there is no comprehensive comparison of the different approaches and very few of the published papers report a comparison with other methods. in addition, both rueda and diaz-uriarte (2010) and shah (2008) point out the importance of carefully planned simulation studies in performance assessment of rcna-algorithms. this work has two goals: the description of a novel rcna-algorithm (gaia) and the evaluation of rcna-algorithm performance. gaia uses a discrete representation of the data to perform a permutation test. a novel iterative procedure taking into account both significance and within-sample homogeneity (homogeneous peel-off) is used to identify the most significant peaks. in section 3, we present a careful comparison of rcnaalgorithms both on synthetic data and on real acgh dataset. synthetic data are generated in agreement to three typical patterns of recurrent cnas so that quantitative comparison can be performed in a variety of well-defined simulated datasets. we also use two recently published real datasets to evaluate the results of compared algorithms. the first dataset is on colorectal cancer: current knowledge can be used to compare and validate the considered. in (a), an example of matrix d: 0 denotes no alteration, + denotes gain and denotes loss. in d there are two homogeneous regions from probes p4 to p6 for samples s1, s2 and s3 and from probes p5 to p7 for samples s3, s4 and s5 (blue and green squares, respectively). in (b) and (c), the matrices d l and d g of the matrix in (a) are shown. in (d), the q-value configuration for d l before the first iteration of peel-off. in (e), the q-value configuration for d l after that the peak p5p6 has been removed by standard peel-off. in (f), the h-values for the matrix d in (a). in (d) and (e), red line represents the q-value significance threshold (q thr ), and in (f) red line represents the h-value threshold (h thr ). algorithms. the second dataset refers to gastrointestinal stromal tumor for which well-known aberrant cytobands are used to perform the comparison. in this dataset for each sample, 1.6 million of probes are measured, so it can also be used to validate the performance of the algorithms in terms of execution time.for real data, the ground truth of cna is not available, so in order to perform a qualitative evaluation of rcna-algorithms we need to extract from biological studies a list of verified cnas. although this list can contain cnas that are not present within the analyzed dataset, it can be efficiently used to have an idea about the results obtained by the rcna-algorithms. to overcome the limitations occurring on the evaluation performed on real data, we generated synthetic data for which the ground truth is available in order to perform a quantitative assessment. in order to run the rcna-algorithms on the considered data, the respective input parameters must be chosen. gaia has just two main parameters: the significance threshold (q thr ) and the homogeneity threshold (h thr ) for which we used values 0.25 and 0.12, respectively. this parameter setting has been used both on synthetic and real data. these parameters can be considered as algorithm driven and do not need to be selected on the basis of the dataset. in jistic, six parameters must be specified and the default setting suggested by authors has been used to perform all comparisons. on real data, both gada and cghmcr were used with the suggested parameter configuration, in contrast on synthetic data we perform a parameter tuning in order to obtain the best performance for these algorithms. in the supplementary material, more details about the parameter settings are provided.gaia uses within-sample homogeneity to obtain results consistent with the biological nature of copy number profiles and the reported results suggested that this heuristic can improve the accuracy. extensive comparison on simulated data allowed the observation of the behavior of the considered algorithms. gada seemed to be particularly robust with respect to noise. gaia and jistic had comparable performance with a slight advantage for gaia and finally less accurate performance were obtained by cghmcr. analysis of two real acgh datasets suggested an important observation: approaches directly working on lrr were strongly affected by the chip resolution. in particular, both for jistic and gada the number of identified regions increased with increasing resolution. in contrast, gaia, which uses a discrete representation of the data, resulted in a stable estimate of the number of computed regions with respect to the chip resolution. results on synthetic and real acgh data showed that cghmcr produced several spurious peaks as also observed in rueda and diaz-uriarte (2010). another important aspect pointed out by our analysis is on the execution time. cghmcr was very fast but it simply performs a counting of the number of alteration for each probe. execution time of gada is related to the convergence of the em algorithm used to estimate the parameters of the model. convergence is slower in high-resolution scenarios, but its execution time seemed to be good. finally, both gaia and jistic use a conservative permutation model to compute the distribution of the null hypothesis. in its approximated version, gaia seems to be faster than jistic. but gaia had also an acceptable computational time (1 h in the largest dataset) when it explicitly performs the permutations. we also highlighted the fact that the list of computed cnas must be integrated with information measuring the strength of evidence of aberrations (i.e q-value). indeed, this information can be used to resolve ambiguous results (this is the case of jistic and gada on gist dataset where regions were found both in loss and in gain) and to choose cnas representing the target of further biological investigations. although our methodology can be subject to further improvements, our opinion is that gaia is a valid alternative to other rcna-algorithms, especially for the analysis of highresolution acgh data. indeed, the performed analysis showed that gaia can be particularly useful for high-resolution data which have been already segmented (as for example tcga cna data). indeed, we report a better stability with respect to the number of detected regions in different resolution scenarios. in other words, the amount of false positives produced is not related to the resolution, and this contrasts noticeably with the rcna-algorithms considered for comparison. in addition, when gaia used an approximated approach to compute the null distribution, the processing of large amount of data is faster than other approaches based on significance analysis. we also pointed out the fact that, of course, accurate tuning of the input parameters can significantly improve the results of the rcna-algorithms. but often, this tuning involves many parameters and their perfect combination is very hard to reach. therefore, another very important advantage of gaia is that in contrast to other considered rcna-algorithms, it requires just two input parameters. finally, although in literature discretization page: 2956 29492956recurrent cnas represent a very important source of information about genetic diseases like cancer, and rcna-algorithms can be used to find significant associated aberrations. in this work, a new rcna algorithm has been presented and a performance analysis of rcna-algorithms was performed. results showed that joint analysis of all available samples without a preprocessing segmentation step (as in gada) can improve robustness respect to noise and that within-sample homogeneity can be used to increase the accuracy of the results. in addition, we point out two interesting strong points of gaia: its ability in working on high-resolution data and its parameter setting that is very straightforward.  
