genetics and population analysis finemap: efficient variable selection using summary data from genome-wide association studies motivation: the goal of fine-mapping in genomic regions associated with complex diseases and traits is to identify causal variants that point to molecular mechanisms behind the associations. recent fine-mapping methods using summary data from genome-wide association studies rely on exhaustive search through all possible causal configurations, which is computationally expensive. results: we introduce finemap, a software package to efficiently explore a set of the most important causal configurations of the region via a shotgun stochastic search algorithm. we show that finemap produces accurate results in a fraction of processing time of existing approaches and is therefore a promising tool for analyzing growing amounts of data produced in genome-wide association studies and emerging sequencing projects. availability and implementation: finemap v1.0 is freely available for mac os x and linux atgenome-wide association studies (gwas) have identified thousands of genomic regions associated with complex diseases and traits. any associated region may contain thousands of genetic variants with complex correlation structure. therefore, one of the next challenges is fine-mapping that aims to pinpoint individual variants and genes that have a direct effect on the trait. this step is crucial for fully exploiting the potential of gwas: to unveil molecular biology of complex traits and, eventually, provide targets for therapeutic interventions. for a recent review on fine-mapping, see spain and. a standard approach for refining association signals is a stepwise conditional analysis, an iterative procedure that conditions on the single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) with the lowest p-value of association until no additional snp reaches the pre-assigned p-value threshold. while conditional analysis is informative about the number of complementary sources of association signals within the region, it fails to provide probabilistic measures of causality for individual variants. to overcome this problem, many recent fine-mapping methods have adopted a bayesian framework. approaches for bayesian analysis of multi-snp gwas data include exhaustive search as implemented in software bimbam , mcmc algorithms , variational approximations and stochastic search as implemented in software guess and guessfm . bayesian fine-mapping has also been conducted under a simplified assumption of a single causal v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.the main difference between finemap and caviarbf is the search strategy to explore the space of causal configurations. we compare the computational efficiency and fine-mapping accuracy of finemap with caviarbf to assess the impact of replacing exhaustive with stochastic search. we also illustrate finemap on data from 4q22/snca region that contains a complex association pattern with parkinsons disease (ukpdc and wtccc2, 2011) as well as on data from 15q21/lipc region associated with hdl-c .gwas have linked thousands of genomic regions to complex diseases and traits in humans and in model organisms. fine-mapping causal variants in these regions is a high-dimensional variable selection problem complicated by strong correlations between the variables. we introduced a software package finemap that implements an important solution to the problem: a stochastic search algorithm to circumvent computationally expensive exhaustive search. in all datasets we have tested, finemap achieves similar accuracy as the exhaustive search but uses only a fraction of processing time. for example, fine-mapping a genomic region with 8612 snps allowing for at most five causal variants completes in less than 30 s using finemap while the exhaustive search implemented in caviarbf is estimated to run over 300 years. computationally efficient algorithms are a key to handle the ever-increasing amount of genetic variation captured by emerging sequencing studies as well as to scale up the analyses to whole chromosomes or even to whole genomes. finemap uses a shotgun stochastic search (sss) algorithm . sss has been inspired by markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) algorithms that are widely used for bayesian inference. for a review on mcmc, see. standard mcmc methods, such as the metropolis-hastings algorithm and gibbs sampler , perform a sequence of steps in the parameter space via a stochastic transition mechanism that ensures a valid approximation to the target distribution. mcmc can often quickly reach an interesting region of the parameter space, but, at each step, it only considers one of the possible neighboring states. this means that mcmc is often slow to explore a high-dimensional state space. to improve on this, sss generates a whole set of neighboring configurations at each iteration and saves them all for further use in probability calculations. this way a large number of parameter configurations with relatively high probability is quickly explored.) this explains why an efficient stochastic search can achieve accurate results in a tiny fraction of the processing time of an exhaustive search. our datasets were generated by requiring that the causal snps had highly correlated proxies (absolute correlation greater than 0.5) among the other variants. the high accuracy of finemap throughout these tests makes us believe that finemap is accurate in typical gwas data with complex correlation structure among the snps. although we have not encountered any dataset where finemap would not have performed well, theoretically, it remains possible that an in-exhaustive search could miss some relevant causal configurations. a simple way to assess possible problems is to run many searches in parallel and compare and combine their outcomes. another way is parallel tempering where several searches are run in parallel in different temperatures. intuitively, increasing temperature flattens the likelihood function and hence a search in a higher temperature moves around more freely than one in a colder temperature. such an approach, together with complex global transition mechanisms to escape from local modes, was introduced in an evolutionary stochastic search algorithm by bottolo and richardson (2010) that was later tailored for genetic analyses of multiple snps and multivariate phenotypes in the software package guess . these two papers could give ideas how finemap could be further modified if trapping into local modes of the search space were encountered in real data analyses of gwas regions. summary data based fine-mapping methods require a highquality correlation estimate. ideally, the correlation matrix is computed from the same genotype data from which the z-scores originate. in that case, for quantitative traits, the equations in section 2.1 connecting original genotype-phenotype data and gwas summary data are exact and hence no information is lost by working with summary data. for case-control data, a normal approximation to the logistic likelihood causes some difference between the two approaches but the difference is expected to be small with current gwas sample sizes . for some populations, sequencing of many thousands of individuals have either already been carried out or will complete soon. such reference data allow reliable fine-mapping down to low-frequency variants also when the original genotype data are not available. a more challenging problem is large meta-analyses that combine individuals from varying ancestries. assuming that the causal variants are included in the data and have the same effect sizes across the ancestral backgrounds, finemap can be run with the sample size weighted snp correlation matrix. if these assumptions are not met, then a hierarchical model allowing separate snp correlation structures in each ancestry would perform better . summary data based fine-mapping methods assume that the causal variants are included in the data. recent advances in z-score imputation help to satisfy this requirement also when a causal variant might not be genotyped. however, some snps are difficult to impute because they are not tagged well by the snps in the data. we do not expect to capture well the association signal from such snps either through imputation or indirectly through other snps in the data. the output from finemap is a list of possible causal configurations together with their posterior probabilities and bayes factors similar to caviarbf. these probabilities contain all the information from the model needed for downstream analyses. examples of useful derived quantities are the single-snp inclusion probabilities, single-snp bayes factors, credible sets of causal variants and a regional bayes factor to assess the evidence against the null model where none of the snps are causal . we believe that finemap, or related future applications of shotgun stochastic search to gwas summary data, enables unprecedented opportunities to reveal valuable information that could otherwise remain undetected due to computational limitations of the existing fine-mapping methods.  
