finestr: a web server for single-base-resolution nucleosome positioning the dna in eukaryotic cells is packed into the chromatin that is composed of nucleosomes. positioning of the nucleosome core particles on the sequence is a problem of great interest because of the role nucleosomes play in different cellular processes including gene regulation. using the sequence structure of 10.4 base dna repeat presented in our previous works and nucleosome core dna sequences database, we have derived the complete nucleosome dna bendability matrix of caenorhabditis elegans. we have developed a web server named finestr that allows users to upload genomic sequences in fasta format and to perform a single-base-resolution nucleosome mapping on them. availability: finestr server is freely available for use on the web at http:/www.cs.bgu.ac.il/nucleom. the site contains a help file with explanation regarding the exact usage. contact:dna accessibility plays an important role in the regulation of processes such as transcription, replication, recombination and dna repair. dna accessibility in turn depends on the chromatin structure, of which the building blocks are nucleosomes. it is generally accepted that the segment of dna double helix which is wrapped around the histone octamer forming the nucleosome should possess sequence-dependent bendability properties that would provide a stabilizing contribution to the free energy of the nucleosome 3d structure. we have discovered the sequence pattern characteristic for nucleosome dna of caenorhabditis elegans and, apparently, applicable to the nucleosomes of all eukaryotes . as described in the cited work, the c.elegans pattern is identical to the pattern uniquely defined by dna deformability properties. in particular, it is dictated by minimization of unstacking of dna bases and base pairs in the nucleosome dna. accordingly, we built a web server finestroctamer is measured from 0 to 1 as a ratio of the actual score to the maximal possible score for the probe.crystallography at atomic resolution at present time is the most accurate way to map nucleosome position on the sequence. respectively, any other mapping technique to be tested should use the crystallography data as reference. in order to test our sequence-directed algorithm that uses the nucleosome mapping probe, we took all known nucleosomes crystallized with unique sequences, where the central base is determined with atomic resolution. these are protein data bank (pdb) structures: 1aoi , 1eqz , 1kx4, 1kx5 and 2nzd . comparison of the nucleosome positions calculated by our probe with the crystallography data showed an exact match within 1 base.  
