structural bioinformatics first insight into the prediction of protein folding rate change upon point mutation the accurate prediction of protein folding rate change upon mutation is an important and challenging problem in protein folding kinetics and design. in this work, we have collected experimental data on protein folding rate change upon mutation from various sources and constructed a reliable and non-redundant dataset with 467 mutants. these mutants are widely distributed based on secondary structure, solvent accessibility, conservation score and long-range contacts. from systematic analysis of these parameters along with a set of 49 amino acid properties, we have selected a set of 12 features for discriminating the mutants that speed up or slow down the folding process. we have developed a method based on quadratic regression models for discriminating the accelerating and decelerating mutants, which showed an accuracy of 74 using the 10-fold cross-validation test. the sensitivity and specificity are 63 and 76, respectively. the method can be improved with the inclusion of physical interactions and structure-based parameters.protein folding is a process by which a polypeptide chain of amino acid residues folds into a specific 3d structure. the rate of protein folding is a measure to understand the tendency of folding (slow/fast) from unfolded state to its native 3d structure, and it varies several orders of magnitude, ranging from microseconds to an hour . studies of protein folding rates enhance our understanding of the variations in protein folding kinetics, which may lead to several pathologies such as prion and alzheimers diseases. hence, several investigations have been carried out to measure protein folding rates, and the data are accumulated in different databases, such as protein folding database (pfd;) and protein folding kinetics database, kineticdb . to whom correspondence should be addressed.these databases provide annotated structural, methodological, kinetic and thermodynamic data of proteins and mutants. currently, experimental data for protein folding rates are available for less than 100 proteins, which demand the necessity of computational methods to predict protein folding rates from 3d structures of proteins and/or just from amino acid sequence.proposed the first method based on contact order to relate protein folding rates with the total number of contacts in protein structures.introduced the concept of long-range order, which relates long-range contacts (lrc, contact between two residues that are close in space and far in the sequence) in protein structures with protein folding rate. consequently, several parameters such as total contact distance , cliquishness , multiple contact index , etc. have been developed to understand protein folding rates using 3d structures of proteins. on the other hand, several methods have been proposed for predicting protein folding rates from amino acid sequence with/without the structural class information. these methods include the relationship with amino acid properties , predicted secondary structures (sss) , predicted inter-residue contacts , amino acid composition , ss length and hybrid sequence representation .reviewed the details of computational methods for predicting protein folding rates. all the above mentioned studies are focused on predicting the folding rates of proteins without any modifications of amino acids. in fact, the substitution of amino acid residues in a protein drastically alters the folding, stability, specificity and functions of proteins . the problems related to protein stability and function upon point mutations have been addressed in earlier studies . consequently, several methods have been proposed to predict protein stability and function due to amino acid replacements . however, the influence of amino acid mutations to proteinpage: 2122 21212127  
