fishingcnv: a graphical software package for detecting rare copy number variations in exome-sequencing data rare copy number variations (cnvs) are frequent causes of genetic diseases. we developed a graphical software package based on a novel approach that can consistently identify cnvs of all types (homozygous deletions, heterozygous deletions, heterozygous duplications) from exome-sequencing data without the need of a paired control. the algorithm compares coverage depth in a test sample against a background distribution of control samples and uses principal component analysis to remove batch effects. it is user friendly and can be run on a personal computer. availability and implementation: the main scripts are implemented in r (2.15), and the gui is created using java 1.6. it can be run on all major operating systems. a non-gui version for pipeline implementation is also available. the program is freely available online: https://sourceforge.net/projects/fishingcnv/many sporadic and mendelian disorders are caused by exonic mutations that alter the amino acid sequence of the affected gene. exome sequencing has so far shown great utilty in elucidating single nucleotide mutations that contribute to these diseases. however, using exome sequencing to detect rare copy number variations (cnvs) that contribute to diseases remain a challenge. we developed fishingcnv, a graphical software package for comprehensive analysis of cnvs in exome-sequencing data. we included a matched case/control analysis feature adapted from exomecnv, but more importantly, we implemented a new cnv detection algorithm that prioritizes rare variants for nonmatched sample analysis. many sequencing centers have by now accumulated large internal sets of exome samples that can be used as controls for cnv detection in new unmatched samples. our method relies on pooling such a control set, comparing the exonic read depth of the test sample against the distribution of read depths in the control set. to remove batch-to-batch variations in the control set, we applied principal component analysis (pca) and removed the top contributing principal components (210) from the data. we bundled gatk into our program to extract coverage information. read depth information is then converted to reads per kilobase per million mapped reads (rpkm) , and the test sample is segmented into regions of similar rpkm ratios using circular binary segmentation (cbs) before comparison against the control distribution . the output is a file that contains segmented cnv calls ranked by statistical confidence (see supplementary materials for details on method). we tested our algorithm on simulated and actual exome data and show that it is effective in identifying homozygous as well as heterozygous cnvs of varying length. we also show that principal component removal is effective in reducing false positives. a summary of the program workflow is presented in. we compared our algorithm against exomecnv and conifer and show that fishingcnv consistently outperforms previous approaches (see supplementary materials for data).we believe that looking for rare cnvs in exome-sequencing data can be a powerful way of detecting new disease-causing mutations.  
