flash: fast length adjustment of short reads to improve genome assemblies motivation: next-generation sequencing technologies generate very large numbers of short reads. even with very deep genome coverage, short read lengths cause problems in de novo assemblies. the use of paired-end libraries with a fragment size shorter than twice the read length provides an opportunity to generate much longer reads by overlapping and merging read pairs before assembling a genome. results: we present flash, a fast computational tool to extend the length of short reads by overlapping paired-end reads from fragment libraries that are sufficiently short. we tested the correctness of the tool on one million simulated read pairs, and we then applied it as a pre-processor for genome assemblies of illumina reads from the bacterium staphylococcus aureus and human chromosome 14. flash correctly extended and merged reads 99 of the time on simulated reads with an error rate of 1. with adequately set parameters, flash correctly merged reads over 90 of the time even when the reads contained up to 5 errors. when flash was used to extend reads prior to assembly, the resulting assemblies had substantially greater n50 lengths for both contigs and scaffolds. availability and implementation: the flash system is implemented in c and is freely available as open-source code atthanks to the rapidly dropping cost of dna sequencing technologies, de novo whole-genome sequencing (wgs) projects are generating very deep coverage of new genomes. however, even with the high coverage that is produced by these technologies, and despite dramatic improvements in genome assembly algorithms , the short read lengths produced by next-generation technologies present a significant barrier to reconstructing a genome from wgs data. any increase in read length will have a significant, positive impact on the quality of genome assemblies. several current protocols generate sequences from both ends of a library of dna fragments. if the fragments are shorter than twice the read length, the resulting paired-end reads will overlap. for example, a project might use 175 bp libraries with 100 bp reads. this type of library presents an opportunity to extend the reads length by to whom correspondence should be addressed. overlapping and merging paired-end reads before using these reads in the assembly. in this article, we present flash (fast length adjustment of short reads), a software tool to find the correct overlap between paired-end reads and extend the reads by stitching them together. we tested the correctness of the tool on one million simulated 100 bp paired-end reads and found it to be highly reliable. we then used real data to measure the effect of this merging procedure on the quality of an assembly. we also compared the speed and accuracy of flash to that of shera , a related tool that also extends read length by finding the overlap between paired-end reads.the short read lengths generated by next-generation sequencing technologies are the biggest challenge in assembling genomes into large, near-complete sequences. to tackle this problem, we developed flash, a highly accurate, very fast tool to merge pairs generated by sequencing both ends of short fragment libraries. flash can be used for any paired-end sequence data in which the paired reads overlap, including rna-seq data. as shown in our experiments, merging paired reads with flash can have a significant positive impact on the quality of genome assemblies.  
