databases and ontologies flowcl: ontology-based cell population labelling in flow cytometry motivation: finding one or more cell populations of interest, such as those correlating to a specific disease, is critical when analysing flow cytometry data. however, labelling of cell populations is not well defined, making it difficult to integrate the output of algorithms to external knowledge sources. results: we developed flowcl, a software package that performs semantic labelling of cell populations based on their surface markers and applied it to labelling of the federation of clinical immunology societies human immunology project consortium lyoplate populations as a use case. conclusion: by providing automated labelling of cell populations based on their immunopheno-type, flowcl allows for unambiguous and reproducible identification of standardized cell types. availability and implementation: code, r script and documentation are available under the artistic 2.0 license through bioconductorboth flow cytometry (fcm) and mass cytometry are used to identify one or more cell populations of interest, such as those correlating with a disease phenotype. cell types can be grouped by their particular combinations of markers, or immunophenotype. despite progress made towards standardization of fcm assays , the lack of a standard labelling strategy hampers data integration when trying to match gating data resulting from various v c the author 2014. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com manual or automated tools and heterogeneous sources. the cell ontology (cl) was developed to represent cell types relevant to biology. a recent revision specifically focused on extending coverage of the cl by improving the representation of haematopoeitic cell types, asserting those cell types in a single-inheritance hierarchy and adding logical restrictions to describe their immunophenotypes. however, multiple issues arose when we attempted to use the cl for labelling of cell types derived from fcm data. the definition of mature t cell (obo:cl_0002419; obo: is an abbreviation for http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/) mentions that it has plasma membrane part some t cell receptor complex (obo:go_0042101), which itself has part the cd3 marker (obo:pr_000001018), requiring complex reasoning to infer that mature t cell has part some cd3. additionally, when trying to identify cd3 cells, fcm experimenters are in fact targeting cd3epsilon (obo:pr_000001020), which is itself a subunit of the cd3 molecule described in the cl. as a consequence, while the cl encompasses information about surface markers, its manual exploitation can be challenging and may require multiple inferences along multiple axes, which is neither optimal nor sustainable with the increase in size of datasets. to address these challenges, we developed flowcl, a software package that enables researchers to unambiguously label their cell populations based on their immunophenotype using the cl. we also improved cl to enhance its utility for automated labelling of cell populations.decoupling the knowledge representation and the software code allows for greater flexibility for extension and updates. as the cl development proceeds, flowcl automatically remains up-to-date with the latest scientific knowledge. additionally, the information added to the cl is immediately available for the scientific community, independently of the flowcl development or the hipc project. by providing automated labelling of cell populations based on their immunophenotype, flowcl allows researchers to report results using cell type labels. future work includes validation on other datasets and extending the cl with an assay-based representation of cell types.  
