data and text mining flower: extracting information from pyrosequencing data the sff file format produced by roches 454 sequencing technology is a compact, binary format that contains the flow values that are used for base and quality calling of the reads. applications, e.g. in metagenomics, often depend on accurate sequence information, and access to flow values is important to estimate the probability of errors. unfortunately, the programs supplied by roche for accessing this information are not publicly available. flower is a program that can extract the information contained in sff files, and convert it to various textual output formats.after pyrosequencing was first introduced , the use of this technology has grown rapidly. data from pyrosequencing can be analyzed with traditional tools for sequence analysis (typically by first converting data into the fasta format), but native formats usually contain more information and for many analyses this information can be used to produce more accurate results. pyrosequencing data from the roche 454 sequencing technology comes in the form of sff files, a relatively compact, binary format. this format contains the sequence of flow values for each read, corresponding to the light intensities, resulting from the ligation process during sequencing. in addition, the sff file contains the base-called sequence with associated quality information, and an index linking each called base to the corresponding flow value. the sff file also contains clipping information for each read, and various metadata. roche provides some utilities for working with sff files, and these have so far been the most convenient option for pipelines like pyronoise and qiime that need to access the raw flow values and other information from sff files. but as roches tools are not publicly available and may not be modified or redistributed, this complicates distribution of integrated pipelines. as a consequence, usage and development of more effective analysis tools is hampered. other tools like sff_extract (jose blanca, unpublished), a utility supplied with the mira assembler , is limited to extracting sequence information. flower is an efficient, portable and freely distributable software utility that reads sff files, and outputs information in textual form.it uses an independent reimplementation of the sff format based only on published documentation , and is freely redistributable and modifiable under the general public license.  
