flowphyto: enabling automated analysis of microscopic algae from continuous flow cytometric data motivation: flow cytometry is a widely used technique among biologists to study the abundances of populations of microscopic algae living in aquatic environments. a new generation of high-frequency flow cytometers collects up to several hundred samples per day and can run continuously for several weeks. automated computational methods are needed to analyze the different phytoplankton populations present in each sample. software packages in the programming environment r provide powerful tools for conducting such analyses. results: we introduce flowphyto, an r package that performs aggregate statistics on virtually unlimited collections of raw flow cytometry files and provides a memory efficient, parallelized solution for analyzing high-throughput flow cytometric data. availability: freely accessible atphytoplankton are microscopic algae that are at the foundation of the marine food web and can influence earths climate. flow cytometry has provided new insights into phytoplankton ecology in freshwater and marine environments. it creates fingerprints of phytopkankton cells based on their ability to scatter or re-emit specific wavelengths of light. this light can be detected and used to estimate cell size and the composition of photosynthetic pigments that are used to distinguish different phytoplankton populations. in the last decade, several high-frequency flow cytometers have been developed to study phytoplankton community structure at very fine spatial and temporal scales, collecting several hundreds of samples per day for several weeks. one of the largest flow cytometry datasets publicly available to marine biologists is produced by a new generation of flow cytometer created at the university of washington, called seaflow, that continuously measures phytoplankton composition and abundance. the instrument generates the equivalent of 6700 samples, representing a dataset of 35135 gb, after a typical 2-week long oceanographic cruise . software tools for automated data analysis and visualization of phytoplankton populations is therefore essential. we describe the r package flowphyto, which provides aflowphyto provides an efficient approach for the analysis of highthroughput flow cytometry data. although this approach provides an unique solution for the analysis of seaflow data repository, it is also compatible with standard flow cytometry data.  
