structural bioinformatics folding race: a robust method for predicting changes in protein folding rates upon point mutations motivation: protein engineering methods are commonly employed to decipher the folding mechanism of proteins and enzymes. however, such experiments are exceedingly time and resource intensive. it would therefore be advantageous to develop a simple computational tool to predict changes in folding rates upon mutations. such a method should be able to rapidly provide the sequence position and chemical nature to modulate through mutation, to effect a particular change in rate. this can be of importance in protein folding, function or mechanistic studies. results: we have developed a robust knowledge-based methodology to predict the changes in folding rates upon mutations formulated from amino and acid properties using multiple linear regression approach. we benchmarked this method against an experimental database of 790 point mutations from 26 two-state proteins. mutants were first classified according to secondary structure , accessible surface area and position along the primary sequence. three prime amino acid features eliciting the best relationship with folding rates change were then shortlisted for each class along with an optimized window length. we obtained a self-consistent mean absolute error of 0.36 s 1 and a mean pearson correlation coefficient (pcc) of 0.81. jack-knife test resulted in a mae of 0.42 s 1 and a pcc of 0.73. moreover, our method highlights the importance of outlier(s) detection and studying their implications in the folding mechanism. availability and implementation: a web server folding race has been developed and is available atunderstanding protein folding mechanisms involves identifying the series of steps taken by a polypeptide chain at a high structural and temporal resolution during the folding process. though the temporal aspects are challenging to decipher, the sequential and structural features have been relatively easier to address through protein engineering methodologies . this involves the measurement of both the folding rates and stability for a series of carefully designed point mutations along the entire protein sequence. the effects of point mutations on rates and stability are then compared to the wild type to obtain a dimensionless number, the phi-value (u) that is generally considered as a proxy for the degree of structure at the transition state and hence shedding light on the mechanism of folding. though site-directed mutagenesis experiments have been successfully applied to more than 40 different proteins, the downside is that measuring the stability and folding rates for the series of mutants is exceedingly time and resource-intensive. an alternative tothis approach would involve the computational prediction of changes in rates and stability upon point mutations. in this regard, predicting the changes in thermodynamic stability upon point mutations are already well established through sequence-based features , structure-based parameters , force-field based approaches and statistical-mechanical methods . remarkably, despite the structural complexity of proteins, the absolute folding rates are nowadays easy to predict either from topological/structural considerations , protein length (de), protein length combined with the secondary structure content , statistical mechanical approaches (; mu oz and) and simply even from the primary sequence information combining statistical and machine-learning approaches . however, the development of models for predicting the effects of point mutations on changes in folding rates is still at an infant stage. this is important as the availability of a computational tool could significantly reduce the time taken in experimental approaches. more relevantly, it could serve as a first exploratory step to design mutations of interest that could then be experimentally tested. moreover, it might aid in synthetic designing of protein mutants with known effect on folding rate, for even therapeutic purposes. till date, prediction of protein folding rate change upon point mutation (fora) is the only available web server for real value prediction of folding rates upon point mutations based on a quadratic regression model . the major pitfalls in this approach include the small training dataset of 467 mutants, moderate performance, encompassing both two-state and multistate proteins, less diversity in nature of mutants as well as amino acid feature dataset.in this work, we have developed a rigorous, knowledge-based model for the prediction of folding rates employing a large database of 790 single-site point mutants specifically from 26 two-state proteins. a triple-order classification scheme together with a multiple linear regression model incorporating three descriptors was able to predict the changes in folding rates with a mean pearson correlation coefficient (pcc) of 0.73, mean absolute error (mae) of 0.42 s 1 and prediction accuracy of 81.20 after jack-knife validation. the structural implications of the outlying mutants have been exclusively discussed. web server named folding race has been developed for prediction purpose.we present a multiple linear regression approach to predict the changes in folding rates upon point mutations in two-state proteins. it involves a combination of rigorous classification of mutations incorporating both structural (secondary structure and asa) and sequence-based aspects of proteins, and heuristic and knowledge based feature selection of amino acid descriptors. the model could predict with a correlation coefficient of 0.73, an absolute error of 0.42 s 1 and an accuracy of 81.2 with the experimental changes in rates after cross validation and outperforms the only available method fora. the symmetric mean absolute percentage error rates (smape) for the cross-validation and test datasets is 31.16 and 49.08, respectively. we have developed a web server named folding race that incorporates the features discussed. the structural implications of outliers have also been discussed. we expect this method and server to be of importance to experimentalists in identifying the position and nature of mutations that change the rates to the desired extent that can have both folding-mechanistic and functional implications.  
