foldnucleus: web server for the prediction of rna and protein folding nuclei from their 3d structures motivation: to gain insight into how biopolymers fold as quickly as they do, it is useful to determine which structural elements limit the rate of rna/protein folding. summary: we have created a new web server, foldnucleus. using this server, it is possible to calculate the folding nucleus for rna molecules with known 3d structuresincluding pseudoknots, trnas, hairpins and ribozymesand for protein molecules with known 3d structures, as long as they are smaller than 200 amino acid residues. researchers can determine and understand which elements of the structure limit the folding process for various types of rnas and protein molecules. experimental a values for 21 proteins can be found and compared with those determined by our method:in theoretical studies of the structure of rna molecules, the focus is often on the prediction of secondary and tertiary structures of rna and on rna folding kinetics, which can be described as a free energy landscape. because the function of rna depends on its conformation, which is analogous to the relationship between the function and folding structure of proteins, researchers have successfully applied methods developed for proteins, such as the a analysis . in the folding process, the rna strand, like a protein globule, passes through numerous intermediate states able to play a key role in the kinetics of the process. the problem of how a biopolymer chooses its native fold between a huge number of alternative folds is crucial for both rna and protein molecules . computer experiments with rna-and protein-like model chains have shown that all can reach their lowest-energy fold without an exhaustive search over all possible folds . it is obvious that not all nucleotides/residues play a decisive role in the rna/protein folding. thus, the knowledge of folding nuclei (a folding nucleus is the structured part of the molecule in a transient state) makes it possible to reveal the structural elements that limit the rate of rna/protein folding. the theoretical prediction of the rna nucleotides/residues important for the formation of a folding nucleus would define the most probable kinetic pathway of folding. this, in turn, makes it possible to base rna/protein-engineering efforts on the experimental detection of the nucleus of folding for an rna/protein structure. it has recently been demonstrated for trna asp that secondary and tertiary interactions are generated simultaneously but not in a hierarchical process as was supposed for a long time. this allows us to adopt and apply an algorithm that was previously developed for the prediction of protein folding nuclei for rna structures. the calculated a values for trna structures agree with the previously obtained experimental data . according to the experiment, the nucleotides of the d and t hairpin loops are the last to become involved in the trna tertiary structure . the purpose of this work is the creation of a server for the prediction of the structure of folding nuclei for proteins and rna molecules, starting from known 3d structures.  
