databases and ontologies footprintdb: a database of transcription factors with annotated cis elements and binding interfaces motivation: traditional and high-throughput techniques for determining transcription factor (tf) binding specificities are generating large volumes of data of uneven quality, which are scattered across individual databases. results: footprintdb integrates some of the most comprehensive freely available libraries of curated dna binding sites and systematically annotates the binding interfaces of the corresponding tfs. the first release contains 2422 unique tf sequences, 10 112 dna binding sites and 3662 dna motifs. a survey of the included data sources, organisms and tf families was performed together with proprietary database transfac, finding that footprintdb has a similar coverage of multicellular organisms, while also containing bacterial regulatory data. a search engine has been designed that drives the prediction of dna motifs for input tfs, or conversely of tf sequences that might recognize input regulatory sequences, by comparison with database entries. such predictions can also be extended to a single proteome chosen by the user, and results are ranked in terms of interface similarity. benchmark experiments with bacterial, plant and human data were performed to measure the predictive power of footprintdb searches, which were able to correctly recover 10, 55 and 90 of the tested sequences, respectively. correctly predicted tfs had a higher interface similarity than the average, confirming its diagnostic value. availability and implementation: web site implemented in php, perl, mysql and apache. freely available from http://floresta.eead.transcription is one of the most important processes in gene expression, and it is modulated primarily by the binding of regulatory proteins called transcription factors (tfs) to short dna sequences, called cis elements or dna binding sites (dbss). the dbs recognition mechanism is generally degenerate, as one tf can usually bind to a collection of similar but different cis elements, which can be grouped together to define a dna motif.motifs are most frequently represented as position-specific scoring matrices (pssm) that capture the occurrence of nucleotides in aligned positions of the underlying dbss . furthermore, motifs are frequently plotted as sequence logos, which graphically summarize the binding specificities and/or affinities of tfs (see supplementary). traditional experimental methods to identify dbss are technically challenging and have been frequently limited to determining cis-regulatory sites for one tf at a time. these methods such as dna footprinting or electrophoretic mobility shift assays (; o) yield high-quality data and have been the primary source of data for expert-curated databases such as regulondb . however, these approaches do not scale well and are currently being replaced by protocols that allow high-throughput discovery of dbss, such as protein binding microarrays, chip-chip or chip-seq experiments . these procedures produce large volumes of raw sequence data, which must be preprocessed and filtered to derive dna motifs. databases such as jaspar and transfac are increasingly annotating dbss produced by such protocols, fueled by articles that report experimentally derived dbss and motifs for large repertoires of tfs on other side there are experimental approaches for characterizing the interface residues of tfs, those in charge of recognizing the nucleotide bases of target cis elements. beyond site-directed mutagenesis (o), the most accurate methods are x-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance studies of proteindna complexes. the resulting structures are maintained and published at the protein data bank (pdb) . by further digesting these structural models, the 3d-fooprint database routinely annotates the interfaces of all dna binding proteins contained therein, following simple geometrical criteria: interface residues must form hydrogen bonds or hydrophobic contacts with nitrogen bases or else locate heavy atoms within 4.5 a of any nitrogen base . here we present footprintdb, a meta-database, which integrates the most comprehensive freely available libraries of curated dbss and systematically annotates, for the first time, to whom correspondence should be addressed. the binding interfaces of the corresponding tfs. furthermore, we survey the redundancy of all included databases and compare them with transfac, a subscription-based commercial alternative. besides allowing users to compare dna sequences/ motifs with records in the database, as most included repositories do, footprintdb can also interrogate complete proteomes to identify which tfs are likely to recognize input cis elements. annotated interfaces are particularly valuable for the second type of query, as our benchmarks indicate that tfs with similar interface residues are more likely to bind to similar dbss. the three unique features of footprintdb are as follows: (i) the possibility to search against multiple curated databases at the same time or to add custom databases, (ii) the annotation of interface residues within dna binding protein domains and (iii) the support for browsing tfs within user-provided proteomes, which are most likely to bind a dbs of interest. this resource is available at http://floresta.eead.csic.es/footprintdb.  
