structural bioinformatics forna (force-directed rna): simple and effective online rna secondary structure diagrams motivation: the secondary structure of rna is integral to the variety of functions it carries out in the cell and its depiction allows researchers to develop hypotheses about which nucleotides and base pairs are functionally relevant. current approaches to visualizing secondary structure provide an adequate platform for the conversion of static text-based representations to 2d images, but are limited in their offer of interactivity as well as their ability to display larger structures, multiple structures and pseudoknotted structures. results: in this article, we present forna, a web-based tool for displaying rna secondary structure which allows users to easily convert sequences and secondary structures to clean, concise and cus-tomizable visualizations. it supports, among other features, the simultaneous visualization of multiple structures, the display of pseudoknotted structures, the interactive editing of the displayed structures, and the automatic generation of secondary structure diagrams from pdb files. it requires no software installation apart from a modern web browser. availability and implementation: the web interface of forna is available at http://rna.tbi.univie.ac. at/forna while the source code is available on github at www.github.com/pkerpedjiev/forna. contact:the use of secondary structure diagrams is ubiquitous within the field of rna biology. they convey not only which nucleotides are paired, but also and perhaps more importantly, which are unpaired. the contents and positions of sub-structures such as hairpin loops, interior loops, multiloop junctions and external loops are immediately evident. such information is of great value to researchers seeking to identify putative mutations to perform when seeking to isolate the structural basis of a biological effect, to find protein binding, and to provide a context for observed behavior. it is used as both an exploratory as well as a communicative tool. researchers examine secondary structure diagrams to gain insights about potential functions and mechanisms as well as to describe and disseminate them. although there are a number of available tools for visualizing the secondary structure of rna molecules, with the exception of pseudoviewer, none are available online without java and none offer the flexibility in exploring, arranging and manipulating the structure that forna does (for an enumerated comparison of features).we provide an easy to use, accessible, free, open-source web tool for rna secondary structure visualization that produces beautiful, highly customizable plots. our tool requires no externally installed. screenshot of forna web app displaying the bacterial ribonuclease p holoenzyme in complex with trna (pdb id: 3q1q). immediately evident are the regions of the trna which are in contact with the ribonuclease, namely the 5 0 and 3 0 end nucleotides, as well as the t wc loop. an rna-binding protein is shown as a gray node in the lower-right hand region of the diagram software and is useful for both the exploration and dissemination of rna secondary structure.  
