fourcseq: analysis of 4c sequencing data motivation: circularized chromosome conformation capture (4c) is a powerful technique for studying the spatial interactions of a specific genomic region called the viewpoint with the rest of the genome, both in a single condition or comparing different experimental conditions or cell types. observed ligation frequencies typically show a strong, regular dependence on genomic distance from the viewpoint, on top of which specific interaction peaks are superimposed. here, we address the computational task to find these specific peaks and to detect changes between different biological conditions. results: we model the overall trend of decreasing interaction frequency with genomic distance by fitting a smooth monotonically decreasing function to suitably transformed count data. based on the fit, z-scores are calculated from the residuals, and high z-scores are interpreted as peaks providing evidence for specific interactions. to compare different conditions, we normalize fragment counts between samples, and call for differential contact frequencies using the statistical method deseq2 adapted from rna-seq analysis. availability and implementation: a full end-to-end analysis pipeline is implemented in the r package fourcseq available at www.bioconductor.org.circularized chromosome conformation capture (4c) couples the low-throughput chromosome conformation capture (3c) technique for studying chromatinchromatin interactions with high-throughput sequencing . 4c detects the contacts of a chosen viewpoint with, in principle, the entire genome. the 4c protocol consists of six main steps . first, the chromatin is cross-linked with formaldehyde to fix dna-protein complexes, thereby capturing dna sequences that are in close spatial proximity. in the next step, the cross-linked chromatin is digested with a restriction enzyme. in the third step, the fragment ends from the digestion treatment are ligated under dilute conditions to favor intra-complex ligation, ligating dna sequences that have been in close spatial proximity. after this, the cross-linking is reversed, followed by a second round of digestion with a different restriction enzyme to obtain smaller dna molecules. these molecules are then circularized and amplified by polymerase chain reaction (pcr). the resulting library is sequenced. the possibility to multiplex several viewpoints in one sequencing library further increases the throughput. as result, the distribution of reads from a 4c sequencing library throughout the genome provides an estimate of the contact frequencies of the viewpoint with the rest of the genome. overall, the 4c signal decreases with genomic distance from the viewpoint and reaches a constant level of noise for large distances. specific interactions of dna elements sit on top of this overall trend. one task is to identify positions that stand out from the general trend. moreover, if 4c has been performed on samples with different cell types, developmental stages or experimental treatments, a second task is the detection of changes in interaction frequencies between the sample groups.to illustrate our approach, we use a 4c dataset of developing drosophila melanogaster embryos . in this dataset, 103 viewpoints were selected throughout the d. melanogaster genome, with a focus on cis-regulatory modules (crms). samples were taken from embryos at 24 h and 68 h after fertilization either using whole embryos or mesoderm-specific cells .  
