fqtools: an efficient software suite for modern fastq file manipulation many next generation sequencing analyses involve the basic manipulation of input sequence data before downstream processing (e.g. searching for specific sequences, format conversion or basic file statistics). the rapidly increasing data volumes involved in ngs make any dataset manipulation a time-consuming and error-prone process. i have developed fqtools; a fast and reliable fastq file manipulation suite that can process the full set of valid fastq files, including those with multi-line sequences, whilst identifying invalid files. fqtools is faster than similar tools, and is designed for use in automatic processing pipelines. availability and implementation: fqtools is open source and is available at: https://github.com/alas tair-droop/fqtools.the fastq format has become the de facto standard for storage of next-generation sequencing read data . based originally upon the fasta sequence format , fastq stores nucleotide sequences and associated base qualities for multiple named reads in a fourfield human-readable ascii format. although there is no defined standard for fastq files,provide a good overview of the format, and provide as close to a standard as is available. many analysis pipelines involve initial data manipulation (e.g. reformatting, viewing or overview statistics) before downstream processing (e.g. quality control, adapter removal and alignment). seemingly simple tasks like viewing the first few reads in a file or checking the distribution of read lengths often require scripting or loading the data in tools that are quite slow for large datasets. these file manipulations are much more frequent when data are being reused in novel analyses. frequently, individual researchers will write scripts (e.g. in python, perl or awk) to perform these tasks. many tools are available for fastq processing such as the fastx-toolkit, bio-awk, fastq-tools, fast, seqmagick and seq-tk (see the supplementary materials for the urls of these tools). none of these provide a comprehensive set of common manipulations that would be required for most analyses. most fastq processing tools fail to process reads with sequence data split across multiple lines. as read lengths from modern sequencing technologies are constantly increasing , this is likely to become problematic as human readability is vastly reduced by extremely long lines. detecting invalid input is extremely important, as bioinformatics pipelines are often automated; thus significant computation and analysis time can be wasted if input errors are not detected early. for this reason, a trustworthy fastq manipulation tool should report invalid files. similarly, tools should be able to correctly process the full range of valid inputs. the fqtools suite was written to address this need for efficient and reliable viewing, manipulation and summarization of fastq data before it is pre-processed (with e.g. fastqc [http://www.bio informatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) or cutadapt (. both compressed and plain fastq can be processed, as can sam and bam-formatted data. paired-end sequence data is handled either as file pairs or in interleaved format .  
