genome analysis fragment recruitment on metabolic pathways: comparative metabolic profiling of metagenomes and metatranscriptomes motivation: the sheer scale of the metagenomic and metatranscrip-tomic datasets that are now available warrants the development of automated protocols for organizing, annotating and comparing the samples in terms of their metabolic profiles. we describe a user-friendly java program fromp (fragment recruitment on metabolic pathways) for mapping and visualizing enzyme annotations onto the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg) metabolic pathways or custom-made pathways and comparing the samples in terms of their pathway completeness scores, their relative activity scores or enzyme enrichment odds ratios. this program along with our fully configurable perl-based annotation organization pipeline meta2pro (metabolic profiling of meta-omic data) offers a quick and accurate standalone solution for metabolic profiling of environmental samples or cultures from different treatments. apart from pictorial comparisons, fromp can also generate score matrices for multiple meta-omics samples, which can be used directly by other statistical programs. availability: the source code and documentation for fromp can be downloaded from https://sites.google.comthe rapidly accumulating environmental meta-omic (metagenomic and metatranscriptomic) projects resulting from highthroughput sequencing techniques warrant the development of new protocols that can provide a quick overview of the microbial metabolic potential or activity. there has been some effort towards management of such data , its taxonomic and metabolic profiling , visualization of metabolic pathways and statistical analyses of community differences . in most cases, the tools are web-based and the primary method for annotation is blast . we describe here a standalone set of tools to get a rapid and accurate overview of the metabolic functions of the resident microbial community. the enzyme identification component of this pipeline, based on the modenza enzyme commission (ec) numbers and pfam profile hidden markov models (hmms), provides a quick and accurate ec number identification. the standout feature is the fromp (fragment recruitment on metabolic pathways) pathway mapping and comparative visualization tool, which maps ec numbers and pfam annotations onto the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg) reference or custom-made metabolic pathways. multiple meta-omic samples can be compared with each other based on a pathway completeness score modified from, a pathway activity score or an odds ratio for enzyme enrichment . the increased accuracy of hmm-based annotation and an ability to compare multiple meta-omic samples at once are attributes that improve on currently available metabolic profiling tools such as megan and mg-rast .we present here a set of tools for accurate standalone metabolic profiling of meta-omic data. the java program fromp and the meta2pro collection of perl scripts along with the relevant documentation are available from https://sites.google.com/site/ dhwanidesai/home/software.  
