structural bioinformatics frag'r'us: knowledge-based sampling of protein backbone conformations for de novo structure-based protein design motivation the remodeling of short fragment(s) of the protein backbone to accommodate new function(s), fine-tune binding specificities or change/create novel protein interactions is a common task in structure based computational design. alternative backbone conform-ations can be generated de novo or by redeploying existing fragments extracted from protein structures i.e. knowledge-based. we present fragrus, a web server designed to sample alternative protein backbone conformations in loop regions. the method relies on a database of super secondary structural motifs called smotifs. thus, sampling of conformations reflects structurally feasible fragments compiled from existing protein structures. availability and implementation fragrus has been implemented as web application and is available at http://www.bioinsilico.org/ fragrus.structural-based computational design aims to alter and change the properties of proteins by using structural information. these include improving protein stability, change and/or optimization of catalytic activities, grafting of novel functionalities or altering the binding to small molecules, nucleic acids or proteins [see reviews and references therein]. pioneering approaches in the field were focused in single amino acid changes with null or limited backbone flexibility . however, the remodeling and redesign of short fragments of the protein backbone, i.e. de novo design, overcomes the intrinsic limitations of fixed backbone design. recent works have shown the potential of de novo design . the remodeling of the protein backbone usually occurs in the loop regions, given its intrinsic flexibility and variable nature. usually, remodeling the loop regions seeks to accommodate specific interactions and restraints, e.g. catalytic residues , or to create new local segments . the major limitation of de novo approaches is the inherent combinatorial complexity that makes almost impossible the systematic sampling of large insertions. in early works we have described the use of smotifs in loop structure prediction [including protein kinases (, functional annotation and prediction of proteinprotein interactions . furthermore, we described that the dramatic increase of structures in the protein databank has resulted in the saturation of sampling of loop structures, even in the case of long loops subsequently confirmed , and that the geometry of smotifs is fully sampled . here we extend the use of smotifs and we present fragrus, a knowledge-based approach designed to sample the conformation of loop regions between fixed flanking regular secondary structures. the sampling is based in the comparison of the geometry between query and candidate smotifs (see server usage in supplementary data), is length independent (the final loop length is not predetermined) and is very fast: a search among thousand of potential conformations is done in a matter of seconds. candidate smotifs matching the geometrical constraints can then be grafted into the protein scaffold to be used as starting conformations for different de novo design manipulations.in this article, we present a server, fragrus, designed to sample loop conformations using the geometrical constrains of smotifs. fragrus has clear applications in de novo computational design by seeding the search of alternative backbone conformations using geometrically suitable backbone regions extracted from known protein structures. fragrus can be also used in proteinprotein, proteinnucleic acids and protein-small ligand interface design by generating a set of alternative conformation of interface loops. finally, fragrus can complement loop structure prediction methods and x-ray/nmr refinement protocols by generating loop conformations that are length independent.  
