gene expression a hybrid approach to protein differential expression in mass spectrometry-based proteomics motivation: quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics involves statistical inference on protein abundance, based on the intensities of each proteins associated spectral peaks. however, typical ms-based proteomics datasets have substantial proportions of missing observations, due at least in part to censoring of low intensities. this complicates intensity-based differential expression analysis. results: we outline a statistical method for protein differential expression, based on a simple binomial likelihood. by modeling peak intensities as binary, in terms of presence/absence, we enable the selection of proteins not typically amenable to quantitative analysis; e.g. one-state proteins that are present in one condition but absent in another. in addition, we present an analysis protocol that combines quantitative and presence/absence analysis of a given dataset in a principled way, resulting in a single list of selected proteins with a single-associated false discovery rate.a key goal of quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics is statistical inference on differential protein expression. quantitative information is derived from spectral peak intensities that are identified as having come from one of a proteins constituent peptides. statistical procedures for differential protein expression are naturally constructed in the context of regression or anova, or as a rollup problem . however, intensity-based procedures are challenged by the presence of widespread missing intensities. it is typical for 2040 of the total collection of attempted measurements to be missing; that is, in a matrix with all identified peptides in the rows, samples in the columns, 2040 of the matrix cell entries are empty. with standard regression or anova procedures, peptides with missing values must either be removed from the analysis, or their missing values must be imputed. there will typically be very few peptides with no missing values, so filtering peptides in this way results in a to whom correspondence should be addressed. much less informative dataset. furthermore, previously-published reports indicate that the vast majority of missing values are the results of censoring of absent or low-abundance peptides . this means that simple imputation routines are not appropriate . parametric imputation and other specialized methodology can be employed to enable intensity-based inference with lessened information loss . however, some information loss is inevitable. in particular, one-state (or nearly so) peptides, those for which there are many observed intensities in one comparison group but few in another comparison group, are not amenable to an intensity-based analysis; not limited to the twoclass problem. as a result, such peptides are typically filtered out of an intensity-based analysis. a protein that is always present in a diseased state, say, and never in the healthy state would be of great biological interest, so it is unfortunate if our statistical methodology cannot identify such a protein. an alternative to an intensity-based analysis is a presence/ absence analysis, in which peak intensities are digitized into binary measurements depending on whether a peak was observed or not. this is analogous to the spectral counting approach in ms/ms studies , where a peptide is quantified by the number of fragmentation spectra assigned to it. data collected in our laboratory do not necessarily have ms/ms fragmentation data associated with it, instead being obtained according to the accurate mass and time tag pipeline . still, we have information on whether or not a particular peptide was observed in each sample. while presence/absence analysis is better-suited to finding one-state proteins, it necessarily has less statistical power to detect abundance differences in proteins with little to moderate missingness. ideally, protein differential expression analysis would simultaneously target proteins of both types, resulting in a single list of differentially expressed proteins, with a single-associated false discovery rate (fdr). a hierarchical bayesian model would be well-suited to this purpose, but such techniques are complex, computationally intensive and less amenable to high-throughput pipelines. we present a hybrid analysis protocol that consists of two stages:(i) intensity-based analysis, and (ii) a presence/absence analysis. the results of each are merged to create a single collection of interesting proteins, to which we use novel methodology to apply a single fdr. this enables the researcher to extract more information from a quantitative proteomic dataset than would be achievable by either approach alone, while still maintaining an interpretable measurethe proposed presence/absence-based methodology is designed to enable the detection of one-state (or similar) proteins that are not amenable to traditional intensity-based methods. furthermore, we have proposed a hybrid approach that combines both intensity-and presence/absence-based analysis of a dataset, together with fdr estimation of the combined list of differentially expressed proteins. the proposed hybrid approach was demonstrated to outperform either of the intensity-or presence/absence-based methods alone. an obvious limitation to our work is its applicability to only two comparison groups. a regression-based implementation would be more generalizable, and we intend to pursue this in our future work.the choices of weights in the peptide-level and hybrid methods could undoubtedly be improved upon as well; all fdr estimates are quite conservative.  
