sequence analysis freeibis: an efficient basecaller with calibrated quality scores for illumina sequencers motivation: the conversion of the raw intensities obtained from next-generation sequencing platforms into nucleotide sequences with well-calibrated quality scores is a critical step in the generation of good sequence data. while recent model-based approaches can yield highly accurate calls, they require a substantial amount of processing time and/or computational resources. we previously introduced ibis, a fast and accurate basecaller for the illumina platform. we have continued active development of ibis to take into account developments in the illumina technology, as well as to make ibis fully open source. results: we introduce here freeibis, which offers significant improvements in sequence accuracy owing to the use of a novel multiclass support vector machine (svm) algorithm. sequence quality scores are now calibrated based on empirically observed scores, thus providing a high correlation to their respective error rates. these improvements result in downstream advantages including improved genotyping accuracy. availability and implementation: freeibis is freely available for use under the gpl (http://bioinf.eva.mpg.de/freeibis/). it requires a python interpreter and a c compiler. tailored versions of libocas and liblinear are distributed along with the package.a crucial step in the illumina sequencing pipeline is basecalling: the generation of individual nucleotide sequences and associated quality scores, which measure the probability of a sequencing error, from raw intensities. the default basecaller provided by illumina, bustard, develops a model from the raw intensities and uses it to perform basecalling. alternative basecallers aimed at achieving a better performance than bustard have been proposed . these basecallers can be divided into those that apply a modelling strategy like bustard (naivebayescall,or see das and vikalo, 2012 for a faster implementation) and all your base (ayb) and those that rely on supervised learning approaches or intermediate approaches . we introduce an update to our basecaller ibis. freeibis replaces the restricted license svm library with libocas , which is released under the gnu public license. our results show that freeibis outperforms the previous version of our software in terms of sequence accuracy. we measured how the decision score of the svm corresponded to the observed error rate as measured by the number of mismatches for each predicted quality score of control reads to their respective genome. a function approximating this distribution is then used to assign quality scores for individual bases. the resulting scores show a high level of correlation between their observed error rate and the predicted one, thus obviating the need for quality score recalibration as a post-processing step . we compare the newest versions of freeibis and ibis against the default basecaller for two genome analyzer ii (ga) runs, a hiseq run and a miseq run. on a set of dna sequences genotyped using both sanger and illumina sequencing technologies, freeibis provides an improvement in genotype accuracy over the default illumina basecaller.  
