data and text mining frequent glycan structure mining of influenza virus data revealed a sulfated glycan motif that increased viral infection motivation: it is well known influenza viruses recognize and bind terminal sialic acid (sa) on glycans that are found on the cell surface. in this work, we used a data mining technique to analyze the glycan array data of influenza viruses to find novel glycan structures other than sa that may be involved in viral infection. results: in addition to sa structures noted previously, we noted the sulfated structures in the mining results. for verification, we overex-pressed the sulfotransferase that is involved in synthesizing these structures, and we performed a viral infection experiment to assess changes in infection in these cells. in our results, we found that there is a 70-fold increase in these cells compared with the control. thus, we have found a novel pattern in glycan structures that may be involved in viral infection. availability and implementation: the glycan miner tool is available from the rings resource at http://www.rings.influenza viruses cause highly contagious respiratory disease in humans with potentially fatal outcomes, and millions of people are affected by influenza every year. in addition, many animal species, including birds, swine, horses, dogs, cats, whales and seals, can be infected by influenza viruses. viruses of all known hemagglutinin (h1h16) and neuraminidase (n1n9) subtypes are maintained in aquatic birds, and therefore, they are considered the natural reservoir of influenza viruses. in humans, the known pandemics inwere caused by the h1, h2 and h3 viruses, respectively . the known epidemics from 1977 until now were associated with viruses of the h1 and h3 subtypes. although not yet pandemic, the first human infections with chicken h5n1 viruses were reported in 1997 in hong kong . influenza viruses bind to sialic acids (sas) on the cell surface to initiate infection and replication. human influenza viruses preferentially bind to n-acetylneuraminic acid (i.e. sa) attached to the penultimate galactose sugar by an 2,6 linkage (sa 2-6 gal), whereas avian viruses preferentially bind to sa with an 2,3 linkage (sa 2-3 gal) . the receptor specificity is shared by the majority of human and avian viruses, but it has been reported that the receptor-recognition of some avian viruses was affected by the third saccharide and more distant moieties of the (sa 2-3 gal)-terminal receptor . in addition, sulfation of the saccharide core has been shown to produce no effect on binding of duck viruses, but chicken and human viruses isolated in 1997 in hong kong showed increased affinity to a sulfated sialyl-lewis structure . thus, it has been shown that negatively charged groups, such as sa and sulfate groups, on glycans might function in binding to viruses. in this work, we used a data mining method called-closed frequent subtree mining to analyze glycan binding data as produced by glycan array experiments , which are available on the web by the consortium for functional glycomics (cfg). after data mining of those glycan structures with high binding affinity, we noted that sulfated structures were found in the results in addition to other terminal sa and sialyl-lewis structures, as illustrated previously in other works . in this work, however, we focused only on sulfation, and to verify the effects of sulfation as shown from these results, we overexpressed the sulfotransferase that is involved in synthesizing these structures. then we performed a viral infection experiment to assess the change in the level of viral infection using the overexpressed cells. in our results, we found a surprisingly large increase in viral infection using our overexpressed cells. we were particularly surprised because we only overexpressed the sulfation and did not modify any sialyltransferases. from these results, we can claim that we have found a novel pattern in glycan structures that is involved in viral infection using our glycan mining tool. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
