from phenotype to genotype: an association study of longitudinal phenotypic markers to alzheimer's disease relevant snps motivation: imaging genetic studies typically focus on identifying single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) markers associated with imaging phenotypes. few studies perform regression of snp values on phenotypic measures for examining how the snp values change when phenotypic measures are varied. this alternative approach may have a potential to help us discover important imaging genetic associations from a different perspective. in addition, the imaging markers are often measured over time, and this longitudinal profile may provide increased power for differentiating genotype groups. how to identify the longitudinal phenotypic markers associated to disease sensitive snps is an important and challenging research topic. results: taking into account the temporal structure of the longitudinal imaging data and the interrelatedness among the snps, we propose a novel task-correlated longitudinal sparse regression model to study the association between the phenotypic imaging markers and the genotypes encoded by snps. in our new association model, we extend the widely used 2,1-norm for matrices to tensors to jointly select imaging markers that have common effects across all the regression tasks and time points, and meanwhile impose the trace-norm regularization onto the unfolded coefficient tensor to achieve low rank such that the interrelationship among snps can be addressed. the effectiveness of our method is demonstrated by both clearly improved prediction performance in empirical evaluations and a compact set of selected imaging predictors relevant to disease sensitive snps.neuroimaging genetics is an emerging research field, where brain imaging is used as quantitative phenotypes to investigate the role of genetic variation in brain structure and function. it holds great promise for a systems biology of the brain to better understand complex neurobiological systems, from genetic determinants to cellular processes to the complex interplay of brain structure, function, behavior and cognition. disorders of the nervous system are associated with complex neurobiological changes, which may lead to profound alterations at all levels of organization. genome-wide association studies (gwas) have been increasingly performed to correlate high-throughput singlenucleotide polymorphism (snp) data to large-scale imaging data. to facilitate such association analysis, many studies used a hypothesis-driven approach by making significant reduction in one or both data types. for example, some whole-brain studies focused on a small number of genetic variables (e.g.), and some whole-genome studies examined a limited number of imaging variables (e.g.). many snps have been identified as risk factors for alzheimers disease (ad), see those in the alzgene database (www.alzgene.org). so far most studies focus on selecting and associating snps to ad status or imaging phenotypes. very few studies have been done to directly examine how the snp values change when phenotypic measures are varied, i.e. via regression of snp values on phenotypic measures. this alternative approach may have a potential to help us discover important imaging genetic associations from a different perspective. in this study, we perform such an initial analysis for finding phenotypic imaging markers that are related to snps from or proximal to alzgene candidates. neuroimaging measures have been widely studied to predict disease status and/or cognitive performance . however, whether these measures coupled with their longitudinal profiles have sufficient power to infer relevant genotype groups is still an under-explored yet important topic in ad research. a simple strategy typically used in longitudinal studies (e.g.) is to analyze a single summarized value such as average change rate of change or slope. this approach may be inadequate to distinguish the complete dynamics of cognitive trajectories and thus become unable to identify the underlying genetic structure.  
