genetics and population analysis fsuite: exploiting inbreeding in dense snp chip and exome data fsuite is a user-friendly pipeline developed for exploiting inbreeding information derived from human genomic data. it can make use of single nucleotide polymorphism chip or exome data. compared with other software, the advantage of fsuite is that it provides a complete suite of scripts to describe and use the inbreeding information. it includes a module to detect inbred individuals and estimate their inbreeding coefficient, a module to describe the proportion of different mating types in the population and the individual probability to be offspring of different mating types that can be useful for population genetic studies. it also allows the identification of shared regions of homozygosity between affected individuals (homozygosity mapping) that can be used to identify rare recessive mutations involved in mono-genic or multifactorial diseases.inbreeding is a central concept in genetics. in population studies, the inbreeding coefficient f of individuals is evaluated to characterize mating habits. in rare disease studies, homozygosity mapping has been widely and successfully used to localize variants with strong recessive effect by searching for regions homozygous by descent (hbd) on pedigrees with inbred cases. with the availability of dense genome-wide genetic data, it is now possible to study inbreeding for individuals without genealogical information. several software packages are available to estimate inbreeding coefficients using genetic data. some of these provide single-point estimates of the inbreeding coefficient such as plink and genome-wide complex trait analysis . other programs allow the detection of hbd segments in individuals such as plink runs of homozygosity (rohs), beagle and ibdld . however, none of these applications provides an integrative solution to exploit inbreeding information. fsuite is a user-friendly pipeline composed of several functions integrating festim software . it estimates f and proposes population genetic statistics that are not available in other software, such as detecting inbred individuals and inferring parental mating types. a homozygosity mapping statistic with heterogeneity, hflod, is proposed, which gives more importance to hbd segments on individuals with small f . with these features, it is easy to perform the hbd-gwas strategy , i.e. homozygosity mapping on inbred cases from genome-wide association study (gwas), to detect mendelian sub-entities of complex diseases. fsuite also provides graphical outputs to facilitate interpretations of homozygosity mapping results.  
