genetics and population analysis ftec: a coalescent simulator for modeling faster than exponential growth recent genetic studies as well as recorded history point to massive growth in human population sizes during the recent past. to model and understand this growth accurately we introduce ftec, an easy-to-use coalescent simulation program capable of simulating haplotype samples drawn from a population that has undergone faster than exponential growth. samples drawn from a population that has undergone faster than exponential growth show an excess of very rare variation and more rapid ld decay when compared with samples drawn from a population that has maintained a constant size over time. availability: source code for ftec is freely available for download from the university of michigan center for statistical genetics wiki atrecent human sequencing studies have uncovered a pattern of genetic variation characterized by a large proportion of very rare variation.sequenced 13 715 individuals across two genes and found on average 1 variant every 24 bases. singletons and doubletons accounted for 30 of variant sites. other studies with between 5000 and 14 000 individuals have found that 50 of observed variants are found in at most two individuals (exome sequencing project, unpublished data; m.r.submitted for publication). a large fraction of extremely rare variation in a population is evidence of recent dramatic population growth . growth in the human population has traditionally been modeled as either instantaneous or exponential .posited that the pattern of variation observed in their data may have resulted from population growth occurring at an explosive, faster than exponential rate. incorporating faster than exponential growth into statistical models aimed at estimating population genetic parameters has the potential to improve estimate accuracy. additionally, refining statistical tools that test for the role of rare variants in disease and trait etiology will require simulated data with an accurate distributionunder a model of faster than exponential growth ( = 2), on average 44 of variants in our samples were singletons and 11 were doubletons . these findings contrast with the exponential growth model where on average 68 of variants were singletons and 12 were doubletons, as well as the constant populations size model, where on average 10 of variants were singletons and 5 were doubletons, and the instantaneous growth model where on average 84 of variants were singletons and 9 were doubletons. the rate of pairwise linkage disequilibrium decay is quite similar across the models investigated. looking closely, linkage disequilibrium decays slowest in constant populations and at an intermediate rate in populations with faster than exponential growth. ld decays fastest in exponentially growing and instantly growing populations . average pairwise r 2 was 0.25 until a distance of 7.0, 6.9, 6.0 and 5.8 kb for the constant size population, faster than exponential growth, instantaneous growth and exponential growth models, respectively. results for d decay are qualitatively similar (supplementary material).ftec provides the opportunity to study easily a broader range of population growth models under the coalescent than has previously been possible. as ever larger sequencing studies bring the rarest portion of the site frequency spectrum into focus, we have provided a tool that can help test theories of how the rarest variation arose and simulate data with a realistic distribution of variants.  
