structural bioinformatics aida: ab initio domain assembly for automated multi-domain protein structure prediction and domain–domain interaction prediction motivation: most proteins consist of multiple domains, independent structural and evolutionary units that are often reshuffled in genomic rearrangements to form new protein architectures. template-based modeling methods can often detect homologous templates for individual domains , but templates that could be used to model the entire query protein are often not available. results: we have developed a fast docking algorithm ab initio domain assembly (aida) for assembling multi-domain protein structures, guided by the ab initio folding potential. this approach can be extended to discontinuous domains (i.e. domains with inserted domains). when tested on experimentally solved structures of multi-domain proteins, the relative domain positions were accurately found among top 5000 models in 86 of cases. aida server can use domain assignments provided by the user or predict them from the provided sequence. the latter approach is particularly useful for automated protein structure prediction servers. the blind test consisting of 95 casp10 targets shows that domain boundaries could be successfully determined for 97 of targets. availability and implementation: the aida package as well as the benchmark sets used here are available for download at http://ffas.burnham.org/aida/.domains are evolutionarily, structurally and functionally independent units in proteins. proteins, especially large, eukaryotic ones are often composed of multiple domains, mostly due to the duplications and recombinations of the coding regions during evolution . average eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteins have 2.1 and 1.5 domains, respectively a low estimate, as only known pfam domains were used in the count, and new domains are continuously being discovered. domains usually have compact 3d shapes and specific functions that are, at least to some extent, conserved between homologous domains in different proteins. the same domains are often found in proteins with different domain architectures, including standalone, single-domain ones. moreover, structures of many domains are solved only as single-domain constructs. as a result, domain assembly is a necessary step for structure predictions of full-length proteins. correctly arranged domain structures are often crucial for full understanding of the function of multi-domain proteins .residues within each domain usually have strong interactions with each other, stabilizing the conserved domain structure, while only a fraction of all residues are involved in the interactions with other domains . this increases the difficulty of accurate determination of the relative domain positions and orientations. the interactions involved in domaindomain interactions and those between different protein chains are very similar, therefore the domaindomain and proteinprotein docking pose exactly the same challenges and could be approached with the same tools . however, due to the restriction of polypeptide chain connectivity, the search space for domain position and orientation is much smaller than that for proteinprotein docking. the problem of domain assembly could also be regarded as a special case of the folding process, in which only the conformation of the linker region is changing and domain structures are rigid. hence, potentials and algorithms for single-domain protein structure prediction, such as rosetta , could be applied to this problem. in this article, we describe a fast energy minimization method for domain assembly guided by the ab initio folding potential . this method is implemented in the first publicly available server in the field, aida (ab initio domain assembly), available at http://ffas.burnham.org/aida/ . this server also provides access to a recursive protocol, which combines template-based modeling with domain assembly in an iterative method suitable for automated domain assignment, modeling and assembly for a one-stop structure prediction of multi-domain proteins.  
