systems biology functional gene networks (fgnet) is an r/bioconductor package that generates gene networks derived from the results of functional enrichment analysis (fea) and annotation clustering. the sets of genes enriched with specific biological terms (obtained from a fea platform) are transformed into a network by establishing links between genes based on common functional annotations and common clusters. the network provides a new view of fea results revealing gene modules with similar functions and genes that are related to multiple functions. in addition to building the functional network, fgnet analyses the similarity between the groups of genes and provides a distance heatmap and a bipartite network of functionally overlapping genes. the application includes an interface to directly perform fea queries using different external tools: david, geneterm linker, topgo or gage; and a graphical interface to facilitate the use. availability and implementation: fgnet is available in bioconductor, including a tutorial.due to the increasing number of omic studies, efficient functional analysis of large lists of genes or proteins is essential to understand the biological processes in which they are involved. functional enrichment analysis (fea) is the most popular bioinformatic methodology to obtain significant functional information from sets of cooperating genes. fea methods search in biological databases (such as gene ontology and kegg pathways, among others) and use statistical testing to find biological terms and functional annotations that are significantly enriched in a list of genes. however, in most cases the results of these analyses are very long lists of biological terms associated to genes that are difficult to digest and interpret. some tools cluster the fea results, like david-fac and geneterm linker , but their output is provided as large tables and there are not many tools to integrate and visualize these results. here we present functional gene networks (fgnet), an r/ bioconductor package that uses fea results to perform networkbased analyses and visualization. the main network is built by establishing links between genes annotated to similar functional terms. in this way, fgnet generates and provides a network representing the links and associations between the clusters of genes and enriched terms. the network summarizes and facilitates the interpretation of the biological processes significantly enriched in the initial list of genes, revealing important information such as: distance and overlap v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.  
