data and text mining fun-l: gene prioritization for rnai screens motivation: most biological processes remain only partially characterized with many components still to be identified. given that a whole genome can usually not be tested in a functional assay, identifying the genes most likely to be of interest is of critical importance to avoid wasting resources. results: given a set of known functionally related genes and using a state-of-the-art approach to data integration and mining, our functional lists (fun-l) method provides a ranked list of candidate genes for testing. validation of predictions from fun-l with independent rnai screens confirms that fun-l-produced lists are enriched in genes with the expected phenotypes. in this article, we describe a website front end to fun-l. availability and implementation: the website is freely available to use at http://an ever increasing volume of biological data provides insights into cellular biological processes. however, how best to leverage the data to generate experimentally testable hypotheses is an open issue. a case in point is rnai screening where assay complexity, cost and available resources can limit capacity to conduct a large screen. when an exhaustive discovery of all genes involved in a biological process is not required, genome-wide screens are not necessary and a screen focused on candidate genes should be preferred. a key to the success of such screens resides in selecting genes with a high probability of being involved in the desired biological process.with the large amount and diversity of information now available, finding likely candidates has become non-trivial. currently target selection for experiments is typically guided by experimentalists selecting a few candidates after manual database searches and extensively trawling the literature. this manual approach has the advantage of the experimentalists ability to filter the quality of the data. however, this risks ignoring relevant experimental data provided by indirect evidence and from high-throughput experiments. therefore, we developed functional lists(fun-l) to help in selecting target genes for experiments. a practical use of fun-l is in building focussed rnai libraries.the fun-l website provides an easy-to-use interface to a validated biological process prediction algorithm. fun-l provides a systematic, integrated, reproducible and fast tool for target prioritisation that is regularly updated. it compares favourably in performance with other applications, providing an independent parameter free method. furthermore, it integrates extra unique information to aid in functional analysis of the proposed candidate list. we will develop these tools further in the near future to provide improved ability to interpret and filter the results. all data will be updated every 3 months to ensure results provided are up to date. we anticipate fun-l to be a useful tool in designing small libraries of interfering rnas targeting a biological function of interest for cases where genome-scale screening is not affordable or possible. importantly, the fun-l method has been validated on independent data and has also been experimentally tested in human cells.  
