sequence analysis fusionhunter: identifying fusion transcripts in cancer using paired-end rna-seq motivation: fusion transcripts can be created as a result of genome rearrangement in cancer. some of them play important roles in carcinogenesis, and can serve as diagnostic and therapeutic targets. with more and more cancer genomes being sequenced by next-generation sequencing technologies, we believe an efficient tool for reliably identifying fusion transcripts will be desirable for many groups. results: we designed and implemented an open-source software tool, called fusionhunter, which reliably identifies fusion transcripts from transcriptional analysis of paired-end rna-seq. we show that fusionhunter can accurately detect fusions that were previously confirmed by rt-pcr in a publicly available dataset. the purpose of fusionhunter is to identify potential fusions with high sensitivity and specificity and to guide further functional validation in the laboratory.one of the key features observed when analyzing cancer genomes is the chromosomal abnormality. genome arrangements could result in aberrant fusion genes, and a number of them have been found to play important roles in carcinogenesis. different functional fusion genes have been detected in both hematological malignancies and solid tumors . precisely identifying these fusion genes is important for developing potential diagnostic and therapeutic targets. recently, rna-seq has proven to be a valuable tool for transcriptome profiling based upon ultra high-throughput nextgeneration sequencing technologies. it has been shown that rnaseq is a more accurate method to survey the entire transcriptome in a quantitative and high-throughput fashion than microarray technology and est sequencing . rna-seq can provide a great deal of information about genome wide transcription, including the identification of fusion genes in cancer. a number of novel fusion genes has been identified using single-end rnaseq reads and paired-end rna-seq reads to whom correspondence should be addressed.. the advantage of pairedend technology is that it provides a more reliable way to uncover breakpoints when comparing two genomes. however, although a computational pipeline that identifies fusion transcripts using rna-seq has been mentioned in a number of recently published cancer transcriptomic studies (,b), there was no publicly accessible, opensource software available until a recently published tool named fusionseq . with more and more cancer transcriptomes being sequenced by next-generation sequencing, we believe an efficient tool for reliably identifying fusion transcripts will be desirable for many groups. here, we describe an opensource software tool, called fusionhunter, that identifies fusion transcripts in cancer, using reads from paired-end rna-seq. this high-throughput software tool is designed for efficient and precise detection of fusion transcripts in cancer for further functional validation in the laboratory.recently, several works have been published to detect splice junctions and chimeric transcripts based on rna-seq, includingpage: 1710 17081710  
