databases and ontologies fypo: the fission yeast phenotype ontology motivation: to provide consistent computable descriptions of phenotype data, pombase is developing a formal ontology of phenotypes observed in fission yeast. results: the fission yeast phenotype ontology (fypo) is a modular ontology that uses several existing ontologies from the open biological and biomedical ontologies (obo) collection as building blocks, including the phenotypic quality ontology pato, the gene ontology and chemical entities of biological interest. modular ontology development facilitates partially automated effective organization of detailed phenotype descriptions with complex relationships to each other and to underlying biological phenomena. as a result, fypo supports sophisticated querying, computational analysis and comparison between different experiments and even between species. availability: fypo releases are available from the subversion repository at the pombase sourceforge project page (https://sourceforge.the fission yeast schizosaccharomyces pombe is a eukaryotic model organism that has been used since the 1950s to study diverse biological processes including the cell division cycle, genome organization and maintenance, cell morphology and cytokinesis, signaling and stress responses, chromatin, gene regulation and meiotic differentiation . a large and active research community uses a wide variety of molecular genetic, cell biological and biochemical techniques to study s.pombe. with the completion of its genome sequence in 2002 , fission yeast has also become amenable to genome-scale experimentation, and has emerged as a reliable model for studying processes involved in human disease and cell biology. pombase (http://www.pombase.org) has recently been established as a comprehensive model organism database that provides centralized access to information relevant to s.pombe . pombase encompasses a core of manual literature curation that provides detailed accurate curation of phenotypes, gene ontology (go) annotations, genetic and physical interactions, protein modifications and many other types of data describing genes and their products. manually curated data are supplemented by automatic gene annotation and large-scale datasets, and information about additional sequence feature types. we define a phenotype as an observable characteristic, or set of characteristics, of an organism that results from the interaction of its genotype with a given environment. extensive genetics research has been carried out using s.pombe over several decades, and a comprehensive set of high-quality curated phenotype data is in high demand in the s.pombe research community. a survey of s.pombe researchers conducted in 2007 identified phenotype annotation as the most requested feature not then available in a fission yeast database. in response to community demand, we have developed the fission yeast phenotype ontology (fypo), a formal ontology of phenotypes observed in fission yeast that will allow pombase to provide consistent computable descriptions of phenotype data. using fypo, we have begun to curate accurate and detailed annotations of mutant allele phenotypes, with the aim of providing comprehensive coverage of phenotypes reported in the fission yeast literature. fypo annotations are available on pombase gene pages, and we envisage that the availability of genome-scale phenotype datasets will make new types of data analysis possible. facilitated by the formal structure of fypo, phenotype annotations can be shared and integrated with additional data, including other types of data obtained in fission yeast as well as phenotype data from other species.we have developed a formal ontology of phenotypes observed in fission yeast, which now includes over 1900 terms, to support phenotype curation in pombase.  
