a java api for working with pubchem datasets pubchem is a public repository of chemical structures and associated biological activities. the pubchem bioassay database contains assay descriptions, conditions and readouts and biological screening results that have been submitted by the biomedical research community. the pubchem web site and power user gateway (pug) web service allow users to interact with the data and raw files are available via ftp. these resources are helpful to many but there can also be great benefit by using a software api to manipulate the data. here, we describe a java api with entity objects mapped to the pubchem schema and with wrapper functions for calling the ncbi eutilities and pubchem pug web services. pubchem bioassays and associated chemical compounds can then be queried and manipulated in a local relational database. features include chemical structure searching and generation and display of curve fits from stored doseresponse experiments, something that is not yet available within pubchem itself. the aim is to provide researchers with a fast, consistent, queryable local resource from which to manipulate pubchem bioassays in a database agnostic manner. it is not intended as an end user tool but to provide a platform for further automation and tools development.pubchem (http://pubchem .ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) is a public repository of chemical structures and associated biological activities. it was launched as part of the molecular libraries roadmap from the national institutes of health (nih), which aims to increase the discovery and use of chemical probes through high-throughput screening of small molecules . it is composed of three interconnected databases. the compound database contains unique chemical structures. the substance database contains batch/sample level descriptions of these chemical structures. the bioassay database is the repository of biological screening results. as of september 2010, over 72 million chemical structures have been deposited by 128 distinct organizations and 462 752 bioassays with over 90 million data points have been deposited by 43 organizations. these include governmental, academic and private entities (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sources/sources.cgi). to whom correspondence should be addressed.we present a java api for working with pubchem datasets. it assembles data from several sources (ncbi web services and flat files) and is backed by the hibernate persistence framework. it utilizes a relational database for storage and has built in querying/search capabilities. it integrates chemical functionality such as structure processing and search via jchem from chemaxon and can also handle doseresponse curves via code derived from ncgc curvefit. we enable programmatic access to pubchem features such as bioassay panels, columns and results, providing data types, units of measure and associating dose responses to specific curve plots. the pubchem power user gateway (pug) web services do not describe the pubchem schema as completely and such detail is also not available in pubchems csv downloads, but only on the bioassay web pages. additionally, a local relational mirror of the pubchem bioassay database provides the data in a way that was previously not available. this can be of great benefit to researchers and software developers as relational databases are a widespread, familiar technology and can open up the dataset to many other tools and technologies than can interact via web browser or web-based protocols with inherent latency and statelessness. it can also serve as an integration platform as annotations and other information can be added to the database schema by adding additional tables and fields as necessary. in summary, this is a toolkit for software developers to work with pubchem bioassay datasets in a consistent manner.  
