data and text mining galaxy lims for next-generation sequencing we have developed a laboratory information management system (lims) for a next-generation sequencing (ngs) laboratory within the existing galaxy platform. the system provides lab technicians standard and customizable sample information forms, barcoded submission forms, tracking of input sample quality, multiplex-capable automatic flow cell design and automatically generated sample sheets to aid physical flow cell preparation. in addition, the platform provides the researcher with a user-friendly interface to create a request, submit accompanying samples, upload sample quality measurements and access to the sequencing results. as the lims is within the galaxy platform, the researcher has access to all galaxy analysis tools and workflows. the system reports requests and associated information to a message queuing system, such that information can be posted and stored in external systems, such as a wiki. through an api, raw sequencing results can be automatically pre-processed and uploaded to the appropriate request folder. developed for the illumina hiseq 2000 instrument, many features are directly applicable to other instruments. availability and implementation: the code and documentation are available at http://tron-mainz.de/tron-facilities/computational-medi-cine/galaxy-lims/next-generation sequencing (ngs) has enabled researchers to sequence large numbers of samples. for example, one flow cell on the illumina hiseq 2000 sequencer can sequence 192 samples using the 24 standard illumina multiplexing indexes or more with alternative barcoding methods. challenges for sequencing facilities and small labs include tracking sequencing requests, individual samples, sample status throughout the sequencing process and the resultant data, including the interpretation of the results. public and commercial laboratory information management systems (limss) exist to track ngs samples. gnomex , for example, is an excellent open-source resource for ngs and microarray lims. both gnomex and openbis provide complete solutions for more than ngs data organization, such as imaging, microarray and proteomics data. gnomex includes its own data processing and analysis tools for use within the platform. in contrast to these platforms, our aim was to build a light-weight yet effective ngs lims within an established data processing and analysis platform. the galaxy platform is a widely used easy-to-setup platform for the analysis of ngs and genomic data. here, we extended galaxys basic sample-tracking capability into a user-friendly and flexible lims, able to handle multiple samples per request. furthermore, we enabled more reporting capabilities by extending the existing galaxy notification system to update external systems (e.g. wikis) with sequencing request and status information. our approach is in part similar to the extension by b. chapman (http://bcbio.wordpress.com/2011/01/11/nextgeneration-sequencing-information-management-and-analysissystem-for-galaxy/), but greatly differs in its implementation for creating requests, samples and data processing.  
