genome analysis games identifies and annotates mutations in next-generation sequencing projects motivation: next-generation sequencing (ngs) methods have the potential for changing the landscape of biomedical science, but at the same time pose several problems in analysis and interpretation. currently, there are many commercial and public software packages that analyze ngs data. however, the limitations of these applications include output which is insufficiently annotated and of difficult functional comprehension to end users. results: we developed games (genomic analysis of mutations extracted by sequencing), a pipeline aiming to serve as an efficient middleman between data deluge and investigators. games attains multiple levels of filtering and annotation, such as aligning the reads to a reference genome, performing quality control and mutational analysis, integrating results with genome annotations and sorting each mismatch/deletion according to a range of parameters. variations are matched to known polymorphisms. the prediction of functional mutations is achieved by using different approaches. overall games enables an effective complexity reduction in large-scale dna-sequencing projects.next-generation sequencing (ngs), or deep sequencing, methods are rapidly changing the standards in genomics . consolidated instruments, such as illumina genome analyzer (illumina inc., san diego, ca, usa) and abi solid (applied biosystems, foster city, ca, usa) can sequence a full human genome in previously unimagined speed. to date, ngs has been applied in various contexts, including whole-genome sequencing , discovery of transcription factor binding sites, and non-coding rna expression profiles . massively parallel dna-sequencing technologies, combined with sequence-capture methodologies (targeted re-sequencing) have obvious potential in clinical diagnostics, particularly for to whom correspondence should be addressed. complex disorders that may be caused by a combination of several genes. a major goal of these studies is the detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), insertions and deletions (indels), and other rearrangements to identify disease-associated variants in clinical samples. these genetic determinants contribute to variation in phenotypes, risk to diseases, and response to drugs or to the environment. different studies, such as 1000 genomes project and the cancer genome atlas (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/), have implemented massive sequencing to more efficiently catalog genetic mutations responsible for cancer and other diseases. therefore, ngs provides important knowledge about genetic variants in the population and about those genetic variants that are being commonly used in diagnostic studies in clinical settings. on one hand, ngs provides unprecedented opportunities for high-throughput genetic research; alternatively, it poses problems in rationale data analysis and requires adequate computational strategies to organize, handle and interpret the results . in the past few years, tools for the analysis of short/long reads datasets have become available. currently, the scientific community has access to many commercial and open source software packages for analyzing ngs data. clc genomics workbench software (clc bio, aarhus, denmark) and nextgene (softgenetics, state college, pa) are among the most popular in the commercial domain. furthermore, there are open source packages, such as maq , shrimp , pass , bwa , samtools , bfast , perm , snvmix , crossbow and atlas-snp2 . for 1000 genome project pilot data bioinformatic analysis, researchers used mosaik (http://bioinformatics.bc.edu/marthlab/ mosaik), maq, coronalite (applied biosystems, foster city, ca, usa), and ssaha2 as aligners, and used genome analysis toolkit (gatk) genotyper , polyscan and polybayes for snp detection. these tools process data from various platforms using different algorithms (such as bayesian approaches) and snp detection procedures. however, their output often seems to be insufficiently annotated (to the detriment of clinical implications) and/or of difficult functional interpretation. to solve this problem, wewe have developed and validated games, a new application for the processing and the annotation of ngs data. games generates concise and highly readable reports for a functional selection of important genetic events. games is a flexible tool, it can be used for the analysis of data from different ngs platforms, it supports short and long, single-end and paired-end reads. in fact, games uses as input the alignment file in the standard generic sam format, which is obtainable from many free and commercial alignment tools. the specificity and the accuracy of this application are warranted by the use of a range of independent filters, which are geared toward the selection of statistically and functionally significant genetic events. the investigator can easily and promptly use games reports to discriminate silent mutations or polymorphisms from variants that are potentially associated with a phenotype or a disease. moreover, by using bed and maf files as tracks in ucsc genome browser or other viewers, it is possible to swiftly identify mutations in different samples or individuals and to interrogate their biological relevance. sift and polyphen-2 outputs can be used to predict the effect of the mutations in proteins. in conclusion, games is not only a new application for mining functional snps or indels from ngs data, but it also aids in the overall interpretation of large-scale sequencing data. games primary purpose is to provide a tool for life science investigators, who do not have bioinformatic expertise, to obtain biological insight into genetic events.  
