genetics and population analysis gapit: genome association and prediction integrated tool software programs that conduct genome-wide association studies and genomic prediction and selection need to use methodol-ogies that maximize statistical power, provide high prediction accuracy and run in a computationally efficient manner. we developed an r package called genome association and prediction integrated tool (gapit) that implements advanced statistical methods including the compressed mixed linear model (cmlm) and cmlm-based genomic prediction and selection. the gapit package can handle large data-sets in excess of 10 000 individuals and 1 million single-nucleotide polymorphisms with minimal computational time, while providing user-friendly access and concise tables and graphs to interpret results.advances in high-throughput single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) genotyping are enabling powerful genome-wide association studies (gwas), thereby enhancing the ability to identify causal mutations that underlie human diseases and agriculturally important traits. the resulting snps are also valuable for genomic prediction and selection (gs), which provides criteria for disease risk management in humans and expedited selection in animal and plant breeding . before the full potential of gwas and gs are realized, inflated false-positive rates, extensive computational requirements and suboptimal prediction accuracies need to be addressed. newly developed gwas statistical methods based on the mixed linear model (mlm) hold great promise to overcome these challenges. they are flexible because they incorporate fixed and random effects. to address the spurious associations that arise from population structure, covariates from either structure or principal components (pcs) can be included as fixed effects. the cryptic relationships between individuals are accounted for through a kinship matrix in the unified mlm . the more computationally efficient and powerful compressed mlm (cmlm) uses a group kinship matrix calculated from clustered individuals. because the typical number of genotypic data points is exceeding hundreds of millions, solving mlms using the traditional restricted maximum likelihood approach is computationally intensive. therefore, the efficient mixed model association (emma) algorithm was developed to reduce this computational burden by reparameterizing the mlm likelihood functions. emma expedited (emmax) and population parameters previously determined (p3d) were independently developed to further reduce computing time by eliminating the need to re-estimate variance components at each marker. most gs methods make predictions with the sum of the effects from all available snps or genomic best linear unbiased prediction (gblup) based on a kinship matrix derived from these snps. the former approach offers higher prediction accuracies for simpler traits, while the latter approach is more accurate for complex traits . our work implements an improved gblup method that increases accuracy, especially for simple traits. most software packages were developed for a particular gwas or gs approach. for example, packages were written exclusively for the emma and emmax algorithms. other software such as the trait analysis by association, evolution and linkage (tassel) and plink make multiple gwas approaches available in one package. we continue these software development efforts by creating genome association and prediction integrated tool (gapit), which integrates the most powerful, accurate and computationally efficient gwas and gs methods into a single r package.  
