gap: towards almost 100 percent prediction for b-strand-mediated aggregating peptides with distinct morphologies motivation: distinguishing between amyloid fibril-forming and amorphous -aggregating aggregation-prone regions (aprs) in proteins and peptides is crucial for designing novel biomaterials and improved ag-gregation inhibitors for biotechnological and therapeutic purposes. results: adjacent and alternate position residue pairs in hexapeptides show distinct preferences for occurrence in amyloid fibrils and amorphous-aggregates. these observations were converted into energy potentials that were, in turn, machine learned. the resulting tool, called generalized aggregation proneness (gap), could successfully distinguish between amyloid fibril-forming and amorphous-aggregating hexapeptides with almost 100 percent accuracies in validation tests performed using non-redundant datasets. conclusion: accuracies of the predictions made by gap are significantly improved compared with other methods capable of predicting either general-aggregation or amyloid fibril-forming aprs. this work demonstrates that amino acid side chains play important roles in determining the morphological fate of-mediated aggregates formed by short peptides.protein folding and aggregation are among the most important unsolved problems in biochemistry. in the past few decades, protein misfolding and aggregation have attracted much research interest not only because of their roles in conformational diseases, such as alzheimers and other amyloid neuropathies , but also because well-ordered aggregates can lead to the design of novel nanomaterials with desired characteristics . aggregation is also a major hurdle in the commercial manufacturing of biotechnology products such as enzymes and biopharmaceuticals . aggregates formed by proteins and peptides exhibit a wide range of morphologies ranging from amorphous to well-defined amyloid fibrils with characteristic x-ray reflections . formation of amyloid fibrils by short peptides is sequence dependent when all other parameters such as ph and concentration remain the same, indicating a role for side chains in the-mediated aggregation process (; lopez de la). in a pioneering work from serranos laboratory, variants of a designed amyloid fibrilforming peptide, stviie, were tested for amyloid fibril formation at neutral and low ph (lopez de la). this study provided valuable datasets of hexapeptides that form amyloid fibrils and those that form amorphous-aggregates. the dataset of amyloid fibril-forming hexapeptides was expanded by the developers of waltz software, who derived position-specific matrices to further elucidate the rules for amyloid fibril formation in hexapeptides . moreover, several computational methods have been developed to identify the aggregation-prone regions (aprs) in proteins and peptides using descriptors such as-strand propensity, hydrophobicity and charge . analyses of the available experimental data on hexapeptides that form amyloid fibrils (amyloid peptides) and those that form amorphousaggregates but not amyloid fibrils (amorphous-aggregating peptides) enabled us to decipher rules that distinguish amyloid fibril hexapeptides from amorphous-aggregating peptides . it was observed that amyloid fibril hexapeptides have position-specific amino acid propensities that are distinct from those of the amorphous-aggregating hexapeptides. by converting the position-dependent differences in amino acid propensities observed for the two types of hexapeptides into energy potentials, an algorithm to predict amyloid fibril peptides was devised. this algorithm compared well with the predictive levels of currently available algorithms . however, there was scope for further improvement. in the present work, we extend our approach and probe propensities for various pairs of residues to occur simultaneously at alternate and adjacent position pairs in the-strand hexapeptides that form amyloid fibrils or amorphous-aggregates. we report the development of an algorithm] that identifies both amyloid fibril and amorphous-aggregate-forming hexapeptides with nearly 100 percent reliability (496 accuracy). furthermore, the performance of gap was evaluated on five additional, but nonredundant, datasets that were not used in training this program. in all these datasets, gap performed with significantly improved accuracy levels when compared with other commonly used methods for aggregation prediction. at a fundamental level, success of gap demonstrates that propensities of amino acid residues to occur at adjacent and alternate position pairs may be crucial for determining the morphological fate of-strand-mediated aggregates formed by short peptides. this observation complements the well-studied role of polypeptide backbone toward initiating aggregation in peptides and proteins . besides accurately identifying potential aprs, gap also predicts whether the aprs shall form amorphous-aggregates or amyloid fibrils. this tool is expected to find several applications in both fundamental protein science and biotechnology. the three most important applications of gap include the (i) ability to rationally design peptide-based nanomaterials with finely tuned morphologies and physical characteristics , (ii) improved identification of proteins in human and animal proteomes whose aggregation could lead to diseases and (iii) improved ability to identify different types of aprs in biopharmaceuticals and industrial enzymes . furthermore, it is anticipated that reliable identification of aprs in peptides and proteins shall facilitate design of novel aggregation inhibitors, for their use as therapeutic agents as well as biotechnological excipients, and protein engineering efforts to improve solubility via apr disruption . improved ability to identify aprs shall also enable fundamental research into relationships of aggregation with protein folding and function .the amino acid sequences of amyloid fibril-forming and amorphous-aggregating hexapeptides show distinct residue pair preferences to occur at adjacent and alternate positions. this observation enabled us to derive statistical potentials for amino acid residue pairs to simultaneously occur at the alternate and adjacent position pairs in hexapeptides that have been experimentally shown in the literature to from either amyloid fibrils or amorphous-aggregates. these residue pair preferences have been used to develop a new tool called gap. gap is capable of accurately identifying aprs in protein and peptide sequences and also distinguishing whether the predicted aprs shall predominantly form amyloid fibrils or amorphous-aggregates. this work also improved our fundamental understanding of-strand-mediated aggregation process by highlighting the role of side chains in determining the morphological fate of the aggregates.  
