structural bioinformatics gass: identifying enzyme active sites with genetic algorithms motivation: currently, 25 of proteins annotated in pfam have their function unknown. one way of predicting proteins function is by looking at their active site, which has two main parts: the catalytic site and the substrate binding site. the active site is more conserved than the other residues of the protein and can be a rich source of information for protein function prediction. this article presents a new heuristic method, named genetic active site search (gass), which searches for given active site 3d templates in unknown proteins. the method can perform non-exact amino acid matches (conservative mutations), is able to find amino acids in different chains and does not impose any restrictions on the active site size. results: gass results were compared with those catalogued in the catalytic site atlas (csa) in four different datasets and compared with two other methods: amino acid pattern search for substruc-tures and motif and catalytic site identification. the results show gass can correctly identify 90 of the templates searched. experiments were also run using data from the substrate binding sites prediction competition casp 10, and gass is ranked fourth among the 18 methods considered. availability and implementation: source code and datasets (dcc.ufmg.br/ $glpappa/gass).over 14 000 protein families are currently annotated in pfam (http:// pfam.sanger.ac.uk/), from which more than 3500 still have their functions unknown . experimental tests are expensive and time consuming, and, in their absence, studies have shown that protein function can be successfully inferred based on the sequence or structure similarity between the hypothetical protein and proteins of known function . one way of predicting protein function is by searching for enzyme binding sites. according to, enzyme binding sites are regions on the surface of an enzyme specially modelled to interact with other molecules. there are different types of binding sites, the most important being the active site.the active site is divided into two or three parts, which include the catalytic site and the substrate binding site. the former is usually a set of two to six residues that perform the catalytic reaction while the latter recognizes the molecule upon which the enzyme acts. for the sake of simplicity, as finding a binding, active or catalytic site refers to the same computational problem, this article always refers to active sites, which is a broader term and encompasses both catalytic and substrate binding sites. due to their importance to enzyme function, active sites amino acids are more conserved during evolution than the sequence as a whole. consequently, they can be a rich source of information for function prediction (fn;). several methods have been proposed to inferprotein function based on active site similarity , and they can be grouped into three major categories: sequence-based, structure-based and hybrid. when using sequence, multiple alignments of various organisms have been widely used to verify conservation of residues that may be structurally or functionally important, including,, in contrast, take advantage of different types of information, including surface accessibility , physiochemical properties or homology modelling . this article is particularly interested in methods for searching active sites based on structural data. in general, structure-based methods proposed to identify active sites in proteins are based on graphs, where nodes represent atoms in the amino acid side chain and neighbour atoms are connected with edges, weighted by their distances. in this context,proposed a simple graph-search method based on a depth-first search called patterns in non-homologous tertiary structures, which finds all possible residue patterns (considering all template atoms) common to the template of the target protein., in contrast, proposed amino acid pattern search for substructures and motifs (assam), which models the problem as a sub-graph isomorphism problem. assam searches for maximum common sub-graphs to find similar structures between the template active site and the enzyme. the graph represents the amino acids in the side chain, and each node consists of two pseudoatoms. distances among different structures are calculated using root-mean-squared deviation (rmsd)., in turn, introduced catalytic site identification (catsid). the algorithm performs a protein-to-template matching using a sub-graph search method and a library of catalytic residue templates from catalytic site atlas (csa;)a database of catalytic sites in enzymes of known 3d structure. these results are refined using a logistic scoring procedure to re-score the matches found in the first phase and use information such as binding site predictions and others physical descriptors to improve the structure matching previously obtained. many methods have also been proposed for substrate binding site in the context of the casp competition . sp-align , for instance, detects substrate binding sites by remote template identification and superimposition, structure-pocket alignment and binding site clustering guided by the template substrates. 3dligandsite , in contrast, aligns similar structures with the query, superimposing their bound ligands onto the query structure. this article proposes a method to identify active sites using genetic algorithms (gas) and information about the proteins 3d structure. gas are widely used to solve combinatorial search problems and emulate the process of evolution and survival of the fittest . they have the advantage of performing a global search, being independent of application and tolerant to noise . the proposed method can perform non-exact amino acid matches without restricting the number of amino acids in the template and finds catalytic residues and binding residues in different protein chains. its global heuristic search is used to prune the search space, and only information about the 3d structure is required. having the active sites identified in a second phase, protein function can be inferred using methods based on a similarity threshold or more sophisticated techniques, such as logistic regression .this section discusses the results obtained when evaluating gass using the two strategies previously described. a summary of the results obtained by gass when comparing its results with csa templates is presented in. the differences among the number of enzymes searched and those with known catalytic sites in csa happen for two reasons: (i) sometimes an enzyme has more than one catalytic site; (ii) not all enzymes have their catalytic sites catalogued in csa. the results are detailed in the following sections.this work proposed gass, a method for active site search based on gas. the method receives as input one or more active sites templates, and looks for them in one or more proteins, returning a ranking of solutions as big as its population size. it also takes into account conservative mutations during the search by using a substitution matrix. the method can also find active sites in different protein chains, and its results can be further improved by using additional attributes to describe the sites. gass has no predefined criteria to search the candidate solution space, such as catsid, nor uses a limit for the size of the active site, as assam does. results show the method is effective in finding catalytic sites already catalogued in csa, with accuracy rates above 90 in most datasets. besides, when considering the dataset used in the fn task in casp 10, when compared with the other 17 methods, gass is ranked fourth according to values of mcc. it can be a powerful tool to improve the current catalytic sites and add new ones to csa. as future work, we intend to enhance the presented techniques so it verifies the accessibility and location of the amino acids (pockets) found by gass. the current solution can be further extended to consider physicochemical attributes during gass search. additional tests with other substitution matrices will also be performed . finally, we plan to make gass available from a web server after the aforementioned issues are addressed.  
