genome analysis gat: a simulation framework for testing the association of genomic intervals motivation: a common question in genomic analysis is whether two sets of genomic intervals overlap significantly. this question arises, for example, when interpreting chip-seq or rna-seq data in functional terms. because genome organization is complex, answering this question is non-trivial. summary: we present genomic association test (gat), a tool for estimating the significance of overlap between multiple sets of gen-omic intervals. gat implements a null model that the two sets of intervals are placed independently of one another, but allows each sets density to depend on external variables, for example, isochore structure or chromosome identity. gat estimates statistical significance based on simulation and controls for multiple tests using the false discovery rate. availability: gats source code, documentation and tutorials are available ata common question in genomic analysis is whether two sets of genomic intervals, for example, chip-seq peaks and gene annotation classes, overlap significantly more than expected by chance alone. interval overlap is easy to compute, but the significance can be computed analytically only for trivial situations. hence, significance is usually estimated by simulation under some null model. this model must account for genome organization; a model that assumes independent and uniform placement of both interval sets is almost always inappropriate when testing for association with gene annotations because gene density strongly correlates with g c content, and datasets of interest often also show g c biases. here, we introduce genomic association test (gat), a tool for computing the significance of overlap between multiple sets of genomic intervals. gat permits the restriction of the analysis to parts of a genome relevant to the experiment and accounts for chromosomal and isochore biases. additional genomic features can be controlled for by providing additional segmentation files. gats approach was developed originally to test for the association of non-coding transcripts with other genomic elements , but has since been applied to a variety of problems, including: conservation of non-coding transcription between human and mouse ; enrichment of histone marks and evolutionarily conserved genomic regions within non-coding transcripts ; functional prediction of non-coding transcripts via their neighboring genes ; and enrichment of chip-seq binding events within signatures of open chromatin or disease-associated intervals . gats re-implementation delivers to the scientific community the extended functionality of themethods.  
