gboost: a gpu-based tool for detecting gene–gene interactions in genome–wide case control studies motivation: collecting millions of genetic variations is feasible with the advanced genotyping technology. with a huge amount of genetic variations data in hand, developing efficient algorithms to carry out the genegene interaction analysis in a timely manner has become one of the key problems in genome-wide association studies (gwas). boolean operation-based screening and testing (boost), a recent work in gwas, completes genegene interaction analysis in 2.5 days on a desktop computer. compared with central processing units (cpus), graphic processing units (gpus) are highly parallel hardware and provide massive computing resources. we are, therefore, motivated to use gpus to further speed up the analysis of genegene interactions. results: we implement the boost method based on a gpu framework and name it gboost. gboost achieves a 40-fold speedup compared with boost. it completes the analysis of wellcome trust case control consortium type 2 diabetes (wtccc t2d) genome data within 1.34 h on a desktop computer equipped with nvidia geforce gtx 285 display card. availability: gboost code is available at http://bioinformatics.ust .hk/boost.htmlgboost.interaction patterns of single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) can be used to interpret genetic disease risks in individuals. with the advances of technologies, the burden of collecting genome-wide dna sequence variations has been lifted. the burst of genotype data leads to an urge of efficient algorithms to analyze many genome-wide association studies (gwas) data in a reasonable period of time. a comprehensive review summarized some popular methods in detecting genegene interactions. plink was recommended as the most computationally feasible method for detecting genegene interactions in genome-wide data. it was reported that plink finished the pairwise interaction examination of 89 294 snps selected from the wtccc crohn disease dataset with 5000 samples in 14 days . to whom correspondence should be addressed.recently,proposed a fast method, named boost, to examine all pairwise interactions in genome-wide casecontrol studies. boost completed the pairwise interaction analysis of human genome data with 350 000 snps and 5000 samples on a computer with 3 ghz central processing unit (cpu) and 4 gb memory in 60 h. however, we can foresee that the growth of data will overwhelm boost in the near future.suggested that the analysis time in gwas can be largely reduced by parallel computing. the development of graphical processing units (gpus) enables modern display cards to have hundreds of cores, providing a high memory bandwidth at a low price. a recent gpu implementation of the multifactor dimensionality reduction (mdr) method has significantly reduced the time required for detecting genegene interactions. the demand of massive memory operations in collecting contingency tables and independence of analyzing different snp pairs in boost make it suitable to implement boost in gpu. here we propose gboost, a gpu implementation of boost. gboost is able to finish the genome-wide interaction analysis of a typical dataset on a single workstation within a few hours.  
