genome analysis geca: a fast tool for gene evolution and conservation analysis in eukaryotic protein families geca is a fast, user-friendly and freely-available tool for representing gene exon/intron organization and highlighting changes in gene structure among members of a gene family. it relies on protein alignment, completed with the identification of common introns in the corresponding genes using ciwog. geca produces a main graphical representation showing the resulting aligned set of gene structures, where exons are to scale. the important and original feature of geca is that it combines these gene structures with a symbolic display highlighting sequence similarity between subsequent genes. it is worth noting that this combination of gene structure with the indications of similarities between related genes allows rapid identification of possible events of gain or loss of introns, or points to erroneous structural annotations. the output image is generated in a portable network graphics format which can be used for scientific publications. availability and implementation: web-implemented version and source code are freely available at https://peroxibase.toulouse. inra.fr/geca_input_demo.php and a detailed example can be found at https://peroxibase.the increasing pace of genome sequencing is providing us with a growing number of sequences, containing a wealth of information that will fuel studies for years to come. one of the numerous resulting fields of investigation is the comparison of annotations and subsequent genic organizations in eukaryotic genomes. the amount of structurally annotated protein genes available has incited the development of web tools such as gsds , fancygene . the purpose of these programs is to represent the exon/intron structure of several genes in a single image in order to perform global gene structure comparison. however, these resources display the gene structures independently, rendering gene comparison difficult and leaving the individual gene structures lacking in information concerning sequence conservation.  
