genome analysis genblastg: using blast searches to build homologous gene models motivation: blast users frequently expect to obtain homologous genes with certain similarity to their query genes. but what they get from blast searches are often collections of local alignments called high-scoring segment pairs (hsps). on the other hand, most homology-based gene finders have been built using computation-intensive algorithms, without taking full advantage of blast searches that have been perfected over the last decades. results: here we report an efficient algorithm, genblastg that directly uses the hsps reported by blast to define high-quality gene models.basic local alignment search tool (blast;) is one of the most popular and efficient bioinformatics tools ever developed. frequently, blast users expect to identify homologous genes for comparative analysis. for example, following the discovery of a previously unknown gene in a human genome, a biologist will typically perform a blast search of the publicly accessible databases such as the mouse genome database to see if another species carries a similar gene, hoping to gain insights into the function and regulatory signals of the newly found gene. blast, however, presents the user a (usually large) collection of local alignments called high-scoring segment pairs (hsps). such hsps provide no indication how they are structured into the gene model because they are usually only isolated regions of similarity with some being simply noises. in the last decade, many homology-based gene predictors have been developed including genewise , projector , twinscan and exonerate . these algorithms either are independent of blast or use blast only as a preprocessing to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. tool to narrow down gene search space . our work is motivated by the following question: can we construct gene structures directly from the hsps found by blast, which represent high-quality local alignments? the rationale is to delegate the expensive local alignment search to the well developed blast and focus on extracting and defining the best gene structure that such hsps represent. here we present a novel homologybased algorithm, genblastg, which takes local similarity alignments (hsps) identified by homologous searches as input and defines gene models by examining alignments and neighboring genomic regions for start/stop codons and splicing signals. compared to previous homology-based gene finding algorithms, genblastg is able to leverage the vast improvement in speed and search quality of blast made in last 20 years since its first publication and benefit from the wide acceptance and availability of the program. this hypothesis has been evaluated in nematode, plant and human genomes. our tests show that genblastg is extremely fast while providing better performance than previous algorithms in terms of specificity and sensitivity .we first tested the performance of genblastg in predicting genes in the genome of the model organism caenorhabditis elegans (c.elegans sequencing) using c.elegans proteins as queries. for each gene prediction run for genblastg, we used genblasta-defined genomic region together all contained hsps as input, while for genewise and exonerate, we used a protein as query and the corresponding homologous genomic region returned by genblasta as the genomic search space. thus for all three programs, we used genblasta-defined genomic regions as gene search spaces. we found that genblastg runs considerably faster than genewise, the arguably most widely used homology-based gene prediction program, and exonerate especially when it runs in the exhaustive mode . genblastg runs faster than exonerate even when it runs at the less accurate heuristic mode. this high speed of genblastg is not achieved by sacrificing its performance. in fact, when genblastg is used to remap c.elegans proteins to the c.elegans genomes, it outperforms both genewise and exonerate in generating genes with high sensitivity and specificity at full-length transcript level (; supplementary information). it performs similarly to genewise and exonerate at the exon and nucleotide levels . the better performance comes from the high quality of hsps returned by blast and genblastgs effort of maximizing similarity to the query gene in defining exons. genblastg also performs favorably in predicting genes in different including distantly related genomes. we evaluated its performance against genewise and exonerate in predicting genes in arabidopsis thaliana genome using rice (oryza sativa l. ssp. japonica) proteins that are fully supported by cdnas as queries. these two speciesdiverged from their common ancestor more than 100 million years ago . we divided query proteins in eight categories, each of which has a certain global percentage identity (pid) between query (rice) proteins and their orthologous proteins in a.thaliana. we then calculated the percentage of the predicted proteins in a.thaliana that are identical (thus, perfectly predicted) to the curated orthologs in a.thaliana. as shown in, for pid of 90100, 62.5 of genblastg predicted a.thaliana gene models are base pair to base pair identical to curated orthologs in a.thaliana. in contrast, the percentage of correct transcripts predicted by genewise is only 43.8. this study clearly shows that there is a high correlation between a correct prediction of transcripts and the similarity between query genes and their orthologs.blast has been extremely successful as a tool for finding local alignments with both high sensitivity and speed. however, the large number of isolated local alignments, in the form of hsps, cannot be readily and effectively interpreted due to the lack of obvious organization that describes the gene structure from which hsps are extracted. genblastg, which builds on the success of genblasta, presents an approach that constructs the gene models directly from the hsps returned by blast, with the intention of leveraging the wide success of blast. our study shows that genblastg can find gene models much faster than existing homology-based gene finders including genewise and exonerate, while providing better performance than these programs.  
