data and text mining genclip 2.0: a web server for functional clustering of genes and construction of molecular networks based on free terms identifying biological functions and molecular networks in a gene list and how the genes may relate to various topics is of considerable value to biomedical researchers. here, we present a web-based text-mining server, genclip 2.0, which can analyze human genes with enriched keywords and molecular interactions. compared with other similar tools, genclip 2.0 offers two unique features: (i) analysis of gene functions with free terms (i.e. any terms in the literature) generated by literature mining or provided by the user and (ii) accurate identification and integration of comprehensive molecular interactions from medline abstracts, to construct molecular networks and subnetworks related to the free terms. availability and implementation: http://ci.given a set of genes, for example, from high-throughput experiments, it can be helpful to know which biological functions and molecular networks may be involved, or whether genes from a given list or all human genes are related to certain topics, such as various biological and pathological processes. some pre-defined annotation databases, such as gene ontology (go), or pathway databases, such as kegg, or proteinprotein interaction (ppi) databases, such as hprd and intact , can be used as a gold-standard description. some annotation tools that integrate these manually curated databases, such as david and egan (, provide convenient and practical application. however, owing to structured vocabularies and manual curations, pre-defined annotations are inevitably limited in scope, quantity and flexibility. some text-mining tools can compensate for these deficiencies. martini and copub 5.0 adopted a keyword-based approach to annotate gene function; however, the keywords were still limited in a pre-defined thesauri. ihop and string generate gene networks based on genes co-occurrence in the literature. however, even though gene pairs co-occur in the same sentences, only 30 of pairs have an actual interaction . facta+ finds hidden associations between concepts and extracts genes related to a topic, but it does not search phase or select genes from an input list. previously, we developed stand-alone software called genclip that annotated gene functions with free terms and generated gene co-occurrence networks related to free terms. however, genclip had three distinct disadvantages: (i) the free terms were limited to single words, (ii) the gene network was constructed based on genes co-mentioned in the same abstracts, often leading to high false positives and (iii) the analysis period generally took 2 weeks, and most of the time was spent on literature download. thus, we have developed genclip 2.0, a web server that inherits the advantages of genclip, and extends it by incorporating five new features: (i) good performance in gene recognition, with f-measure rising from 0.72 to 0.828, (ii) expansion of free terms to phrases, (iii) molecular interaction extraction accuracy of nearly 90, (iv) search genes related to free terms and (v) complete analysis in minutes.genclip 2.0 has three modules for text mining: gene cluster with literature profiles, literature mining gene networks and word related gene search. as an example, we took 65 upregulated and 53 downregulated genes (sample 2 on the main page) of keloid to compare with hypertrophic scar to illustrate the application of our server. unlike hypertrophic scars, keloids are disfiguring scars that extend beyond the original wound borders and resist treatment. in our analysis, enriched keywords were mostly related with cell growth, extracellular matrix, epithelial mesenchymal transition (emt), cell migration, cell adhesion, mesenchymal stem cell and wound healing. collagen was manually input as a search term, and found that 10 upregulated genes (p = 7.366e-11) were closely associated with collagen. these keywords are mostly concordant with well-known characteristics of keloid. interestingly, keratnocyte and keratinocyte differentiation were also annotated as keywords, and associated genes were all downregulated genes except for one (supplementary). this reminded us that we should pay more attention to keratnocyte. recent study has also shown the important role of keloid keratinocytes in keloid scarring, and it was also reported that there were a substantial number of upregulated genes involved in emt in keloid keratinocytes . in the word related gene search module, we obtained 28 of the 118 input genes that co-occurred with epithelial mesenchymal transition in sentences. we confirmed that 12 upregulated and 5 downregulated genes were related to emt. in our experience, in general, at least 50 of the genes will be related to search terms. resulting gene networks (supplementary) showed that upregulated mmp2 played an important role in the network. interestingly, thbs2, cst3 and glb1, as activators of mmp2, were upregulated, whereas three inhibitors, il1rn, s100a8 and s100a9, were downregulated. most of these genes had not been investigated in keloid; however, keywords and the related gene search provided strong evidence that they were closely associated with extracellular matrix, emt, cell migration and cell growth. consequently, we proposed that abnormal expression of these genes can cause upregulation of mmp2 and may impact keloid progress.  
