genefu: an r/bioconductor package for computation of gene expression-based signatures in breast cancer breast cancer is one of the most frequent cancers among women. extensive studies into the molecular heterogeneity of breast cancer have produced a plethora of molecular subtype classification and prognosis prediction algorithms, as well as numerous gene expression signatures. however, reimplementation of these algorithms is a tedious but important task to enable comparison of existing signatures and classification models between each other and with new models. here, we present the genefu r/bioconductor package, a multi-tiered compendium of bioinformatics algorithms and gene signatures for molecular subtyping and prognostication in breast cancer. availability and implementation: the genefu package is available from bioconductor.breast cancer is a devastating disease whose management is complicated by its high molecular heterogeneity. breast cancer is categorized into at least four clinically relevant molecular subtypes that reflect upon expression levels of specific genes . these are her2-enriched (also called her2), triple-negative breast cancers (er/her2/pr, similar to basal-like) and luminal-like which are mainly er/her2 that could be further discriminated into luminal a and b based on their low and high proliferative phenotype, respectively. these classifications have showed that breast cancer is not a single disease but is rather highly heterogeneous. breast cancer subtypes exhibit distinct transcriptomic patterns that are associated with outcome, which emphasizes the relevance of these subtypes for basic and translational research . among various molecular techniques, gene expression profiling in particular has increasingly been used to refine breast cancer stratification, and to assess prognosis and response to therapy . importantly, the prognostic value of the vast majority of these signatures were limited to luminal-like breast tumors, calling for the development of subtype-specific prognostic models . subtypespecific prognoses however are also largely dependent on the proper identification of the major biological subtypes. the parallel development of breast cancer subtyping methods has also produced a significant number of classification algorithms, with diverse taxonomies. the large body of literature on the molecular complexity of breast cancer has introduced a burden of computational complexity for researchers. the advent of high-throughput genomics and next-generation sequencing promises unprecedented views into the major biological breast cancer subtypes . however, there is a dire need for an accessible, computational platform that can easily sustain the growing variety of breast cancer classification and prognostic algorithms. this will facilitate both meta-analyses of breast cancer data as well as cross comparison of different computational methods. here, we have developed the genefu package, a multi-leveled compendium that provides bioinformatics implementations of classification algorithms to identify molecular subtypes, as well as prognostic predictors along with their published gene signatures (, supplementary). notably, we have incorporated the most recently developed molecular subtyping algorithms in the field, including the intclust , the ihc4 prognostic scoring algorithm , the absolute intrinsic molecular subypting (aims) algorithm , as well as the classification algorithm for prediction of claudin-low breast cancer samples . the package also includes other functions to facilitate quick manipulation of gene expression datasets, including gene selection and probegene mapping across microarray platforms.  
