systems biology gene function prediction from synthetic lethality networks via ranking on demand motivation: synthetic lethal interactions represent pairs of genes whose individual mutations are not lethal, while the double mutation of both genes does incur lethality. several studies have shown a correlation between functional similarity of genes and their distances in networks based on synthetic lethal interactions. however, there is a lack of algorithms for predicting gene function from synthetic lethality interaction networks. results: in this article, we present a novel technique called kernelrod for gene function prediction from synthetic lethal interaction networks based on kernel machines. we apply our novel algorithm to gene ontology functional annotation prediction in yeast. our experiments show that our method leads to improved gene function prediction compared with state-of-the-art competitors and that combining genetic and congruence networks leads to a further improvement in prediction accuracy.synthetic lethalityconcept and mechanisms: synthetic lethal interactions have received much attention in the genetics community over recent years. a synthetic lethal interaction refers to a pair of genes which interact in the following sense: while mutating each of the two genes individually does not cause lethality, a double mutation of both genes does show a lethal effect on the organism. hence, synthetic lethality seems to indicate a compensatory effect of two genes, with one gene compensating for the deletion of the other and with lethal consequences only if both genes are deleted jointly. the two main hypotheses to explain synthetic lethality between two genes a and b are the within-and between-pathway models . the within-pathway hypothesis assumes that both genes a and b are part of the same pathway, and that the function of this pathway is diminished by the single mutations, but rendered below the viability threshold by to whom correspondence should be addressed their double mutation. the between-pathway hypothesis assumes that a and b act in parallel pathways that can compensate for defects in the other. these two main hypotheses can be extended in more complex models of synthetic lethality (e.g. see), and algorithms for detecting pathways within genetic networks have been defined based on these hypotheses . synthetic lethality and gene function: the compensatory effect of genes in synthetic lethal interactions and the two main hypotheses to explain this phenomenon already hint at a strong link between gene function and synthetic lethal interaction. this link could be confirmed in several studies.report that 12 and 27 of synthetic lethal interaction pairs have identical or similar gene ontology (go;) annotations, respectively.report correlations between go annotations of genes and their distances in so-called congruence networks which are derived from the genetic network. these congruence networks quantify similarity between two genes by means of a score that depends on their number of common neighbors in the genetic interaction graph. in a second study,report correlations between go annotations of gene pairs and this congruence score. this correlation is strongest for the go annotations that refer to the biological process and the cellular component that these genes are part of, and weaker for their molecular function.defined diffusion kernels on genetic interaction networks whose scores were shown to correlate with semantic similarity of gene functions according to all three go categories. goals and scope of this article: while previous studies focused on examining whether there is a correlation between genetic network structure and functional associations (, b) or in discovering pathways , our goal in this article is to define algorithmic machinery to rank all the genes in a genetic network based on their likelihood of belonging to a particular functional class, given a set of examples from this class. this ranking provides guidance in choosing promising targets for experimental function determination. first, we study this problem of gene function prediction in yeast and for all three definitions of gene function provided by the go : biological process, molecular function and cellular component. second, we assess the prediction accuracy of our method in comparison with that of state-of-the-art methods. third, we study whether combining predictions based on geneticwe perform gene function prediction via cross-validation on a synthetic lethality network from yeast using kernelrod and several comparison methods: bs, gba and svm1 and two-class svm (seeand, and supplementary tables 2 and 3 and supplementary figs 6 and 7 for all results). all methods are significantly better than random: as a first check, we examined whether the results we had obtained with kernelrod, gba and bs were better than random. for this purpose, we generated 1000 random rankings on each task and computed the auc values for these random rankings. we then used this approximated null distribution of auc values from random rankings to compute a p-value of the results of our methods. if the methods worked only as good as a random ranker, one would expect to obtain a distribution over p-values that is close to uniform. as can be seen fromand supplementary, the distribution of p-values of all methods is skewed toward small p-values, and highly significantly different from that of a random ranker [kolmogorov-smirnov test (ks-test),in this article, we have presented kernelrod, a novel ranking approach for gene function prediction from synthetic lethality networks. in function prediction in yeast, we observe that our kernel-based approach kernelrod outperforms state-of-the-art methods and that a combined random walk kernel on genetic networks and on congruence networks often improves, and never harms prediction accuracy. considering indirect interactions (walks of length 2) in the synthetic interaction network results in improved rankings compared with considering only direct interactions. we could confirm that congruence networks are useful for function prediction from genetic networks, as reported by). we could also confirm that diffusion or random walk-based kernels are a promising approach to function prediction on genetic networks, as reported by. furthermore, we also established that random walk kernels achieve even better page: 917 912918  
