gene–gene interaction analysis for the survival phenotype based on the cox model motivation: for the past few decades, many statistical methods in genome-wide association studies (gwas) have been developed to identify snpsnp interactions for case-control studies. however, there has been less work for prospective cohort studies, involving the survival time. recently, gui et al. (2011) proposed a novel method, called surv-mdr, for detecting genegene interactions associated with survival time. surv-mdr is an extension of the multifactor dimensionality reduction (mdr) method to the survival phenotype by using the log-rank test for defining a binary attribute. however, the surv-mdr method has some drawbacks in the sense that it needs more intensive computations and does not allow for a covariate adjustment. in this article, we propose a new approach, called cox-mdr, which is an extension of the generalized multifactor dimensionality reduction (gmdr) to the survival phenotype by using a martingale residual as a score to classify multi-level genotypes as high-and low-risk groups. the advantages of cox-mdr over surv-mdr are to allow for the effects of discrete and quantitative covariates in the frame of cox regression model and to require less computation than surv-mdr. results: through simulation studies, we compared the power of cox-mdr with those of surv-mdr and cox regression model for various heritability and minor allele frequency combinations without and with adjusting for covariate. we found that cox-mdr and cox regression model perform better than surv-mdr for low minor allele frequency of 0.2, but surv-mdr has high power for minor allele frequency of 0.4. however, when the effect of covariate is adjusted for, cox-mdr and cox regression model perform much better than surv-mdr. we also compared the performance of cox-mdr and surv-mdr for a real data of leukemia patients to detect the genegene interactions with the survival time. contact:recently, massive amounts of information for single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) across the whole genome have become available from high-throughput technology, which allows genomewide association studies (gwas) to be performed. as recently reviewed by, nearly 600 genome-wide association studies covering 150 distinct diseases and traits have been reported, with nearly 800 snp-trait associations reported as significant under p 5 10 8. however, it is noted that the effective sizes of the to whom correspondence should be addressed. loci identified via gwas are relatively small, and these individual loci may not be useful in assessing risk in personal genetics, as mentioned by moore and williams (2009). in early gwas, statistical methods for identifying susceptibility have considered a single snp at a time and have selected a subset of the top few snps from a ranked list of snps. then, replication studies have been implemented to determine whether these associations held for other samples. some of the replication studies, however, show that significant associations are not found from the top ranked list. recently, this single-locus approach has been moved into a multiple-loci approach because most complex diseases are associated with multiple genes and their interactions. however, the traditional parametric approach, such as the logistic regression model, has limited power in detecting non-linear patterns of interaction and needs a large amount of study samples when multiple snps and genegene interactions are considered. as a dimensional reduction strategy,proposed the multifactor dimensionality reduction (mdr) method, which is a computationally efficient method for detecting non-linear patterns of genegene interactions in genetic association studies. the mdr method is a non-parametric and genetic model-free approach that efficiently identifies higher-order interactions between genes and/or geneenvironmental factors with binary phenotype. the main idea of mdr is to reduce multi-dimensional genotypes into onedimensional binary attributes by pooling genotypes of multiple snps using a well-defined classifier. more studies on mdr have been published byand hahn and moore (2004). in addition, many modifications and extensions to mdr have been published, which include the use of odds ratios , log-linear models , generalized linear models , methods for imbalanced data , methods for dealing with missing data , and model-based methods . among these previous studies, the generalized multifactor dimensionality reduction (gmdr) method proposed byincludes both dichotomous and continuous phenotypes and allows for the adjustment of covariates such as age, sex and other clinical variables. in a prospective cohort study, survival time has been one of the important phenotypes in studies of associations with gene expression levels measured by high-throughput microarray technology. recently,proposed a novel approach for identifying genegene interactions with survival times using snp information in the frame of mdr, called surv-mdr. the survmdr method modifies mdrs constructive induction algorithm to classify multi-level genotypes as high-and low-risk groups using a log-rank test instead of case control ratios. in addition, balanced accuracy is replaced by log-rank test statistics and is used as ato identify the complexity of genegene and/or geneenvironment interactions on common diseases, many plausible approaches have been developed by extending existing methods into a more general framework. in this article, we propose the cox-mdr method by extending the main idea of gmdr to the survival phenotype. coxmdr uses the martingale residual of the cox regression model as a score to classify multi-loci genotype combinations into highand low-risk groups. since the martingale residual reflects the unexplained part beyond what is explained by the adjusted covariates excluding the genetic factors, we can evaluate whether genetic factors have an independent association with the survival time using the martingale residual. through the simulation study, we compared the performance of cox-mdr to those of a cox regression model and surv-mdr. all of the three methods showed the common trend that the power increases steadily as heritability increases from 0.1 to 0.4 although the degree of increase varies depending on the minor allele frequency and the effect size of covariate. when the minor allele frequency is 0.2, i587  
