databases and ontologies advance access publication gene list significance at-a-glance with genevalorization motivation: high-throughput technologies provide fundamental informations concerning thousands of genes. many of the current research laboratories daily use one or more of these technologies and end-up with lists of genes. assessing the originality of the results obtained includes being aware of the number of publications available concerning individual or multiple genes and accessing information about these publications. faced with the exponential growth of publications avaliable and number of genes involved in a study, this task is becoming particularly difficult to achieve. results: we introduce genevalorization, a web-based tool that gives a clear and handful overview of the bibliography available corresponding to the user input formed by (i) a gene list (expressed by gene names or ids from entrezgene) and (ii) a context of study (expressed by keywords). from this input, genevalorization provides a matrix containing the number of publications with co-occurrences of gene names and keywords. graphics are automatically generated to assess the relative importance of genes within various contexts. links to publications and other databases offering information on genes and keywords are also available. to illustrate how helpful genevalorization is, we will consider the gene list of the oncotypedx prognostic marker test.high throughput technologies (e.g. comparative pan-genomic hybridization, gene expression, protein and methylation arrays, high-throughput dna sequencing) are major, promising and very exciting tools to study biology. each of them provide fundamental informations concerning thousands of genes such as their normal functions or specific alterations (e.g. dna copy number alteration, loss of heterozygosity, change in expression, promoter methylation, mutation or post-translational modification). many of the current biological research laboratories daily use one or more of these technologies. selecting genes of interest to design further experiments is of paramount importance. in this to whom correspondence should be addressed.process, scientists need to access the latest publications concerning individual or multiple genes. among the genes they may consider, researchers need to distinguish three categories of genes: (i) genes already clearly shown to be associated with the process they are studying; (ii) new and promising genes for a particular research field whose interest is well known in other research fields; (iii) genes that have not been studied. this task is becoming particularly difficult to achieve faced with the many gene lists which are retrieved and the exponential growth of publications available. in this article, we introduce a web-based tool named genevalorization. given a list of gene names and a set of keywords describing the context of the study, genevalorization provides a matrix with the number of publications cociting each gene name and keyword. genevalorization thus gives very quickly a clear and handful overview of the bibliography corresponding to a gene list of interest within a given context of study. to illustrate how helpful genevalorization is, we consider here the gene list of the oncotypedx prognostic marker test , which is composed of 16 genes and used to determine the individual relapse risk of a breast cancer patient.  
