systems biology genenet toolbox for matlab: a flexible platform for the analysis of gene connectivity in biological networks we present genenet toolbox for matlab (also available as a set of standalone applications for linux). the toolbox, available as command-line or with a graphical user interface, enables biologists to assess connectivity among a set of genes of interest (seed-genes) within a biological network of their choosing. two methods are implemented for calculating the significance of connectivity among seed-genes: seed randomization and network permutation. options include restricting analyses to a specified subnetwork of the primary biological network, and calculating connectivity from the seed-genes to a second set of interesting genes. pre-analysis tools help the user choose the best connectivity-analysis algorithm for their network. the toolbox also enables visualization of the connections among seed-genes. genenet toolbox functions execute in reasonable time for very large networks (10 million edges) on a desktop computer. availability and implementation: genenet toolbox is open source and freely available from http://avigailtaylor.github.io/gntat14.in search of the genetic causes of diseases, high-throughput experiments, such as genome-wide association and gene expression studies, are often used to find putatively causative genetic variants. such experiments implicate many genes (seed-genes); to gain insights into the biological mechanisms through which these genes variants exert their effects, we often explore the hypothesis that the seed-genes participate in a shared biological pathway or process. to this end, within a given biological network, (say, a proteinprotein interaction (ppi) or gene co-expression network), we can count the direct connections between the seedgenes [seed-genes and direct connections between them comprise the direct network (see supplementary)], and determine if this direct seed connectivity is more than expected by chance. broadly speaking, there are two ways to assess direct seed connectivity within a network of interest: in seed randomization (sr), we keep the network the same, randomly select gene-sets equal in size to the set of seed-genes, and obtain an empirical p-value by comparing the direct seed connectivity to the connectivity of the random gene-sets (see supplementary); conversely, in network permutation (np), we keep seed-genes the same, permute the edges of the network many times (while preserving node degree and network clustering structure), and obtain an empirical p-value by comparing the direct seed connectivity in the real versus permuted networks (see supplementaryand supplementary information for algorithmic details). sometimes, experimental biases influence seed-gene selection; for example, when using rna-sequencing to call differentially expressed genes, there is a length bias towards longer transcripts . in such cases, gene attributes affected by these biases must be accounted for when assessing direct seed connectivity. in sr, we can do this by matching gene attributes of randomized gene-sets to the real set of seed-genes (see supplementary; note this approach will not work if seed-genes have unique attributes). in other scenarios, the biological network used to determine direct seed connectivity may be subject to an ascertainment bias; for example, genegene connections reported in ppis are biased by the number of studies pertaining to processes in which gene products participate . with sr, we can account for an ascertainment bias by matching randomized genes to real seed-genes by degree. however, if such a bias is the primary concern, then np should be used to better account for node degree [on condition that the network in question can be sufficiently permuted, while preserving its clustering structure (see additional features)]. np can also be used to evaluate three further properties of the seedgene network [proposed in , but renamed here]: seed direct degrees mean; seed indirect degrees mean; and common connectors degrees mean. [the latter two properties use the indirect network among seed-genes (see supplementary); supplementary figures s4s6 explain these properties.] last, np can help identify which seedgenes, if any, might be hubs in the direct network (see supplementary).  
