generalized empirical bayesian methods for discovery of differential data in high-throughput biology motivation: high-throughput data are now commonplace in biological research. rapidly changing technologies and application mean that novel methods for detecting differential behaviour that account for a large p, small n setting are required at an increasing rate. the development of such methods is, in general, being done on an ad hoc basis, requiring further development cycles and a lack of standardization between analyses. results: we present here a generalized method for identifying differential behaviour within high-throughput biological data through empirical bayesian methods. this approach is based on our bayseq algorithm for identification of differential expression in rna-seq data based on a negative binomial distribution, and in paired data based on a beta-binomial distribution. here we show how the same empirical bayesian approach can be applied to any parametric distribution, removing the need for lengthy development of novel methods for differently distributed data. comparisons with existing methods developed to address specific problems in high-throughput biological data show that these generic methods can achieve equivalent or better performance. a number of enhancements to the basic algorithm are also presented to increase flexibility and reduce computational costs. availability and implementation: the methods are implemented in the r bayseq (v2) package, available on bioconductorhigh-throughput data are becoming ubiquitous in biological research and numerous statistical techniques have been developed to analyze these data, often to identify patterns of difference between sets of biological replicates. microarray technology led to a proliferation of methods designed to analyze data with many features (i.e. genes) but few biological replicates [the large p, small n problem ] under an assumption of (log-)normality. the subsequent emergence of count data from high-throughput sequencing (hts) experiments motivated the development of analysis methods which generally assume some form of over-dispersed poisson distribution . the majority of these analytic methods seek not merely to adjust for the high-dimensionality of the data , but to exploit it through various forms of information borrowing across the p dimension. however, many of the methods developed achieve this borrowing of information by exploiting specific features of the data. consequently, while the methods developed for analysis of negative binomially distributed hts data are conceptually similar to those previously developed for analysis of (log-)normally distributed data, their implementation is very different.novel technologies for high-throughput generation of biological data may require different distributional assumptions to current methods. complete analyses of single-cell sequencing seem likely to require novel distributional assumptions , as do analyses of high-throughput quantitative proteomic and metabolomic data . in addition, complex experimental designs are producing diverse types of data from a single organism which require the development of methods for multi-dimensional and integrative analyses. while some of these challenges are beginning to be addressed, this is being done on an ad hoc basis, requiring further development cycles and a lack of standardization between analyses. we present here a generalized method for identifying differential behaviour applicable to high-throughput data of any type. this approach is based on our bayseq algorithm, initially developed for identification of differential expression in rna-seq data using a negative binomial distribution , and later adapted to paired data using a beta-binomial distribution . these algorithms extended the method of parametric empirical bayes point estimation by using multiple point estimators sampled across the large p dimension to approximate a distribution on the hyper-parameters of the data. here we show that this empirical bayesian approach (bayseq v2) is applicable to any parametric distribution, removing the need for time-consuming development of novel methods for each new type of data. this generalization allows differential behaviour to be identified in any class (or combination of classes) of biomolecular event detectable by the application of high-throughput technologies. here, we define biomolecular event to describe a biomolecular process producing a measurable signal with the potential to vary between experimental conditions. this may involve measurement of levels of biomolecules; for example, mrna-seq or high-throughput proteomics , modifications to biomolecules; for example, methyl-seq and chip-seq, or levels of interaction between biomolecules; for example, ribo-seq . to assess the utility of this approach, we consider analyses on microarray data, assumed to be log-normally distributed, and simulated zero-inflated negative binomial data, distributions novel to the empirical bayesian approach here described. we compare the performance of bayseq v2 to specific methods developed for analyses of such data in identifying differential expression. comparisons on over-dispersed poisson data are largely superfluous since bayseq was originally designed for such data, and extensive independent comparisons have already been carried out. nevertheless, to demonstrate that the performance of bayseq v2 has not been degraded by the generalization we include a re-analysis of thedata in supplementary. we additionally demonstrate the capability of bayseq v2 to perform various novel analyses on a complex set of rna-seq data from matched tissue sampling in four age groups of rat . code examples describing these analyses are included in supplementary s7.  
