gener: a minimal programming module for chemical controllers based on dna strand displacement gener is a development module for programming chemical controllers based on dna strand displacement. gener is developed with the aim of providing a simple interface that minimizes the opportunities for programming errors: gener allows the user to test the computations of the dna programs based on a simple two-domain strand displacement algebra, the minimal available so far. the tool allows the user to perform stepwise computations with respect to the rules of the algebra as well as exhaustive search of the computation space with different options for exploration and visualization. gener can be used in combination with existing tools, and in particular, its programs can be exported to microsoft researchs dsd tool as well as to latex.one of the goals of synthetic biology is constructing information processing systems for controlling biochemical systems at the molecular level. such an achievement would pave the way for applications, e.g. to smart therapeutic devices that are capable of sensing their environments . within a broad spectrum, various technologies are being developed to address different aspects of this vision. applications in dna nanotechnology aim at harnessing the complexity of biochemical dynamics to control active molecular devices in vivo . technologies based on dna strand displacement algebras, in particular, the double-stranded architecture with nicks on one strand is proving to be effective also in wet lab implementations of formally designed experiments . the double-stranded dna strand displacement algebras perform computations as a result of the interactions between single and double-stranded dna structures: the single-stranded structures act as signals that are processed by double-stranded structures that act as gates. the mechanism with which the signals are processed by the gates is toehold-mediated branch migration and strand displacement . by using this machinery, one can program, e.g. systems of chemical reaction networks that operate at the molecular level . in this setting, a single chemical reaction step is emulated by a sequence of dna-strand displacement operations. because an increase in additional steps introduces more opportunities for errors in design, simpler schemes for designing these molecular programs become more favorable. in this respect, two-domain dna strand displacement scheme provides a good platform for developing molecular programs as it is minimal in design while being sufficiently expressive for describing chemical reaction networks that are of interest from the point of view of molecular programming .gener is developed for performing in silico experiments in design and debugging of dna strand displacement systems. potential applications include designing dna sequences from desired dna domain structures . the search feature is useful for verification and analysis of reachable states of the designed systems. the sequences can then be ordered from integrated dna technologies (idt) and executed in a basic wet lab with a fluorometer for reading the output . the features of gener are only limited by its minimalistic design, avoiding duplication of effort, and imagination. we thus foresee extensions as they will be required.. one of the two composed domains can be a short domain, denoted with t. any other string consisting of letters denotes a long domain. complemented double strands are written in angle brackets and , and they denote double strands consisting of strands and their watsoncrick complements. we denote nicks on double strands with , which are the interruptions on one side of the double strand that make the interactions between the signals and gates possible. a screenshot of a search performed on an example. for the search, all paths option is chosen together with the display options search tree and equal nodes. the gray lines between the nodes denote equal nodes  
