generation of sequence-based data for pedigree-segregating mendelian or complex traits motivation: there is great interest in analyzing next generation sequence data that has been generated for pedigrees. however, unlike for population-based data there are only a limited number of rare variant methods to analyze pedigree data. one limitation is the ability to evaluate type i and ii errors for family-based methods, due to lack of software that can simulate realistic sequence data for pedigrees. summary: we developed rarepedsim (rare-variant pedigree-based simulator), a program to simulate region/gene-level genotype and phenotype data for complex and mendelian traits for any given pedigree structure. using a genetic model, sequence variant data can be generated either conditionally or unconditionally on pedigree members qualitative or quantitative phenotypes. additionally, qualitative or quantitative traits can be generated conditional on variant data. sequence data can either be simulated using realistic population demographic models or obtained from sequence-based studies. variant sites can be annotated with positions, allele frequencies and functionality. for rare variants, rarepedsim is the only program that can efficiently generate both genotypes and phenotypes, regardless of pedigree structure. data generated by rarepedsim are in standard linkage file (.ped) and variant call (.vcf) formats, ready to be used for a variety of purposes , including evaluation of type i error and power, for association methods including mixed models and linkage analysis methods.currently, there is great interest in analyzing next generation sequence (ngs) data generated for pedigrees. for mendelian traits, gene identification is far from complete and performing linkage analysis can greatly increase the ability to identify causal variants . for complex traits, pedigree-based studies differ from population-based design, i.e. better control of population stratification and potentially more powerful to detect associations, particularly for rare variants, due to causal allele enrichment . however, only a limited number of methods have been developed to analyze pedigree sequence data, e.g. extended fbat multimarker test , rv-tdt , seqlinkage . one bottleneck is the lack of available software to realistically generate rare variant pedigree data, to evaluate type i error, to compare statistical power of association and linkage methods and aid in the design of studies through the evaluation of sample size for sufficient power. although there are a number of programs that simulate common variants for pedigrees, they are not useful for ngs association and) can simulate sequence-based genotype and phenotype data for rare variants. however, their focus is on generating data for unrelated individuals. although seqsimla can also generate sequence data for pedigrees, it is strictly limited to complex traits and a three-generational family structure with a fixed number of individuals per generation. rarepedsim was developed to simulate region/gene-level genotype data and phenotypes for complex and mendelian pedigrees, regardless of structure. to evaluate type i error, variant data can be generated using mendelian segregation independent of the phenotype data. for evaluating power, where the trait is linked/associated with causal variant(s), variant data are generated conditional on the phenotypes. for mendelian traits, mode of inheritance, penetrance and phenocopies are incorporated in the model; for complex traits an odds ratio model is implemented, while for quantitative traits a linear model is used. phenotype data for mendelian, complex and quantitative traits can also be generated conditional on the simulated variant data. rarepedsim output files are in standard linkage and vcf formats. rarepedsim can generate data with allelic and locus heterogeneity as well as with errors and missing genotypes.rarepedsim is written in python and c and provides a userfriendly command-line interface. the program provides key functionalities to generate region/gene-based genotype pedigree data conditional or unconditional on phenotypes. the generated data are ready to be used for evaluating type i and ii errors for both familybased association methods, including mixed models, and parametric and nonparametric linkage methods. rarepedsim can be used by researchers to efficiently generate pedigree variant data without having to develop special software. ultimately rarepedsim will facilitate the development of novel methods to analyze rare variant generation of sequence data for pedigreespedigree data for a variety of genetic etiologies and aid in the design of studies.  
