systems biology a lasso regression model for the construction of microrna-target regulatory networks motivation: micrornas have recently emerged as a major class of regulatory molecules involved in a broad range of biological processes and complex diseases. construction of mirna-target regulatory networks can provide useful information for the study and diagnosis of complex diseases. many sequence-based and evolutionary information-based methods have been developed to identify mirnamrna targeting relationships. however, as the amount of available mirna and gene expression data grows, a more statistical and systematic method combining sequence-based binding predictions and expression-based correlation data becomes necessary for the accurate identification of mirnamrna pairs. results: we propose a lasso regression model for the identification of mirnamrna targeting relationships that combines sequence-based prediction information, mirna co-regulation, risc availability and mirna/mrna abundance data. by comparing this modelling approach with two other known methods applied to three different datasets, we found that the lasso regression model has considerable advantages in both sensitivity and specificity. the regression coefficients in the model can be used to determine the true regulatory efficacies in tissues and was demonstrated using the mirna target site type data. finally, by constructing the mirna regulatory networks in two stages of prostate cancer (pca), we found the several significant mirna-hubbed network modules associated with pca metastasis. in conclusion, the lasso regression model is a robust and informative tool for constructing the mirna regulatory networks for diagnosis and treatment of complex diseases. availability: the r program for predicting mirnamrna targeting relationships using the lasso regression model is freely available, along with the described datasets and resulting regulatory network, at http://biocompute.bmi.ac.cn/czlab/alarmnet/. the source code is open for modification and application to other mirna/mrna expression datasets.micrornas (mirnas) are 2024 nt rnas that derive from distinctive hairpin precursors in animals, plants and fungi, and can bind to complementary sequences on target mrnas. in recent years, mirnas have emerged as a major class of regulatory elements of gene expression. computational predictions of mirna targets estimate that each mirna regulates hundreds of different mrnas, and 60 of human protein-coding genes are subject to mirna regulation . mirnas are involved in a broad range of biological processes, including development, differentiation, apoptosis and proliferation . several studies have shown that mirnas are involved in the initiation and progression of cancer . significantly differing mirna profiles in various types of tumors suggests that mirna profiling has diagnostic and perhaps prognostic potential . mirnas use base pairing to guide rna-induced silencing complexes (riscs) to specific mrnas with imperfect complementary sequences. the recruitment of risc commonly leads to the repression of targeted mrna through inhibition of translation initiation and/or mirna-mediated mrna destabilization . the argonaute protein in the risc complex is crucial for gene silencing to occur for its capability of endonucleolytic cleavage. in human, there are four ago proteins, where ago2 is the sole protein required for the risc activity . a mirna can directly destruct the target mrna through mrna cleavage when the pairing is extensive . this kind of repression dominates in plants . in animals, however, it was once thought mirnas repress protein output with little or no influence on mrna levels, because in animals only a few targets satisfy the extensive pairing required for cleavage . however a number of microarray data showed that mirnas decrease the levels of many targeted mrnas . only recently it became clear that, similar as in plants, mirnas predominantly exert their effects in mammalian cells through decreasing the levels of target mrnas, and the mrna destabilisation that accounts for most (84) of the decreased protein production . a number of computational prediction methods have been introduced to identify the targets of mirnas. the first generation of mirna target prediction methods were primarily based on watsoncrick base pairing rules and free energy calculations for  
