genescissors: a comprehensive approach to detecting and correcting spurious transcriptome inference owing to rna-seq reads misalignment motivation: rna-seq techniques provide an unparalleled means for exploring a transcriptome with deep coverage and base pair level resolution. various analysis tools have been developed to align and assemble rna-seq data, such as the widely used tophat/cufflinks pipeline. a common observation is that a sizable fraction of the frag-ments/reads align to multiple locations of the genome. these multiple alignments pose substantial challenges to existing rna-seq analysis tools. inappropriate treatment may result in reporting spurious expressed genes (false positives) and missing the real expressed genes (false negatives). such errors impact the subsequent analysis, such as differential expression analysis. in our study, we observe that $3.5 of transcripts reported by tophat/cufflinks pipeline correspond to annotated nonfunctional pseudogenes. moreover, $10.0 of reported transcripts are not annotated in the ensembl database. these genes could be either novel expressed genes or false discoveries. results: we examine the underlying genomic features that lead to multiple alignments and investigate how they generate systematic errors in rna-seq analysis. we develop a general tool, genescissors, which exploits machine learning techniques guided by biological knowledge to detect and correct spurious transcriptome inference by existing rna-seq analysis methods. in our simulated study, gen-escissors can predict spurious transcriptome calls owing to misalign-ment with an accuracy close to 90. it provides substantial improvement over the widely used tophat/cufflinks or mapsplice/ cufflinks pipelines in both precision and f-measurement. on real data, genescissors reports 53.6 less pseudogenes and 0.97 more expressed and annotated transcripts, when compared with the tophat/cufflinks pipeline. in addition, among the 10.0 unannotated transcripts reported by tophat/cufflinks, genescissors finds that 416.3 of them are false positives. availability: the software can be downloaded atrna-seq techniques provide an efficient means for measuring transcriptome data with high resolution and deep coverage . millions of short reads sequenced from cdna provide unique insights into a transcriptome at the nucleotide-level and mitigate many of the limitations of microarray data. although there are still many remaining unsolved problems, new discoveries based on rna-seq analysis ranging from genomic imprinting to differential expression promise an exciting future. current rna-seq analysis pipelines typically contain two major components: an aligner and an assembler. an rna-seq aligner [e.g. tophat , splicemap and mapsplice (attempts to determine where in the genome a given sequence comes from. an assembler [e.g. cufflinks and scripture (addresses the problems of which transcripts are present and estimating their abundances. existing rna-seq pipelines can be divided into two major categories: align-first pipelines and assembly-first pipelines . assembly-first pipelines attempt to assemble and quantify the complete transcriptome without a reference. several algorithms, such as trinity and transabyss , have been developed. however, alignment to a reference genome is still necessary to interpret the results from an assembly-first pipeline and to relate them to existing knowledge. the assembly-first pipeline is compute-intensive and may require several days to complete. in align-first pipelines, a high-quality reference genome serves as a scaffold for inferring the source of rna-seq fragments. current alignment approaches are both computationally efficient and easily parallelized. thus, the align-first rna-seq analysis can be finished within hours even on a normal desktop machine. therefore, align-first pipelines such as tophat/cufflinks or mapsplice/cufflinks are generally preferred when a suitable reference genome is available.we first describe a series of modifications made to open-source rna-seq analysis tools to support genescissors. then, we describe the various datasets used for evaluation. we evaluated two standard pipelines that do not use genescissors: one using tophat and the second using mapsplice as an aligner. we then added genescissors to each pipeline, to improve the alignment results, and we refer to these as genescissors(tophat) and genescissors(mapsplice) pipelines. all four pipelines use cufflinks as the transcriptome assembler.  
