genetics and population analysis genevar: a database and java application for the analysis and visualization of snp-gene associations in eqtl studies genevar (gene expression variation) is a database and java tool designed to integrate multiple datasets, and provides analysis and visualization of associations between sequence variation and gene expression. genevar allows researchers to investigate expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) associations within a gene locus of interest in real time. the database and application can be installed on a standard computer in database mode and, in addition, on a server to share discoveries among affiliations or the broader community over the internet via web services protocols.expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) mapping, where gene expression profiling is treated as a phenotypic trait in genome-wide association studies (gwas), has successfully been employed to uncover genetic variants that influence expression variation in recent studies . single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp)gene associations from eqtl analysis can be investigated in populations or among tissue types . in addition to genome-wide eqtl identification, combinations of eqtls and lead snps identified by gwas have been provided to interrogate the mechanisms underlying disease susceptibility at specific loci . however, an analytical and visualization tool, together with a structured repository for multiple datasets, is still needed to facilitate the investigation of loci of interest and to share data publicly and among collaborators. here, we present genevar, a database and java tool designed to provide: (i) data warehousing; (ii) real-time computation of correlation significance; (iii) visualization of mapping results in a user-friendly interface; and (iv) an added web services platform to whom correspondence should be addressed. that is implemented as a bridge between the server and multiple users. genevar allows published data to be visually accessible in a secure fashion, without the need for users to download raw data. through interactive analysis pipelines, researchers are able to rapidly investigate, for instance, cis-acting eqtls at the locus of interest. complementing already available standalone tools , a database-centric architecture enables genevar to perform complex queries on-the-fly and does not have a high memory requirement for prior reading in large-scale datasets. furthermore, exploiting the convenience of web-based and web-launch tools, a java interface was developed that connects to both database and web services. the main advantage of this system design is that users can switch between public services and local data on the same interface. default services at the sanger institute currently contain gene expression profiling and genotypic data from the following two datasets: lymphoblastoid cell lines from eight hapmap3 populations (824 individuals, unpublished data); and three cell types derived from umbilical cords of 75 geneva gencord individuals .  
