genevetter: a web tool for quantitative monogenic assessment of rare diseases when performing dna sequencing to diagnose affected individuals with monogenic forms of rare diseases, accurate attribution of causality to detected variants is imperative but imperfect. even if a gene has variants already known to cause a disease, rare disruptive variants predicted to be causal are not always so, mainly due to imperfect ability to predict the pathogenicity of variants. existing population-scale sequence resources such as 1000 genomes are useful to quantify the background prevalence of an unaffected individual being falsely predicted to carry causal variants. we developed genevetter to allow users to quantify the background prevalence of subjects with predicted causal variants within specific genes under user-specified filtering parameters. genevetter helps quantify uncertainty in monogenic diagnosis and design genetic studies with support for power and sample size calculations for specific genes with specific filtering criteria. genevetter also allows users to analyze their own sequence data without sending genotype information over the internet. overall, genevetter is an interactive web tool that facilitates quantifying and accounting for the background prevalence of predicted pathogenic variants in a population. availability and implementation: genevetter is available at http://genevetter.org/ contact:inaccurate attribution of causality to rare genetic variants found in sequencing studies of subjects with rare diseases can limit the benefits of screening and potentially result in harm . for accurate classification of a variants pathogenicity, investigators typically account for multiple characteristics, such as its allele frequency, conservation score and predicted functional consequences. however, even after careful filtering and application of these parameters to a known set of causal genes, a proportion of non-causal variants are still at risk for being misclassified as causal due to imperfect filtering. for example, it is reported than 1 of general population can be falsely determined to carry causal variants for maturity onset diabetes of the young (mody), a monogenic form of diabetes . our work is motivated by a study of nephrotic syndrome (ns), a rare disease with more than 20 genes implicated as monogenic causes . diagnosis of a monogenic cause in an ns patient may be important for personalizing treatment plans. many studies have quantified the fraction of monogenic cases through targeted sequencing followed by pathogenicity filtering in case-only cohorts . however, applying imperfect variant-filtering procedures will misdiagnose a fraction of truly non-monogenic cases as harboring putative causal variants. in addition, this will result in a non-negligible rate of background prevalence of monogenic ns diagnosis in the unaffected population. beyond ns, when making genetic diagnosis of any rare diseases in clinical or research settings,new methods and tools that account for this background prevalence should improve accuracy of this classification. to facilitate accounting for the background prevalence in sequencing studies of rare diseases, we developed an intuitive web tool, genevetter. it provides comprehensive analyses and visualizations of putative causal variants when sequencing a set of genes across 2500 individuals in 1000 genomes (1000g). users can obtain background prevalence for a specific population and also calculate power and sample size for genetic studies assessing enrichment of case-specific rare and disruptive variants. when sequencing data is already available for a specific cohort, users can apply the same filtering criteria to genevetter to systematically compare cases with 1000g, without sending any individual-level information over the network.  
