genome analysis alea: a toolbox for allele-specific epigenomics analysis the assessment of expression and epigenomic status using sequen-cing based methods provides an unprecedented opportunity to identify and correlate allelic differences with epigenomic status. we present alea, a computational toolbox for allele-specific epigenomics analysis, which incorporates allelic variation data within existing resources , allowing for the identification of significant associations between epigenetic modifications and specific allelic variants in human and mouse cells. alea provides a customizable pipeline of command line tools for allele-specific analysis of next-generation sequencing data (chip-seq, rna-seq, etc.) that takes the raw sequencing data and produces separate allelic tracks ready to be viewed on genome browsers. the pipeline has been validated using human and hybrid mouse chip-seq and rna-seq data. availability: the package, test data and usage instructions are available online ateach diploid cell consists of two near-identical copies of the genome. despite the similarity of these paternally and maternally contributed genomes, they differ in certain genomic loci due to heterozygous variants such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), indels and structural variations, which can be used to find allele-specific (as) epigenetic variations. as events may occur everywhere, including regions devoid of heterozygous variants. however, computational tools can only focus on heterozygous loci where the allelic differences are distinguishable. alleleseq is a computational pipeline for phasing heterozygous variants from trio (father, mother and child) data, constructing diploid personal genome and aligning short sequencing reads to maternal and paternal genomes. iaseq uses a machine-learning approach to find the allelic imbalance by jointly analyzing multiple chip-seq datasets and by improving the as inference using correlations among them. allim is a more recent as tool for rna-seq analysis of f1 individuals that generates a polymorphism-aware diploid reference genome from trio genomic and/or transcriptomic sequences, and corrects the residual mapping bias when measuring the allelic expression imbalance. what limits application of these tools for as epigenomics studies is that the majority of genomic datasets are generated from single patient samples, which do not include genomic data from the parents of the patients. also, it is not always practical or desirable to sequence multiple epigenomic marks for each patient as required by iaseq. to address these limitations, we developed a new pipeline, alea, for as epigenomics analysis. alea takes advantage of the available genomic resources for human (the 1000 genomes project consortium) and mouse (the mouse genomes project) to reconstruct diploid in silico genomes for human or hybrid mice under study. then, for each accompanying chip-seq or rnaseq dataset, alea generates two wiggle track format files from short reads aligned differentially to each haplotype.  
