systems biology 13cflux2—high-performance software suite for 13 c-metabolic flux analysis 13 c-based metabolic flux analysis (13 c-mfa) is the state-of-the-art method to quantitatively determine in vivo metabolic reaction rates in microorganisms. 13cflux2 contains all tools for composing flexible computational 13 c-mfa workflows to design and evaluate carbon labeling experiments. a specially developed xml language, fluxml, highly efficient data structures and simulation algorithms achieve a maximum of performance and effectiveness. support of multicore cpus, as well as compute clusters, enables scalable investigations. 13cflux2 outperforms existing tools in terms of universality, flexibility and built-in features. therewith, 13cflux2 paves the way for next-generation high-resolution 13metabolic flux analysis with carbon labeling experiments ( 13 c-mfa) matured as the state-of-the-art technique to infer directly immeasurable in vivo central metabolic reaction rates, the fluxome, by rigorous mathematical modeling . progress in measurement techniques and scaled-down experimentation has raised the experimental throughput and coverage to which isotope-labeled tracers in the metabolism are quantified . this has encouraged the usage of 13 c-mfa for cell-wide analyses of complex cells such as eukaryotes, mammalian cells or fungi . such applications drastically increase the computational burden and cannot be adequately treated with existing all-purpose software. built on experiences made with its successful predecessor 13cflux, the high-performance software suite 13cflux2 is designed to overcome computational and modeling limitations to increase the flexibility and scope of 13 c-mfa. major unique features of 13cflux2 are (i) tailor-made algorithms in combination with a novel code generation approach leading to highly efficient machine code, (ii) the xml-based document format fluxml to specify ultimate universal models and all kind of measurements, (iii) support of high-performance computing environments, and (iv) seamless setup of user-defined processing pipelines for serial evaluations. moreover, the multi-platform software omix may be used for convenient modeling and visualization purposes . with respect to these features, 13cflux2 exceeds the functionality of existing 13 c-mfa software systems, namely, metran and fiatflux, as well as the 13cflux clones openflux, c13, fia, nmr2flux and influx_s . specification of generic measurements is possible. more than 400 syntactical and semantical errors are detected and indicated by expressive error/warning messages.  
