genomation: a toolkit to summarize, annotate and visualize genomic intervals biological insights can be obtained through computational integration of genomics data sets consisting of diverse types of information. the integration is often hampered by a large variety of existing file formats, often containing similar information, and the necessity to use complicated tools to achieve the desired results. we have built an r package, genomation, to expedite the extraction of biological information from high throughput data. the package works with a variety of genomic interval file types and enables easy summarization and annotation of high throughput data sets with given genomic annotations. availability and implementation: the software is currently distributed under mit artistic license and freely available at http://bioinformatics.mdc-berlin.de/genomation, and through the bioconductor framework.genomic intervals are the basis of genome annotation and are widely used in short-read alignments, where an interval represents the location of an aligned read. in addition, intervals can contain a variety of scores, with different scales, such as conservation, percent methylation and chip-seq enrichment. summarization of these information-rich intervals over different sub-genomic contexts (promoters, exons, enhancers, etc.) is the necessary first step in making inference about the biological importance of the data. throughout the text we use the phrase genomic annotation to refer to the regions of the genome associated with a potential function or regions of interest, which do not necessarily have a score (examples: cpg islands, genes, enhancers, promoter, exons, etc.). these genomic annotations provide anchor points, and the general distribution of genomic intervals at and in vicinity to these annotations can assist in biological interpretation of the data.in order to facilitate the extraction of knowledge from genomic intervals, we have developed the r package genomation. this package is a toolkit for annotation and bulk summarization, and visualization of genomic intervals over predefined genomic annotations. genomation is designed to work with genomic intervals stored either in (i) arbitrarily formatted text files containing minimal information about the chromosome, start and end, or (ii) in compressed formats such as bam and bigwig . the package provides functions for computing fast summary statistics about the level of association of genomic intervals with the desired annotation and enables simultaneous visualization of multiple highthroughput experiments over regions of interest through parallel heatmaps, meta-region (meta-gene, meta-promoter, etc.) plots, coverage distribution profiles and pie charts for overlap with annotation (features summarized in). in addition, the data structures used in the package can easily be integrated to other analysis in r/bioconductor , which provides a multitude of possibilities for downstream analysis.genomation is a versatile toolkit for interrogating diverse types of genomic intervals with or without scores. it significantly reduces the time needed for data processing and biological inference by providing a multitude of convenience functions for annotation, summarization and visualization of genomic intervals. complementing and extending capabilities of similar tools written in other languages , we believe this r package will be a welcome addition to a bioinformaticians toolbox. in addition, the data structures used in the package can easily be integrated to other analysis in r/bioconductor . a comprehensive overview of the capabilities is included in package vignette available at http://goo.gl/vhtexn.  
