genome assembly from synthetic long read clouds motivation: despite rapid progress in sequencing technology, assembling de novo the genomes of new species as well as reconstructing complex metagenomes remains major technological challenges. new synthetic long read (slr) technologies promise significant advances towards these goals; however, their applicability is limited by high sequencing requirements and the inability of current assembly paradigms to cope with combinations of short and long reads. results: here, we introduce architect, a new de novo scaffolder aimed at slr technologies. unlike previous assembly strategies, architect does not require a costly subassembly step; instead it assembles genomes directly from the slrs underlying short reads, which we refer to as read clouds. this enables a 4-to 20-fold reduction in sequencing requirements and a 5-fold increase in assembly contiguity on both genomic and metagenomic datasets relative to state-of-the-art assembly strategies aimed directly at fully subassembled long reads. availability and implementation: our source code is freely available at https://github.com/kule shov/architect.genome sequencing technology has had an enormous impact on modern science and medicine. information gleaned from the genome has become a crucial ingredient in numerous industrial and medical applications, such as breeding disease-resistant crops, identifying infectious microbes or diagnosing human health problems. yet, despite rapid progress in sequencing technology, fully reconstructing de novo the genomes of new organisms or complex metagenomes still remains a major technological challenge. the main obstacle in de novo genome assembly remains sequencing read length. current technologies can only read short hundredbase substrings of the genome; recovering the original sequence from these substrings is impossible, as they fundamentally cannot resolve the true position of repetitive sequences that are longer than their own length. this results in highly fragmented assemblies that need to be further improved with more sophisticated and expensive techniques. recently, new synthetic long read (slr) technologies have offered great promise towards making inexpensive and accurate de novo assembly a reality. these technologies exhibit read lengths in the tens of kilobases and theoretically have the power to reconstruct a large fraction of an organisms genome. nonetheless, slrs have not yet realized their full potential. most existing approaches involve a two-stage process in which long fragments are first assembled from short reads, and then the genome is assembled from the long fragments. such strategies typically require prohibitively large amounts of short-read sequencing for each long fragment; in some cases, attaining this high level of coverage may not even be feasible. in addition, long reads often must be complemented by short reads (e.g. to compensate for sequencing bias); yet, there are currently very few assemblers that can effectively handle both types of data. here, we introduce architect, a new de novo scaffolder for slr technologies that aims to address these shortcomings. unlike previous assembly strategies, architect does not require a costly subassembly step; instead it assembles genomes directly from the slrs underlying short reads. moreover, by dealing only with short reads, it avoids difficulties that arise from jointly assembling reads of highly differing lengths. in practice, architect leads to a 4-to 20-fold reduction in sequencing requirements and up to a 5-fold increase in assembly contiguity compared with current state-of-the-art assembly strategies aimed directly at fully subassembled long reads. we demonstrate the improvements offered by architect on the genomes of drosophila melanogaster and caenorhabditis elegans as well as on two metagenomic samples: the synthetic mock community from the human microbiome project, and a bona fide human gut metagenome from a healthy male individual. our results suggest that architect may lower the cost of accurate de novo assembly and facilitate the v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.3.5.1 assembly quality a summary of our results can be found in. at a high level, architect outperforms alternative assembly strategies and produces genome assemblies that are up to five times longer than approaches based on shotgun and subassembled slrs. moreover, architect achieves this performance with only 25 of the sequencing requirements of standard long read-based methods.  
