genomecons: a web server for manipulating multiple genome sequence alignments and their consensus sequences genome sequence alignments provide valuable information on many aspects of molecular biological processes. in this study, we developed a web server, genomecons, for manipulating multiple genome sequence alignments and their consensus sequences for high-throughput genome sequence analyses. this server facilitates the visual inspection of multiple genome sequence alignments for a set of genomic intervals at a time. this allows the user to examine how these sites are evolutionarily conserved over time for their functional importance. the server also reports consensus sequences for the input genomic intervals, which can be applied to downstream analyses such as the identification of common motifs in the regions determined by chip-seq experiments. availability and implementation: genomecons is freely accessible atthe progress of genome sequencing projects for various species has now made it possible to compare genome sequences over a wide range of related species. genome sequence alignments provided by the ucsc genome browser greatly facilitate the identification of the regions under strong selective pressure by measuring the conservation in related species. genome sequence alignments in the ucsc genome browser are useful for the visual inspection of a genomic region of interest, but they are not suitable for downloading to perform further detailed analyses. moreover, the browser can handle only a single locus at a time, making it difficult to survey many loci, for example, a set of the genomic regions identified by chip-seq experiments. to conduct a large-scale analysis of genome sequence alignments, it is necessary to download and manipulate the data stored in the multiple alignment format (maf) from the ucsc genome browser . as expected based on the length of an entire genome and the number of species available, the amount of data in these genome sequence alignments is huge. furthermore, genome sequences of any two species are not always collinear because of the genome rearrangements that occur during the course of evolution. thus, genome alignments consist of a huge set of small alignment blocks because of the inclusion of species with various levels of diversity. therefore, it is not a trivial task to retrieve a genome sequence alignment for a region of interest from a huge amount of maf files. a possible solution to this problem is to use a set of specialized tools for manipulating genome sequence alignments , which have been implemented on the galaxy web server . recently, another program, maffilter, was developed for this task . these programs facilitate the highly flexible manipulation of maf files, but they also require command-line and/or multi-step operations, which arein this study, we introduce our web server, genomecons, a highly user-friendly, dedicated web server for manipulating genome sequence alignments and for the automatic generation of consensus sequences of the corresponding genomic intervals in one step. genomecons is well suited for large-scale analyses of genome sequence alignments, for example, the identification of evolutionarily conserved transcription factor binding sites in the peak regions identified by chip-seq experiments.  
