genomed3plot: a library for rich, interactive visualizations of genomic data in web applications motivation: a simple static image of genomes and associated metadata is very limiting, as researchers expect rich, interactive tools similar to the web applications found in the post-web 2.0 world. genomed3plot is a light weight visualization library written in javascript using the d3 library. genomed3plot provides a rich api to allow the rapid visualization of complex genomic data using a convenient standards based json configuration file. when integrated into existing web services genomed3plot allows researchers to interact with data, dynamically alter the view, or even resize or reposition the visualization in their browser window. in addition genomed3plot has built in functionality to export any resulting genome visualization in png or svg format for easy inclusion in manuscripts or presentations.in the study of an organisms genome multiple data sources are often integrated along side the genome to facilitate analysis . two often used methods for visualization are linear or circular representations of the genome stacked with this additional data as seen in tools such as gmod or circos . however these often create either static image or visualizations with limited interaction not taking advantage of the advances in web browsers and their associated javascript engines. newer tools have been produced such as jbrowse that bring dynamic interaction to these datasets, but unfortunately act more like a standalone tool, being complex to setup and not integrating seamlessly in to existing analysis platforms.other tools such as scribl and genome maps lack a circular genome view, which is useful for some types of microbial analyses . genomed3plot takes advantage of the well supported d3 library (http://d3js.org/) used by hundreds of websites globally to allow rapid creation of dynamic, interactive visualizations of datasets. the goal in the development of genomed3plot was to create a library with minimal external dependencies that could be integrated in to existing web applications just as a developer might include an image or table. the use of json, a standardized and well supported data format, to configure a visualization with genomed3plot reduces the burden on developers and lowers the complexity of use. genomed3plot features an easy to use json based data language for visualizations. in its simplest form, a developer needs only define the tracks, give the size of the genome and the base pairs boundaries of elements to visualize, genomed3plot will create an svg canvas and plot the genomes and associated metadata as either a linear or circular view  
