genome analysis genome editing assessment using crispr genome analyzer (crispr-ga) clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crispr)-based technologies have revolutionized human genome engineering and opened countless possibilities to basic science, synthetic biology and gene therapy. albeit the enormous potential of these tools, their performance is far from perfect. it is essential to perform a posterior careful analysis of the gene editing experiment. however, there are no computational tools for genome editing assessment yet, and current experimental tools lack sensitivity and flexibility. we present a platform to assess the quality of a genome editing experiment only with three mouse clicks. the method evaluates next-generation data to quantify and characterize insertions, deletions and homologous recombination. crispr genome analyzer provides a report for the locus selected, which includes a quantification of the edited site and the analysis of the different alterations detected. the platform maps the reads, estimates and locates insertions and deletions , computes the allele replacement efficiency and provides a report integrating all the information. availability and implementation: crispr-ga web is available at http://crispr-ga.net. documentation on crispr-ga instructions can be found atthe journal science selected crispr (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) as one of the top 10 breakthroughs of 2013 . crispr-based technologies have revolutionized human genome engineering and opened unlimited possibilities to basic science, synthetic biology and gene therapy. its design simplicity and efficiency makes it an extremely versatile tool . most of the genome engineering methods are based on the combined effort of a nuclease, and an exogenous dna, which encodes the desired edits. the nuclease specifically cleaves the genome in a region close to the targeting site, and the cellular machinery repairs the genome using the exogenous dna as template. crispr gene editing is based on cas9. this protein can be programmed easily to cleave specific dna sequences and target a la carte the desired genome region . although these technologies have been widely implemented in many fields and organisms [human, cynomolgus monkeys, mouse, rat, zebrafish, drosophila, yeast, caenorhabditis elegans, arabidopsis, bacteria and others ], we do not have any computational tools to analyze the outcome of these experiments yet. several tools have proliferated for off-target prediction (http://bioanalysis.otago.ac.nz/crisprtarget) and experiment design (http://www.e-crisp.org, http://zifit.partners.org/zifit/, http://www.crispr-cas.org/, http://wormcas9hr.weebly.com/), but none of them supports experimental analysis. we present crispr genome analyzer (crispr-ga), a platform to assess the quality of a genome editing experiment only with three mouse clicks. it can be used in any genomic locus of any organism that the sequence is available. the method uses next-generation data to quantify and characterize insertions, deletions and homologous recombination (hr) at the intended targeting sites. current methods to assess genome engineering are based on enzymatic mutation detection techniques or reporter assays. both methods suffer from important limitations. in optimal conditions, an enzymatic method such as surveyors assay, it reaches a detection limit of 3, but often editing efficiencies are well below this value . another enzymatic method, the t7 endonuclease i (t7e) may achieve detection limits around 1. both methods have biases on the detection limit. surveyors assay is more sensitive to transition and transversion mutations, whereas t7e to indels . reporter assays are more sensitive, as they detect single cells, but they require additional steps to generate exogenous dna reporter constructs. more importantly, reporters incorporate other by-products (i.e. fluorescent proteins), which may not be desired for certain applications. in addition, both methods deliver a binary output, and none provides with a complete description of the genome editing experiment. crispr-ga requires little experimental labor, and it provides a complete report of the genome editing results with a fast turnover. the user is only required to use polymerase chain reaction (pcr) to amplify the area of the genome to analyze (the specific instructions to carry out this pcr can be found in supplementary). this amplified library is sequenced with an illumina miseq machine (other platforms may also be used; see online documentation). the user provides to the pipeline crispr-ga, the next-generation sequencing obtained reads, the intended editing sequence and the original sequence. to whom correspondence should be addressed. crispr-ga will estimate the hr (normally associated with intended edits), non-homologous end-joining (nhej; normally associated with non-desired edits) and a complete report of the location and characteristics of the indels. next-generation sequencing is becoming available for most research institutions. the possibility of bar coding hundreds of samples in a single illumina miseq lane makes it competitive from a time and economic perspective. hundred samples can be analyzed for a bit more than $1000 with cost of $10 per sample, in one overnight illumina miseq run.  
