genomering: alignment visualization based on supergenome coordinates motivation: the number of completely sequenced genomes is continuously rising, allowing for comparative analyses of genomic variation. such analyses are often based on whole-genome alignments to elucidate structural differences arising from insertions, deletions or from rearrangement events. computational tools that can visualize genome alignments in a meaningful manner are needed to help researchers gain new insights into the underlying data. such visualizations typically are either realized in a linear fashion as in genome browsers or by using a circular approach, where relationships between genomic regions are indicated by arcs. both methods allow for the integration of additional information such as experimental data or annotations. however, providing a visualization that still allows for a quick and comprehensive interpretation of all important genomic variations together with various supplemental data, which may be highly heterogeneous, remains a challenge. results: here, we present two complementary approaches to tackle this problem. first, we propose the supergenome concept for the computation of a common coordinate system for all genomes in a multiple alignment. this coordinate system allows for the consistent placement of genome annotations in the presence of insertions, deletions and rearrangements. second, we present the genomering visualization that, based on the supergenome, creates an interactive overview visualization of the multiple genome alignment in a circular layout. we demonstrate our methods by applying them to an alignment of campylobacter jejuni strains for the discovery of genomic islands as well as to an alignment of helicobacter pylori, which we visualize in combination with gene expression data.advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies have dramatically increased the speed at which genomes are sequenced . this led to the establishment of large-scale genome sequencing projects such as the 1000 genomes project , the 1001 genomes project in arabidopsis thaliana , the 10k genomes project , which aims at sequencing vertebrate genomes, the insect genomes initiative i5k as well as many projects sequencing prokaryotic species, often at the level of individual strains. the genome sequencing projects are conducted with different long-term goals. while the 10k and the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint first authors. to whom correspondence should be addressed. i5k initiatives aim at collecting genomes across a large part of the tree of vertebrates and insects, respectively, the 1000 and 1001 genome projects focus on genetic variation within one species. regarding the prokaryotic species, genome projects often focus on this latter aspect, comparing different strains of bacteria with the goal of understanding the genetic basis of pathogenicity and drug resistance, the adaptability to environments, the extent of horizontal gene transfer as well as to elucidate the architectural diversity of bacterial genomes. parallel to the increase in genomic data with the development of new sequencing technologies, powerful visualization tools have been developed and continue being developed. an excellent review on methods as well as the challenges of visualizing genomes has recently been published by. generally, one can distinguish two approaches to the visualization of genomes: a single genome is visualized (often in comparison to a reference genome), or multiple genomes are compared. in the first case, genome browsers are typically utilized, which represent the genome linearly and can display multiple variables in parallel tracks aligned to the genomic coordinates. such tracks can contain annotation, experimental, or statistical data. for the comparison of multiple genomes, the same linear approach as applied by genome browsers can be used. a typical example is the viewer integrated into mauve . however, large changes such as inversions can quickly lead to visual clutter, and it can be difficult to deduce similarities and differences between genomes from the visualization. some genome viewers employ a circular approach to visualize one genome with annotation and experimental data, or to present an alignment of several genomes. circos is one of the most often used circular genome visualization tools. it displays genomic data as a circular plot, in which the relationships of genomic elements are displayed using arcs. it is, therefore, particularly useful for visualizing variation within one genome, but it can also be applied to visualize the relationship of several genomes. while circos without doubt produces aesthetically very attractive figures, it has the major disadvantage of only presenting a static, non-interactive view of the data. further circular genome viewers are medea and mizbee . another circular approach is taken by the blast ring image generator (brig) that visualizes multiple prokaryotic genomes . each genome is compared to a reference genome using blast. the hits between each genome and the reference are then visualized as concentric rings using different colors for each genome. additional rings, representing meta information, such as gc content, can be added. its main focus is to accompany sequencing projects, in particular to handle and visualize assembly data. though a number of excellent visualization and analysis tools are already available for researchers working with multiple genomegenomering is a highly interactive tool for multiple alignment visualization based on supergenome coordinates. the concept of the supergenome together with genomering provides a quick and broad overview through the display of genomic events from completely aligned genomes and allows for a detailed analysis of specific genes through the linkage of genomering to several other visualizations incorporated into mayday, such as maydays genome browser. these aspects and the applicability of genomering to other fields of research make it a highly usable visualization strategy complementing already existing visualization techniques. in addition, the supergenome coordinate system can be widely applied beyond the field of visualization, as it provides a generic solution to the problem of consistently specifying coordinates in multiple genome alignments without attributing a special status to an arbitrarily chosen reference sequence.  
