genomerunner web server: regulatory similarity and differences define the functional impact of snp sets motivation: the growing amount of regulatory data from the encode, roadmap epigenomics and other consortia provides a wealth of opportunities to investigate the functional impact of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps). yet, given the large number of regulatory datasets, researchers are posed with a challenge of how to efficiently utilize them to interpret the functional impact of snp sets. results: we developed the genomerunner web server to automate systematic statistical analysis of snp sets within a regulatory context. besides defining the functional impact of snp sets, genomerunner implements novel regulatory similarity/differential analyses, and cell type-specific regulatory enrichment analysis. validated against literature-and disease ontology-based approaches, analysis of 39 disease/trait-associated snp sets demonstrated that the functional impact of snp sets corresponds to known disease relationships. we identified a group of autoim-mune diseases with snps distinctly enriched in the enhancers of t helper cell subpopulations, and demonstrated relevant cell type-specificity of the functional impact of other snp sets. in summary, we show how systematic analysis of genomic data within a regulatory context can help interpreting the functional impact of snp sets. availability and implementation: genomerunner web server is freely available at http://www.inte grativegenomics.org/. contact:the success of genome-wide association studies (gwass) in finding causative single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) for mendelian disorders is hindered by their failure to define complex patterns of nonmendelian inheritance, such as seen in multi-factorial complex diseases . this is in part because $8893 of all snps lie outside protein coding regions , complicating our understanding of the regulatory mechanisms involved. furthermore, $90 of all snps are rare , i.e. occurring in a small percentage of individuals (typically 0.055), and generally underemphasized in gwass. thus, only a fraction of valuable genetic information is studied.recent research has provided evidence that rare snps and snps outside of protein-coding regions can contribute to disease manifestation by collectively altering dna methylation , histone modifications , enhancers , chromatin states , deoxyribonuclease i (dnase i) accessibility and transcription factor binding , leading to gene expression changes (reviewed in) and disruption of proteinprotein interactions . yet exploring snps-regulatory relationships in a hypothesis-driven manner is not just time-consuming, but also limited to the regulatory mechanisms an individual researcher can think of. conversely, using systematically organized publicly available regulatory data offers a data-driven investigation of potential functional mechanisms altered by snps. to do this, software is needed to facilitate systematic analysis of such genome-wide data. recent years have seen rapid growth of publicly available data on genome organization and functional/regulatory information . the encyclopedia of dna elements (encode) project, the roadmap epigenomics program and others have been actively cataloguing functional/regulatory genome annotation datasets, such as cell-and tissue specific histone modification profiles, dnase i hypersensitive sites, chromatin states, and transcription factor-binding sites (tfbss). although many breakthroughs have been made by the analyses of these datasets, these resources remain underutilized by computational biologists for systematic analysis and interpretation of the functional mechanisms associated with, and potentially altered by, experimentally obtained omics data. in this article, we describe the genomerunner web serveran automated framework for the statistical analysis and interpretation of the functional impact of snp sets using regulatory datasets from the encode, roadmap epigenomics and other projects. genomerunner prioritizes regulatory datasets most significantly enriched in snp sets and visualizes the most significant enrichments , thus suggesting regulatory mechanisms that may be altered by them. in addition to prioritizing snp set-specific regulatory enrichments (functional impact), genomerunner implements three novel approaches: (i) regulatory similarity analysis, aimed at identifying groups of snp sets having similar functional impact; (ii) differential regulatory analysis, developed to identify functional impact specific for a group of snp sets; and (iii) cell type regulatory enrichment analysis, designed to identify cell type specificity of the functional impact. we have reviewed 20-related software tools to highlight the novel functionality of genomerunner (, supplementary). the article is organized as follows. the methods part provides a brief overview of genomerunner functionality and analytical approaches. the results part illustrates the application of genomerunner to deepen our understanding of the potential functional impact of 39 disease/trait-associated snp sets. genomerunner identified a group of nine immunologic diseases with distinct functional enrichment signature of the corresponding snp sets, detected cell specificity of the regulatory enrichments relevant to disease pathology, and confirmed known enrichment of the immunologic disease-associated snp sets in t helper cell-specific enhancers, h3k4me1 and h3k27ac activating histone marks. in summary, we show how genomerunner, an open-source web server freely accessible at http://www.integrativegenomics.org/, aids in biological interpretation of the significance of snp sets in terms of putative functional impact.  
