gene expression genome-scale analysis of interaction dynamics reveals organization of biological networks analyzing large-scale interaction networks has generated numerous insights in systems biology. however, such studies have primarily been focused on highly co-expressed, stable interactions. most transient interactions that carry out equally important functions, especially in signal transduction pathways, are yet to be elucidated and are often wrongly discarded as false positives. here, we revisit a previously described smithwaterman-like dynamic programming algorithm and use it to distinguish stable and transient interactions on a genomic scale in human and yeast. we find that in biological networks, transient interactions are key links topologically connecting tightly regulated functional modules formed by stable interactions and are essential to maintaining the integrity of cellular networks. we also perform a systematic analysis of interaction dynamics across different technologies and find that high-throughput yeast two-hybrid is the only available technology for detecting transient interactions on a large scale.the proteinprotein interactome of an organism is the network of all biophysically possible interactions of different proteins in that organism . it is of key importance to accurately map this network as most proteins function by interacting with other proteins . moreover, a better understanding of genotype to phenotype relationships in human disease requires modeling of how disease-causing mutations might affect protein interactions and interactome properties . currently, there are two main highthroughput technologies to generate high-quality proteinprotein interactomes on a large scale: yeast two-hybrid (y2h), where a protein interaction reconstitutes a transcription factor which then activates expression of reporter genes , and affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (ap/ms), where proteins bound to tagged baits are co-purified and identified . high-throughput y2h maps have been generated for yeast, fly, worm and human, while large-scale ap/ms datasets have the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. been generated for yeast, worm and human . an alternative approach, adopted by most databases, is to obtain literature-curated (lc) interactions . it has been shown that well-controlled y2h and ap/ms experiments are both of high quality but of complementary nature y2h identifies direct binary interactions whereas ap/ms determines co-complex associations . moreover, gene expression and other functional genomics datasets are routinely integrated with proteinprotein interactions to validate their biological relevancefor example, interactions between proteins encoded by co-expressed genes are often considered to be of high quality . in these analyses, gene co-expression is normally determined by a high pearson correlation coefficient (pcc), which really means that the expression levels of the two genes are correlated over most conditions, i.e. they are globally co-expressed . previous studies have shown that interacting proteins within stable complexes also tend to be encoded by globally co-expressed gene pairs . on the other hand, the regulation and coordination of the subcellular machinery is achieved by dynamic transient interactions for example in signal transduction pathways . proteins involved in transient interactions are not globally co-expressed. rather, they share local blocks of co-expression. transient interactions and their dynamics have significant biological importance, but most genes in these pathways are often co-expressed only under certain conditions . as a result, these are usually discarded as false positives . here, we take advantage of a novel measurement of expression relationships to directly distinguish stable from transient interactions on a genomewide scale in human and yeast and systematically analyze their topological and biological significance. we also evaluate different technologies in terms of their sensitivity in detecting interaction dynamics on a genomic scale.  
