genome analysis genome-wide dna sequence polymorphisms facilitate nucleosome positioning in yeast motivation: the intrinsic dna sequence is an important determinant of nucleosome positioning. some dna sequence patterns can facilitate nucleosome formation, while others can inhibit nucleosome formation. nucleosome positioning influences the overall rate of sequence evolution. however, its impacts on specific patterns of sequence evolution are still poorly understood. results: here, we examined whether nucleosomal dna and nucleosome-depleted dna show distinct polymorphism patterns to maintain adequate nucleosome architecture on a genome scale in yeast. we found that sequence polymorphisms in nucleosomal dna tend to facilitate nucleosome formation, whereas polymorphisms in nucleosome-depleted dna tend to inhibit nucleosome formation, which is especially evident at nucleosome-disfavored sequences in nucleosome-free regions at both ends of genes. sequence polymorphisms facilitating nucleosome positioning correspond to stable nucleosome positioning. these results reveal that sequence polymorphisms are under selective constraints to maintain nucleosome positioning. contact:the nucleosome is the fundamental unit of eukaryotic chromatin, which consists of a histone octamer around which a stretch of 147 bp dna is wrapped. most of the dna is wrapped in nucleosomes, with adjacent nucleosomes generally separated by 2050 bp of unwrapped linker dna. the nucleosome limits the accessibility of nucleosomal dna to regulatory dna-binding proteins. nucleosome positioning thus plays an essential role in the regulation of diverse cellular processes, including dna replication, recombination, repair, transcription, chromosome segregation and cell division. nucleosome positioning is determined by multiple factors, including the intrinsic dna sequence, dna methylation, histone variants, post-translational modifications, transcription factors and chromatin remodelers . sequence evolution can be under selection to facilitate specific cellular processes. there is evidence for selection on synonymous codons required for accurate translation (; to whom correspondence should be addressed.). sequence patterns in exons are also under selection to facilitate correct splicing . genome-wide analysis on nucleosome positioning in yeast has revealed that linker dna evolves more slowly than nucleosomal dna . a possible explanation is that nucleosomes occlude the dna from access to most dna repair proteins, resulting in low repair efficiency in nucleosomal dna . experimental evidence indicates that dna sequences differ greatly in their abilities to bend and twist . consequently, some dna sequence patterns facilitate nucleosome formation, whereas others distort nucleosome formation . the intrinsic dna sequence is one dominant factor responsible for nucleosome positioning . linker dna-based nucleosome depletion signals have been shown to be more critical for nucleosome positioning than nucleosome formation signals . an alternative explanation for the slower sequence evolution rates of linker dna is that the extent of sequence evolution in linker dna is under selection to maintain the nucleosomal organization. although the impact of nucleosome positioning on the overall rate of sequence evolution is clear, its impacts on specific patterns of sequence evolution remain to be elucidated. in this study, we investigated into the relationship between nucleosome positioning and nucleotide polymorphism patterns within saccharomyces cerevisiae populations. we analyzed genomewide single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) data in s.cerevisiae populations. we found distinct polymorphism biases between nucleosomal dna and nucleosome-depleted dna. polymorphism patterns that facilitate nucleosome formation are preferred in nucleosomal dna, while polymorphism patterns with nucleosomeexcluding properties are favored in nucleosome-depleted dna. we also found that nucleotide polymorphism patterns that facilitate nucleosome positioning correspond to stable nucleosome positioning.page: 1764 17581764  
