genome-wide inferring gene–phenotype relationship by walking on the heterogeneous network motivation: clinical diseases are characterized by distinct phenotypes. to identify disease genes is to elucidate the gene phenotype relationships. mutations in functionally related genes may result in similar phenotypes. it is reasonable to predict disease-causing genes by integrating phenotypic data and genomic data. some genetic diseases are genetically or phenotypically similar. they may share the common pathogenetic mechanisms. identifying the relationship between diseases will facilitate better understanding of the pathogenetic mechanism of diseases. results: in this article, we constructed a heterogeneous network by connecting the gene network and phenotype network using the phenotypegene relationship information from the omim database. we extended the random walk with restart algorithm to the heterogeneous network. the algorithm prioritizes the genes and phenotypes simultaneously. we use leave-one-out cross-validation to evaluate the ability of finding the genephenotype relationship. results showed improved performance than previous works. we also used the algorithm to disclose hidden disease associations that cannot be found by gene network or phenotype network alone. we identified 18 hidden disease associations, most of which were supported by literature evidence. availability: the matlab code of the program is available atelucidating the inherited basis of human disease involves linking genomic variation to clinical phenotype. establishing this relationship, however, can be challenging for several reasons, the pleiotropy of genes, the genetic heterogeneity of diseases and the limited number of cases . most current efforts at diseasegene identification involving linkage analysis and association studies result in a genomic interval of 0.510 cm, containing up to several hundreds of genes . these candidate genes need to be further investigated to identify disease-causing genes. a number of methods have been proposed to prioritize candidate to whom correspondence should be addressed. genes based on different kinds of genomic data, such as sequencebased features , functional annotation data and protein interaction data . these algorithms typically prioritize candidate genes based on their similarity to known disease genes. though these methods perform well, they still have some limitations. the first limitation comes from the incompleteness and noise of genomic data sources. some integration algorithms have been proposed to solve this problem . the other problem is the ambiguous boundary between different diseases. clinical disease often encompass a variety of phenotypes and biological mechanisms, making it difficult to define the boundary between diseases. traditionally, diseases have been categorized on the basis of pathophysiology or on etiology, but often these characterizations break down and more ad hoc approaches aroused, resulting in the celebrated debate between splitters and lumpers . the ambiguous boundary between different diseases prevents the direct inference of genedisease association. for example, the lebers congenital amaurosis (lca) turns out to be highly heterogeneous on a molecular basis, but these molecular subtypes appear clinically homogeneous . using all the lca genes to prioritize a list of genes responsible to a subtype of lca may not be correct. most recently, two algorithms have been proposed to identify genephenotype relationship instead of finding the genedisease relationship directly . their assumption is that similar phenotypes are caused by functionally related genes .assign candidate gene to protein complexes and then rank these complexes using phenotypic data. finally, candidate genes are ranked based on the phenotypes associated with the protein complexes.employ the regression model, named cipher, to quantify the concordance between the candidate gene and the target phenotype. candidate genes are then ranked by the concordance score. cipher performed better thanon the overlapped benchmark data . in this work, we propose a rwrh (random walk with restart on heterogeneous network) algorithm to infer the genephenotype relationship. we connect the gene network and phenotype network by genephenotype relationship and constructed a heterogeneous network. then, we extend the random walk with restart (rwr) algorithm to the heterogeneous network, using the target phenotype and corresponding disease genes as seed nodes. in the prioritization of candidate genes, we attempt to make better use of the phenotypic data. on benchmark dataset the proposed algorithmpage: 1220 12191224  
