genomic context analysis reveals dense interaction network between vertebrate ultraconserved non-coding elements motivation: genomic context analysis, also known as phylogenetic profiling, is widely used to infer functional interactions between proteins but rarely applied to non-coding cis-regulatory dna elements. we were wondering whether this approach could provide insights about utlraconserved non-coding elements (ucnes). these elements are organized as large clusters, so-called gene regulatory blocks (grbs) around key developmental genes. their molecular functions and the reasons for their high degree of conservation remain enigmatic. results: in a special setting of genomic context analysis, we analyzed the fate of grbs after a whole-genome duplication event in five fish genomes. we found that in most cases all ucnes were retained together as a single block, whereas the corresponding target genes were often retained in two copies, one completely devoid of ucnes. this winner-takes-all pattern suggests that ucnes of a grb function in a highly cooperative manner. we propose that the multitude of interactions between ucnes is the reason for their extreme sequence conservation.genomic context analysis is a comparative evolutionary approach to infer interactions between protein-coding genes. the string database distinguishes three types of evolutionary evidence for interactions: co-occurrence in the same species, co-localization in the same chromosome region and gene fusion. co-occurrence analysis is the most widely applicable variant and has been termed phylogenetic profiling . the co-localization or neighborhood criterion is primarily used in prokaryotes where genes participating in the same pathway are often arranged in a single operon. gene fusion is a less frequent event, but probably constitutes the strongest type of evolutionary evidence that two proteins encoded by separate genes in some genomes physically interact with each other. in principle, genomic context analysis should be applicable to non-coding sequences as well. the neighborhood criterion is ideally suited to infer interactions involving cis-acting regulatory elements as such elements by definition have to reside on the same chromosome with their interaction partners. nevertheless, with a notable exception discussed further below, genomic context analysis has rarely or never been applied to non-coding sequences. to whom correspondence should be addressed.in this work we present an application of this method to vertebrate ultraconserved non-coding sequence elements, henceforth referred to as ucnes. vertebrate ucnes are the most conserved sequences that exist in nature. the term was originally coined bywho defined ultraconserved elements as sequence regions that are at least 200-bp long and 100 identical between human, mouse and rat (2004). somewhat different definitions have been applied by other groups (see). in a previous work, we defined ucnes as non-coding elements that are at least 200-bp long and have evolved at a substitution rate of 0.01 per million years . the reasons for ultraconservation remain enigmatic. no molecular mechanism is known that would require such a high degree of conservation. it is broadly accepted that a majority of ucnes act as tissue-specific enhancers . a few may function as splicing regulators or as noncoding rnas . surprisingly, genetically altered mice lacking particular ucnes were found to be viable with no detectable phenotype . it could be argued that the phenotypes may be too mild to be recognized by human researchers but still severe enough to be removed by purifying selection in nature over many generations. a striking property of ucnes is their tendency to occur as large clusters on the genome . such clusters, also referred to as genomic regulatory blocks (grbs), may comprise up to 100 ucnes, span over more than a megabase, and include up to a dozen of genes. within a grb, the ucnes appear to be randomly localized with respect to genes, with approximately equal numbers located in introns and intergenic regions, respectively. the order of individual elements is strictly conserved between distant vertebrate species resulting in perfect synteny of the corresponding genes. it is assumed that grbs in general have only one target gene. the other genes within the block are called bystander genes. in an elegant and pioneering study bythe neighborhood principle of genomic context analysis was used to discriminate between target and bystander genes of grbs in fish genomes. for most vertebrate species, the neighborhood criterion would be useless because the synteny within grbs is perfectly conserved. however, the situation is radically different in teleost fishes which have undergone a lineage-specific whole-genome duplication (wgd). after the wgd event, most genes survived in only one copy and the same may be true for gene regulatory elements as well. within a duplicated grb, bystander genes may be retained randomly by one or the other copy. however, the ucnes will always stay with their target genes. the availability of five fish genomes with potentially different gene loss histories after wgd increases the power of the method. in fact, numerous cases of reciprocal gene. alternative models of ucne action and corresponding retention patterns after whole-genome duplication. grey rectangles represent ucnes (supposed to be remote control elements), the black circles represent the promoter of the target gene (not supposed to be ultraconserved). (a) standalone model: each ucne drives independently of the other ucnes the expression of the target gene in one particular tissue. (b) cooperative model: the simultaneous activity of at least two ucnes is required for target gene expression. different combinations of ucnes drive expression in different tissues. (c) reciprocal retention pattern after wgd expected under the stand-alone model: ucnes get randomly distributed over the two daughter genes. (d) winner-takes-all retention pattern expected under the cooperative model. ucnes need to be retained by the same daughter gene in order to ensure expression in all tissues loss were observed between the lineages leading to zebrafish and tetraodon . we should mention in this context that the fate of conserved non-coding elements after wgd was also analyzed to address questions about subfunctionalization . in this work, we also exploit the wgd event that has happened in teleosts. however, we address a different question. we are not primarily interested in ucnetarget gene relationships. our focus is on cooperative interactions between ucnes within the same block. specifically, we use genomic context analysis to discriminate between two models of ucne action, which may be called standalone and cooperative. the standalone model assumes that each ucne acts independently, whereas the cooperative model assumes that two or more ucnes jointly drive expression of the target gene in a particular tissue. the two modes of gene regulation are illustrated inwith a minimal grb consisting of three ucnes. in the standalone mode, each ucne drives gene expression in one of three different tissues. in the cooperative mode, three different pairwise combinations drive the expression in three different tissues. the fate of ucnes after wgd could potentially discriminate between these two scenarios. if ucnes act independently of each other they will be randomly distributed over the daughter genes. if ucnes cooperate with one another they have to be jointly retained with one daughter gene. we should mention that the discriminatory power of this approach depends on two conditions: (i) the target genes are frequently retained in two copies after wgd and (ii) individual ucnes are frequently retained in only one copy. fortunately, these conditions are met, as will become evident from the results presented further below. the reminder of this article is organized as follows. section 2 describes the computational protocols at a technical level. in section 3, we present two largely independent studies. the first part centers on putative target genes that are highly enriched in intronic ucnes. in the second part, we analyze the fate of the most prominent grbs after wgd. this part also includes a non-technical description of the computational protocol used to trace-back the individual pieces of duplicated grbs after potential synteny breaks. conclusions and perspectives are presented in the last section.in this work, we have addressed the question whether ucnes of a grb act independently of one another, or in a cooperative manner. using a special setting of genomic context analysis, we presented evidence in support of the cooperative mode of action. this cooperativity can be viewed as a second layer of combinatorial gene regulation. traditionally, this concept has been applied to transcription factor binding sites within a gene regulatory region. it has been argued that a great variety of different response behaviors could be achieved through different combinations of relatively few  
