genome analysis genotype calling and mapping of multisite variants using an atlantic salmon iselect snp array motivation: due to a genome duplication event in the recent history of salmonids, modern atlantic salmon (salmo salar) have a mosaic genome with roughly one-third being tetraploid. this is a complicating factor in genotyping and genetic mapping since polymorphisms within duplicated regions (multisite variants; msvs) are challenging to call and to assign to the correct paralogue. standard genotyping software offered by illumina has not been written to interpret msvs and will either fail or miscall these polymorphisms. for the purpose of mapping, linkage or association studies in non-diploid species, there is a pressing need for software that includes analysis of msvs in addition to regular single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) markers. results: a software package is presented for the analysis of partially tetraploid genomes genotyped using illumina infinium beadarrays (illumina inc.) that includes pre-processing, clustering, plotting and validation routines. more than 3000 salmon from an aquacultural strain in norway, distributed among 266 full-sib families, were genotyped on a 15k beadarray including both snp-and msv-markers. a total of 4268 snps and 1471 msvs were identified, with average call accuracies of 0.97 and 0.86, respectively. a total of 150 msvs polymorphic in both paralogs were dissected and mapped to their respective chromosomes, yielding insights about the salmon genome reversion to diploidy and improving marker genome coverage. several retained homologies were found and are reported. availability and implementation: r-package beadarraymsv freely available on the web at http://cran.r-project.org/salmonid fishes have experienced several whole genome duplication (wgd) events in their evolutionary history . the 2r hypothesis states there have been two early wgd events (common for all jawed vertebrates), which were followed by subsequent 3r (common for all ray-finned fishes) and 4r duplications (unique for the salmonid lineage). usually, wgd to whom correspondence should be addressed. is followed by extensive modifications of both the genome and transcriptome, with a gradual return to diploidy occurring over time . the key event during reversion to diploidy is the switch from tetrasomic to disomic inheritance, i.e. from having four chromosomes forming a quadrivalent to having two pairs each forming a bivalent during meiosis. salmon is still in the process of returning to diploidy after the latest wgd, and the genome displays substantial evidence of retained homologies . single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) markers have proven useful in linkage and association studies, and next-generation sequencing technologies have created exciting opportunities for genome sequencing and snp discovery. the process of snp discovery is not straightforward, however, and duplicated genomes in particular contain paralogous sequence variants (psvs), which are readily mistaken for snps . a psv is created when there is a base pair difference between the sequences of two paralogs, but the substitution does not segregate within either paralogue. another source of variation in polyploid genomes are multisite variants (msv) which, in contrast to psvs, segregate for a base substitution in one or both of the paralogous loci . msvs are polymorphic and potentially informative; however, lack of designated software for polyploid genomes makes analysis difficult. in atlantic salmon and other salmonids, the large numbers of msvs and psvs have complicated the use of snp arrays in genome-wide association (gwas) and population genetics studies. this is also true for polyploid species of major agronomic importance such as wheat and potato. illuminas infinium technology (illumina inc) is one of the most widely used snp array technologies, which allows simultaneous genotyping of thousands to millions of snps in samples run in parallel on a single silicon slide . the assay chemistry translates the sample allele composition into red and green fluorophores [see steemers andfor more detail]. illuminas proprietary genomestudio genotyping analysis module (v1.6.3 or an earlier relative) converts red and green signals for each snp into a and b signals whose values reflect the relative abundance of arbitrarily assigned a and b alleles. signal is converted into polar coordinates, using the manhattan distance metric for the intensity r, and with theta representing angle degrees. each marker is clustered in cartesian coordinates, and the genotypes aa, ab, bb are assigned to samples in clusters close to theta = 0, 1 2 ,1. an example of a typical diploid snp with well separated clusters is given in.  
