genvisr: genomic visualizations in r visualizing and summarizing data from genomic studies continues to be a challenge. here, we introduce the genvisr package to addresses this challenge by providing highly customiz-able, publication-quality graphics focused on cohort level genome analyses. genvisr provides a rapid and easy-to-use suite of genomic visualization tools, while maintaining a high degree of flexibility by leveraging the abilities of ggplot2 and bioconductor.the continued development of massively parallel sequencing technologies has led to an exponential growth in the amount of genomic data produced . this growth has in turn enabled scientists to investigate increasingly large, cohort-level genomic datasets. generating intuitive visualizations is a critical component in recognizing patterns and investigating underlying biological properties in cohorts under study. a significant bottleneck exists, however, between data generation and subsequent visualization and interpretation . additionally, generating publication-quality figures for effective communication of these data typically requires ad hoc methods such as manual creation or extensive graphic manipulation with third party software. this process is both time intensive and difficult to automate/reproduce. further, the absence of software supporting multiple species can make this process even more demanding. here, we present genvisr, a bioconductor package to address these issues. genvisr provides a user-friendly, flexible and comprehensive suite of tools for visualizing complex genomic data in three categories (small variants, copy number alterations and data quality) for multiple species of interest.genvisr provides features and functions for many popular genomic visualizations not otherwise available in a single convenient package . by leveraging the abilities of ggplot2 it confers a level of customizability not previously possible. virtually any aspect of a plot can be changed simply by adding an additional layer onto the graphical object. thus, genvisr allows for publication quality figures with a minimal amount of required input and data manipulation while maintaining a high degree of flexibility and customizability.  
