geo2enrichr: browser extension and server app to extract gene sets from geo and analyze them for biological functions mount sinai knowledge management center for illuminating the druggable genome and 4 367 airport sector motivation: identification of differentially expressed genes is an important step in extracting knowledge from gene expression profiling studies. the raw expression data from microarray and other high-throughput technologies is deposited into the gene expression omnibus (geo) and served as simple omnibus format in text (soft) files. however, to extract and analyze differentially expressed genes from geo requires significant computational skills. results: here we introduce geo2enrichr, a browser extension for extracting differentially expressed gene sets from geo and analyzing those sets with enrichr, an independent gene set enrichment analysis tool containing over 70 000 annotated gene sets organized into 75 gene-set libraries. geo2enrichr adds javascript code to geo web-pages; this code scrapes user selected accession numbers and metadata, and then, with one click, users can submit this information to a web-server application that downloads the soft files, parses, cleans and normalizes the data, identifies the differentially expressed genes, and then pipes the resulting gene lists to enrichr for downstream functional analysis. geo2enrichr opens a new avenue for adding functionality to major bioinformatics resources such geo by integrating tools and resources without the need for a plug-in architecture. importantly, geo2enrichr helps researchers to quickly explore hypotheses with little technical overhead, lowering the barrier of entry for biologists by automating data processing steps needed for knowledge extraction from the major repository geo. availability and implementation: geo2enrichr is an open source tool, freely available for installation as browser extensions at the chrome web store and firefox add-ons. documentation and a browser independent web application can be found atgene expression profiling data are widely and openly available with many computational and statistical techniques developed in the past decade to process and analyze this type of data. the identification of differentially expressed genes and their analysis through gene set enrichment are two important steps in extracting knowledge from expression data. however, there is still a need for creating interoperable tools to improve the reuse of the collective rapidly, a public database maintained by the national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) for depositing and serving functional genomics data, mostly from gene expression profiling studies . geo contains a search engine and each dataset is provided with metadata that includes the publication associated with each dataset, the assay platform, and a description of the experiment and conditions for each sample. geo stores data in tab-delimited ascii text files called simple omnibus format in text (soft) files. geo organizes data into four primary types: geo sample (gsm), geo series (gse), geo dataset (gds) and, geo platform (gpl), which are accessioned with unique and constant identifiers. gsms contain expression measurements from a single experiment where each sample consists of pairs of probe ids and their expression values. gses organize samples into sets which make up a complete study. gdss contain more curated and annotated sets of samples from related gses. gpls contain the lists of probe ids along with mappings of probes to genes for the various expression platforms that are supported. while the interface that provides access to gdss has functionality to identify differentially expressed genes, it is difficult for a user to obtain a coherent view of the results, or to have the ability to analyze the differentially expressed genes with prior biological knowledge for functional characterization and link to external tools. gses provide the data for processing with r using the geo2r format and this creates a barrier to entry for biologists without computational expertise in r. here we present geo2enrichr, a browser extension and a web-based client/server application that adds functionality to the geo site for easier extraction of differentially expressed genes, and for piping such differentially expressed genes to the external gene set enrichment analysis tool enrichr . geo2enrichrs front-end adds buttons and a modal dialog box to geos gds and gse pages via the extension; whereas the back-end of geo2enrichr handles the downloading, processing and analyzing of the expression data from geo specified by the user input.  
