databases and ontologies gepdb: a database for investigating the ternary association of genotype, gene expression and phenotype gepdb integrates both genome-wide association studies and expression quantitative trait loci information, the two primary sources of genome-wide mapping for genotypephenotype and geno-typeexpression associations together with phenotype-associated gene lists. the gepdb provides simultaneous interpretation of both genetic risks and potential gene regulatory pathways toward phenotypic outcome by establishing the ternary relationship of geno-typeexpressionphenotype (gep). the analytic scope is further extended by linkage disequilibrium from five different populations of the international hapmap project. availability and implementation: http://ercsbweb.genome-wide association studies (gwas) and expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) are the principal methods for genomescale mapping of genotypephenotype and genotypeexpression relationships, respectively. in most cases, gwas provides little information on the underlying mechanism at the molecular and cellular levels. a recent survey showed that 516 of the gwas hits fall into coding regions allowing direct interpretation of protein structural and functional impacts. the majority of hit single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) may have some regulatory function through transcriptional regulation, mirna targeting or epigenetic changes. therefore, if there are common snps shared by both gwas and eqtl, the eqtl genes are good candidates for the underlying pathological process and its phenotypic outcome . many dedicated databases have been developed for either gwas or eqtl . there are few integrated databases for both gwas and eqtl data that (i) support a mechanistic interpretation of gwas results, and (ii) infer causal genetic variations responsible for differential expression of disease signature genes via eqtl mapping. we developed gepdb that seamlessly integrates a comprehensive collection of gwas, eqtl and phenotype-associated gene lists. such integration provides a novel opportunity to analyze the ternary relationship of genotypeexpressionphenotype (gep) in a genome scale. the hit snps (tagging snps) may belong to a haplotype block, whereas their neighboring snps may be actually functional in both gwas and eqtl mapping by linkage disequilibrium (ld). gepdb supports expansion of snps using ld information.a critical question regarding the gep ternary relationship is to what extent the expression signatures (degs) can be interpreted by gwas hit snps, via (i) eqtl and further by (ii) ld information. among the datasets compiled in the gepdb, we analyzed paired sets of the gwas hit snps and the gene signatures from gad and genesigdb annotated by the same disease using mesh terms and manual inspection. the coverage of the signature genes by gwas hit snps via eqtl (+ld) varied highly depending(a) genesigdb and (b) gad by the gwas hit snps via eqtl mapping (blue) and ld + eqtl mapping (green). the gwas hit snps are merged together for each disease if there are multiple gwas for a single diseaseon the disease category and individual study. the median coverage was 0100 and 2.3100 by eqtl and ld + eqtl, respectively, and some signature genes resulted in no outcome . the overall low coverage may, at least partially, result from inaccurate mapping between gwas and the corresponding expression signatures because of disease subtypes or heterogeneity. nevertheless, a significant fraction of known gene signatures were traced back to their potential genetic risks using gepdb (g:e mode). similarly, any set of gene signatures or candidate snps can also be analyzed using the g4e4p or p4e4g modes to generate testable hypotheses.  
