algorithms for sorting unsigned linear genomes by the dcj operations motivation: the double cut and join operation (abbreviated as dcj) has been extensively used for genomic rearrangement. although the dcj distance between signed genomes with both linear and circular (uni-and multi-) chromosomes is well studied, the only known result for the np-complete unsigned dcj distance problem is an approximation algorithm for unsigned linear unichromosomal genomes. in this article, we study the problem of computing the dcj distance on two unsigned linear multichromosomal genomes (abbreviated as udcj). results: we devise a 1.5-approximation algorithm for udcj by exploiting the distance formula for signed genomes. in addition, we show that udcj admits a weak kernel of size 2k and hence an fpt algorithm running in o(2 2k n) time. contact:computing genomic distance on gene order is a fundamental problem in computational biology. in the last two decades, a variety of biological operations, such as reversals, translocations, fusions, fissions, transpositions and block-interchanges, have been proposed to handle gene order. the double cut and join operation, introduced by, unifies all the classical operations. in the past, the rearrangement distance for signed genomes is well studied for single operations, like reversals , combinations of operations (reversals, translocations, fusions and fissions) and universal operations (double cut and join) . unfortunately, as for unsigned genomes, most of these problems seem to be np-hard. then it is natural to devise relevant approximation algorithms. a 1.5-approximation algorithm was devised for sorting by unsigned reversals , and the approximation factor was improved to 1.375 bythe problem of sorting by unsigned translocations was investigated by, and an algorithm with an approximation factor of 1.5+ was proposed. transposition, though occurring much less than reversal and translocation, is an indispensable operation in the evolutionary events. the problem of sorting by transpositions was first studied by, who devised a to whom correspondence should be addressed. 1.5-approximation algorithm running in quadratic time. later, the approximation factor was improved to 1.375 by. the problem of sorting by short block-moves, a special but more practical case of transpositions, was studied by jiang and zhu, 2011, and they obtained an 14/11-approximation algorithm. the design of fpt algorithms for genome rearrangement problems was started very recently, with the help of weak kernels. (intuitively, an fpt algorithm is an exact algorithm which runs in polynomial time when the problem solution size, like the number of unsigned reversals to sort a sequence, is bounded by a constant. the relevant formal definitions will be given in the next section.) both sorting by unsigned reversals and sorting by unsigned translocations admit small weak kernels, hence are in ftp . as far as we know, the only known positive result for sorting unsigned genomes by minimum dcj operations (or interchangeably, the unsigned dcj distance problem) is a factor-1.416 approximation for the case of linear unichromosomal genomes . of course, even in this case the problem involves computing a maximum alternating-cycle decomposition (max-acd) of the breakpoint graph, which is np-complete ; therefore, it is not surprising that the unsigned dcj distance problem is np-complete, even for linear unichromosomal genomes . prior to our current work, there has been no fpt algorithm known for the unsigned dcj distance problem.our contributions: in this article, we introduce dcj operations on unsigned linear multichromosomal genomes to compute the corresponding genomic distance. we devise a 1.5-approximation algorithm for linear multichromosomal genomes in section 3. in section 4, we obtain a weak kernel of size 2k for udcj; moreover, we present an fpt algorithm running in o(2 2k n) time.in this article, we devise the first approximation algorithm with a factor of 1.5 and an fpt algorithm running in o(2 2k n) time for the np-complete problem of sorting linear multichromosomal genomes under unsigned dcj distance. it is interesting to improve the approximation factor as well as the running time of the fpt algorithm. for genomes containing circular chromosomes, our approximation algorithm cannot achieve the same performance as linear genomes, so it is also meaningful to handle the problem of sorting mixed genomes (i.e. with both linear and circular chromosomes) under unsigned dcj distance.  
