gerv: a statistical method for generative evaluation of regulatory variants for transcription factor binding motivation: the majority of disease-associated variants identified in genome-wide association studies reside in noncoding regions of the genome with regulatory roles. thus being able to interpret the functional consequence of a variant is essential for identifying causal variants in the analysis of genome-wide association studies. results: we present gerv (generative evaluation of regulatory variants), a novel computational method for predicting regulatory variants that affect transcription factor binding. gerv learns a k-mer-based generative model of transcription factor binding from chip-seq and dnase-seq data, and scores variants by computing the change of predicted chip-seq reads between the reference and alternate allele. the k-mers learned by gerv capture more sequence determinants of transcription factor binding than a motif-based approach alone, including both a transcription factors canonical motif and associated co-factor motifs. we show that gerv outperforms existing methods in predicting single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated with allele-specific binding. gerv correctly predicts a validated causal variant among linked single-nucleotide polymorphisms and prioritizes the variants previously reported to modulate the binding of foxa1 in breast cancer cell lines. thus, gerv provides a powerful approach for functionally annotating and prioritizing causal variants for experimental follow-up analysis. availability and implementation: the implementation of gerv and related data are available atgenome-wide association studies (gwas) have revealed genetic polymorphisms that are strongly associated with complex traits and diseases . missense and nonsense variants that occur in protein coding sequences are simple to characterize. however, many gwas-detected variants reside in non-coding regions with regulatory function . the influence of non-coding variation on gene expression and other cellular functions is not well understood. previous work has observed that non-coding dna changes in the recognition sequences of transcription factors can affect gene expression and cellular phenotypes . thus, predicting the effect of genomic variants on transcription factor (tf) binding is an essential part of interpreting the role of non-coding variants in pathogenesis. most of existing computational approaches to predict the effect of single-nucleotide polymorphism (snps) on tf binding such as strap and haplogreg are based on quantifying the difference between the presented reference and alternate alleles in the context of canonical tf binding motifs . recent work uses k-mer weights learned from a gapped-kmer svm to score the effect of variants, taking into account the frequency of k-mer occurrences but not the spatial effect of k-mers. here, we present gerv (generative evaluation of regulatory variants), a novel computational model that learns the spatial effect of k-mers on tf binding de novo from whole-genome chip-seq and dnase-seq data, and scores variants by the change in predicted chip-seq read counts between the reference and alternate alleles. gerv improves on existing models in three ways. first, gerv does not assume the existence of a canonical tf binding motif. instead it models transcription factor binding by learning the effects of specific k-mers on observed binding. this allows gerv to capture more subtle sequence features underlying transcription factor binding including non-canonical motifs. second, gerv accounts for the spatial effect of k-mers and learns the effect of cis-regulatory regions outside of the canonical tf motif. this enables us to model the role of important auxiliary sequences in transcription factor binding, such as cofactors. third, gerv incorporates chromatin openness information as a covariate in the model which boosts the accuracy of the predicted functional consequence of a variant. we first demonstrate the power of gerv on the chip-seq data for transcription factor nf-jb. we show that gerv learns a vocabulary of k-mers that accurately predicts held-out nf-jb chipseq data and captures the canonical nf-jb motifs and associated sequences such as known co-factors. applying gerv to six transcription factors on which allele-specific binding (asb) analysis is available, we show gerv outperforms existing approaches in prioritizing snps associated with asb. we demonstrate the application of gerv in post-gwas analysis by scoring risk-associated snps and their linked snps for breast cancer and show that gerv trained on foxa1 chip-seq data achieves superior performance in prioritizing snps previously reported to modulate foxa1 binding in breast cancer cell lines.despite the recent substantial advances in characterizing the genome-wide transcription factor binding sites with chip-seq experiments, it remains a challenge to interpret variation in the noncoding region of the genome and to determine variants that cause transcription factor binding changes in post-gwas analysis. our work improves the prediction of causal non-coding variants when compared with other contemporary methods.. roc curve (first row) and prc (second row) for discriminating asb snps from the second type of negative variant set (10 times of the size of positive set) using gerv (red), gerv without covariates (yellow), deltasvm (blue) and strap (green). gray-dashed line in roc curves indicates random chance. in each figure, 95 confidence intervals of the true-positive rate (for roc) or precision (for prc) are plotted. the performance of strap on jund is not measurable as jund motif is not included in its built-in motif databasethe 29 variants previously reported to modulate foxa1 binding had significantly higher (mann whitney u test p 0.0011) gerv scores than the rest of the avs  
