gestodifferent: a cytoscape plugin for the generation and the identification of gene regulatory networks describing a stochastic cell differentiation process the characterization of the complex phenomenon of cell differentiation is a key goal of both systems and computational biology. gestodifferent is a cytoscape plugin aimed at the generation and the identification of gene regulatory networks (grns) describing an arbitrary stochastic cell differentiation process. the (dynamical) model adopted to describe general grns is that of noisy random boolean networks (nrbns), with a specific focus on their emergent dynamical behavior. gestodifferent explores the space of grns by filtering the nrbn instances inconsistent with a stochastic lineage differentiation tree representing the cell lineages that can be obtained by following the fate of a stem cell descendant. matched networks can then be analyzed by cytoscape network analysis algorithms or, for instance, used to define (multiscale) models of cellular dynamics. availability: freely available at http://bimib.disco.unimib.it/index .php/retronetgestodifferent or at the cytoscape app storecell differentiation is the process by which the progeny of totiand multi-potent stem cells progressively develops in more specialized cell types, characterized by particular properties and functions. the characterization of this complex and still mostly undeciphered phenomenon is of key importance for both computational and systems biology. to address this problem, we here introduce gestodifferent, a plugin for cytoscape that builds on the dynamical model of cell differentiation introduced in. the key hypothesis of the model is that cell types are characterized by coherent gene activation patterns of the underlying gene regulatory networks (grns), and that the degree of differentiation is correlated with the stability of these patterns to noise and perturbations (e.g. mutations). in particular, more differentiated cells would show more sophisticated control mechanisms against noise and mutations (compare hoffman et al., 2008 and references therein). in, this is achieved by considering noisy random boolean networks (nrbns) as a grn model and by focusing on the dynamical behavior that emerges from the interaction of a large number of genes. the model is general (i.e. it does not refer to any specific organism) and was proven to reproduce some key properties of the differentiation process, namely, (i) the presence of different degrees of differentiation, i.e. from toti-/multi-potent stem cells to intermediate states, to fully differentiated cells; (ii) the stochastic differentiation process, according to which a population of toti-/multi-potent cells generates progenies of distinct types by means of a stochastic process; and (iii) the induced pluripotency phenomenon, according to which fully differentiated cells can achieve a pluripotent stage through the perturbation of some key genes . within this framework, gestodifferent can generateaccording to some specific (user-defined) featuresand select grns that display an appropriate emergent behavior matching an input cell lineage differentiation tree (e.g. that of intestinal crypts or hematopoietic cells). the cytoscape environment then allows for further network-specific analysis and matching against well-known biological databases. our group is working on meshing different simulation levels for intestinal crypt development in conjunction with colorectal cancer development. gestodifferent has been used to identify grns describing the lineage commitment tree of cell populations in colonic crypts in de matteis et al. (submitted for publication). matched networks have been subsequently used within a multicellular and multiscale simulation model , which we used to study some key cellular processes, such as cell growth, migration, sorting, division and lineage commitment; the selected nrbns are consistent with the expected behaviour and are amenable to perturbation studies. finally, new matching filters could in principle be devised to consider epigenetic factors pertaining to the cell differentiation process.  
