genome analysis geval — a web-based browser for evaluating genome assemblies motivation: for most research approaches, genome analyses are dependent on the existence of a high quality genome reference assembly. however, the local accuracy of an assembly remains difficult to assess and improve. the geval browser allows the user to interrogate an assembly in any region of the genome by comparing it to different datasets and evaluating the concordance. these analyses include: a wide variety of sequence alignments, comparative analyses of multiple gen-ome assemblies, and consistency with optical and other physical maps. geval highlights allelic variations, regions of low complexity, abnormal coverage, and potential sequence and assembly errors, and offers strategies for improvement. although geval focuses primarily on sequence integrity , it can also display arbitrary annotation including from ensembl or trackhub sources. we provide geval web sites for many human, mouse, zebrafish and chicken assemblies to support the genome reference consortium, and geval is also downloadable to enable its use for any organism and assembly. availability and implementation: web browser: http://geval.sanger.ac.uk, plugin: http://wchow.reference genomes are the foundation for genomic biology. as more and more de novo sequencing projects are being conducted, and more draft genomes released, the continued challenge is to create sufficiently complete and correct assemblies that can be confidently used as references by the research community. although it has been over a decade since it was announced that the human genome was completed, this statement referred to the then achievable quality of sequence resolution. there remained errors and lack of sequence coverage for important regions, for example many areas encoding multi-gene families (ihgsc). since then, genome assemblies of varying quality have been produced for many more species and individuals, often resulting in annotation errors with negative influence on their research use . groups such as the genome reference consortium (grc, genomereference.org) lead efforts to curate and resolve genome assembly issues, and maintain the best quality genome references possible for key research species . depending on the project, groups that tackle creating a genome reference may have at their disposal multiple alternative assemblies together with resources such as clone libraries, collections of short reads, cdna sequences, rnaseq data, physical maps, optical maps or genetic markers. these datasets help in repairing and reorganizing genomic regions or to create a strategy to infuse new sequence into a draft assembly. in parallel, research biologists who observe discrepancies between their data and the genome reference would v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.  
