genome analysis geworkbench: an open source platform for integrative genomics geworkbench (genomics workbench) is an open source java desktop application that provides access to an integrated suite of tools for the analysis and visualization of data from a wide range of genomics domains (gene expression, sequence, protein structure and systems biology). more than 70 distinct plug-in modules are currently available implementing both classical analyses (several variants of clustering, classification, homology detection, etc.) as well as state of the art algorithms for the reverse engineering of regulatory networks and for protein structure prediction, among many others. geworkbench leverages standards-based middleware technologies to provide seamless access to remote data, annotation and computational servers, thus, enabling researchers with limited local resources to benefit from available public infrastructure. availability: the project site (http://www.geworkbench.org) includes links to self-extracting installers for most operating system (os) platforms as well as instructions for building the application from scratch using the source code [which is freely available from the projects svn (subversion) repository]. geworkbench support is available through the end-user and developer forums of the cabig molecular analysis tools knowledge center, https://cabig-kc.nci.nih.gov/molecular/forums/ contact:a large number of bioinformatics techniques have been developed in recent years to serve the needs of biomedical research. the field is moving rapidly, with new and improved approaches appearing frequently. the fast pace of change and the technical sophistication of these approaches creates a barrier of adoption for ordinary biologists. the problem is exacerbated by the integrative nature of biomedical research, which requires combining data from multiple genomic/biomedical databases and using an array of advanced analyses, often available only in the form of command line programs . additionally, due to their sheer size and dimensionality, analysis of genomic data sets can be computationally very demanding. it is unlikely that every biomedical researcher that would like to utilize such analyses will have access to local/institutional hardware resources capable of geworkbench comprises at present more than 70 distinct modules, supporting the integrated analysis and visualization of many types of genomic data. users of geworkbench can: @bullet load data from disk or from remote data sources (such as the caarray microarray data repository at the national cancer institute, https://array.nci.nih.gov/; the pdb protein structure database; and sequence databases at the university of santa cruz and the european molecular biology laboratory).@bullet visualize gene expression, molecular interaction networks, protein sequence and protein structure data in a variety of ways. @bullet access client-and server-side computational analysis tools such as t-test analysis, hierarchical clustering, self-organizing maps, analysis of variance (anova), regulatory and signaling network reconstruction, basic local alignment search tool (blast) searches, pattern/motif discovery, etc. @bullet validate computational hypothesis through the integration of gene and pathway annotation information from curated sources as well as through enrichment analyses.page: 1780 17791780the mission of the magnet center is to provide the research community with novel, structural and systems biology methods and tools for the dissection of molecular interactions in the cell and for the interaction-based elucidation of cellular phenotypes (lists some of the magnet plug ins; supplementary figs 1 and 2 provide related screenshots). other geworkbench modules are wrapped versions of pre-existing third party software tools such as cytoscape , ontologizer , and several analysis modules from the microarray experiment viewer and genepattern . a complete module listing (with screenshots) is available at the project web site, http://www.geworkbench.org/, under the plug-ins page.  
