genetics and population analysis ghap: an r package for genome-wide haplotyping the ghap r package was designed to call haplotypes from phased marker data. given user-defined haplotype blocks (hapblock), the package identifies the different haplotype alleles (hapallele) present in the data and scores sample haplotype allele genotypes (hapgenotype) based on hapallele dose (i.e. 0, 1 or 2 copies). the output is not only useful for analyses that can handle multi-allelic markers, but is also conveniently formatted for existing pipelines intended for bi-allelic markers. availability and implementation: https://cran.r-project.org/packageghap contact:the use of high-density marker panels in genomics relies on the concept of linkage disequilibrium (ld) and tagging, such that information from unobserved variants can be indirectly captured by correlation with nearby markers . methods for genomic analysis are usually based on single markers, ignoring that unobserved variants may be better modeled by the use of phase information . moreover, the need for tools to perform haplotype calls from phased data has been underserved in spite of the growing interest in haplotype-based analyses in the last years. here we describe ghap, an r package designed to call haplotypes from phased data. the goal of ghap is to compute summary statistics for haplotype blocks (hapblock) and haplotype alleles (hapallele), as well as to construct a matrix of haplotype genotypes (hapgenotype). as a general framework, each hapallele can be treated as a pseudo-marker in downstream analyses, facilitating the incorporation of phase information in existing pipelines. this approach differs from competing methods as it uses hapallele as markers, instead of hidden haplotype states generated by expectation maximization or hidden markov models.the ghap package provides means for haplotype calling, facilitating the incorporation of phase information in genome-wide analyses. the package is available at: https://cran.r-project.org/ packageghap.  
