girafe – an r/bioconductor package for functional exploration of aligned next-generation sequencing reads the r/bioconductor package girafe facilitates the functional exploration of alignments of sequence reads from next-generation sequencing data to a genome. it allows users to investigate the genomic intervals together with the aligned reads and to work with, visualise and export these intervals. moreover, the package operates within and extends the ever-growing bioconductor framework and thus enables users to leverage a multitude of methods for their data in order to answer specific research questions. availability and implementation: the r package girafe is available from the bioconductor web site: http://www.bioconductor.org/ packages/release/bioc/html/girafe.html an extensive vignette and the bioconductor mailing lists provide additional documentation and help for using the package. contact:next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies provide users with millions of comparatively short rna or dna reads from biological samples of interest. the first step in the analysis of these data usually is to align the reads to the chosen reference genome, using powerful, specific alignment tools. for the secondary analysis that follows, there is a need for an integrated work environment which allows users to explore and annotate the genome intervals with the aligned reads. besides providing functionality for data exploration, this environment must also provide interfaces to other available tools, especially as the field of ngs analysis software is comparatively new and rapidly evolving. previously described, excellent tools that provide frameworks for working with aligned reads include galaxy and samtools . here, we describe the r/bioconductor package girafe that enables users to investigate the genome intervals with the aligned reads, henceforth referred to as aligned intervals, and to work with, visualise and export these aligned intervals. one advantage of girafe over other tools for working with aligned reads is that the package operates within the open source, open development and constantly to whom correspondence should be addressed. growing bioconductor framework . thus, this package enables users to leverage a multitude of methods in the analysis of their data in order to answer specific research questions.the r/bioconductor package girafe provides users with a powerful, flexible and extensible framework to explore ngs data, following alignment of the reads to a reference genome. the package interacts with other bioconductor packages and allows export of the data in various formats for exploring them in other software, with the aim of not restricting the user to a limited set of analysis tools.the field of ngs analysis software is growing rapidly. thus, future developments of the package will include adding further methods for working with aligned genome intervals, reducing the memory footprint, and providing additional interfaces to other r/bioconductor packages and other software.  
