genome analysis gkaks: the pipeline for genome-level ka/ks calculation gkaks is a codon-based genome-level ka/ks computation pipeline developed and based on programs from four widely used packages: blat, blastall (including bl2seq, formatdb and fas-tacmd), paml (including codeml and yn00) and kaks_calculator (including 10 substitution rate estimation methods). gkaks can automatically detect and eliminate frameshift mutations and premature stop codons to compute the substitution rates (ka, ks and ka/ks) between a well-annotated genome and a non-annotated genome or even a poorly assembled scaffold dataset. it is especially useful for newly sequenced genomes that have not been well annotated. we applied gkaks to estimate the genome-wide substitution rates in five pairs of closely related species. the average ka and ks computed by gkaks were consistent with previous studies. we also compared the ka, ks and ka/ks of mouse and rat orthologous protein-coding genes estimated by gkaks and based on the alignments generated by pal2nal. results from two methods are compatible.open reading frames (orfs) are embedded in genomic dna sequences. once detected, orf sequences can be aligned at either dna or protein levels. because of the degeneracy of genetic codes, protein sequences are more conserved than dna sequences. therefore, protein sequences can be used to compare two orfs with greater evolutionary distance and provide fundamental biological and evolutionary information of dna sequences. previously, sequence alignment programs for orfs, such as bioperl toolkit , revtrans , transalign , pal2nal , translatorx and macse , use a consecutive three-step approach: (i) translation of nucleotide sequences into protein sequences; (ii) alignment of protein sequences; and (iii) alignment of dna sequences according to protein alignment. however, this three-step alignment approach is highly sensitive to frameshift and non-sense mutations. such mutations are common in genomic datasets, and they can be the result of either sequencing errors or true evolutionary events leading to loss of function or neo-functionalized gene copies . in addition, the three-step alignment approach also creates a problem when the aligned sequences do not have annotated orfs, or homologous genes have only partial sequences originating from a common ancestor. in this study, we present an alternative codon-based alignment approach where dna sequences are directly aligned while also considering codon information. codon-aware alignment based on blat and bl2seq programs automatically aligns coding sequences (cdss) from a reference genome to another genome sequences, deleting the non-homologous sequences such as those existing in a pair of partial duplicated genes. it automatically handles the existence of multiple frameshift mutations and/or early stop codons in both input dna sequences. after the alignment, the pipeline uses codeml/ yn00 in paml or other 10 algorithms in kaks_calculator to compute the ka, ks and ka/ks of the aligned homologous sequence pairs, which can be based on 420 genetic codon models. we named the whole pipeline gkaks. in terminology of gkaks pipeline, ka, ks and ka/ks are equivalent to dn, ds and dn/ds, respectively.  
