glmgraph: an r package for variable selection and predictive modeling of structured genomic data one central theme of modern high-throughput genomic data analysis is to identify relevant genomic features as well as build up a predictive model based on selected features for various tasks such as personalized medicine. correlating the large number of omics features with a certain phenotype is particularly challenging due to small sample size (n) and high dimensionality (p). to address this small n, large p problem, various forms of sparse regression models have been proposed by exploiting the sparsity assumption. among these, network-constrained sparse regression model is of particular interest due to its ability to utilize the prior graph/network structure in the omics data. despite its potential usefulness for omics data analysis, no efficient r implementation is publicly available. here we present an r software package glmgraph that implements the graph-constrained regularization for both sparse linear regression and sparse logistic regression. we implement both the l 1 penalty and minimax concave penalty for variable selection and laplacian penalty for coefficient smoothing. efficient coordinate descent algorithm is used to solve the optimization problem. we demonstrate the use of the package by applying it to a human microbiome dataset, where phylogeny structure among bacterial taxa is available.with the development of high-throughput technology such as next generation sequencing, biology has advanced into the big data era. though generation of these omics data has become increasingly cheaper, high-throughput analysis of the omics data remains challenging due to the massive amounts of omics features. one central goal of genomic studies is to correlate these omics features with a variable of interest such as disease status. sparse regression models, which jointly analyze the omics features, have gained popularity for omics data analysis due to its good model interpretability, computational efficiency and superior predictive power . the omics features are usually related by an underlying graph or network. for example, genes can be grouped into biological pathways and metagenomic sequences are related by a phylogenetic tree. incorporating the prior network information has been demonstrated to improve both model selection and predictive power . the network-constrained sparse regression model proposed by, which smoothes the coefficients with respect to the underlying network structure by imposing a laplacian penalty, provides an efficient way to utilize the prior structure information. however, no r package of the method has been available. though it can be cast into a lasso problem by data augmentation approach for a continuous response, it is not computationally efficient and memory-friendly, especially when the dimension p is high, since it converts an n p data matrix into an n p p augmented data matrix. the data augmentation approach cannot be extended to handle the binary outcome, and network-constrained sparse logistic regression requires specific algorithm. moreover, no software exists for the combination of laplacian penalty and non-convex sparsity penalty such as the minimax concave penalty (mcp), though the superior property of the combination has been demonstrated in linear regression setting . therefore, we aim to provide an r package with similar interface as the popularly used glmnet package to implement the network-constrained sparse linear and logistic regression with sparsity options of l 1 penalty and mcp. direct cyclic coordinate descent algorithm is applied to speed up computation. the r package glmgraph will be useful for variable selection and prediction for high-dimensional datasets when there exists graph/network structure among predictors.  
