gene expression global analysis of microarray data reveals intrinsic properties in gene expression and tissue selectivity motivation: it is expected that individual genes have intrinsically different variability in the global expressional trend among them. thus, the consideration of gene-specific expressional properties will help us to distinguish target-selective gene expression over non-selective over-expression. results: the re-standardization and integration of heterogeneous microarray datasets, available from public databases, have enabled us to determine the global expression properties of individual genes across a wide variety of experimental conditions and samples. the global averages and sds of expression for each gene in the integrated microarray datasets were found to be intrinsic properties, which were consistent among independent collections of datasets using different microarray platforms. using the gene-specific intrinsic parameters to rescale the microarray data, we were able to distinguish novel selective gene expression [cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (comp) and collagen x] in breast cancer tissues from non-selective over-expression, a difference that has not been detectable by conventional methods. availability and implementation: the web-based tool for gs-lage is available at http://dna microarray experiments have provided a powerful tool for monitoring transcriptome-wide changes in gene expression that are associated with physiological or pathological states . large-scale microarray experiments can serve as a resource for a systematic understanding of global expression trends in the transcriptome under various experimental conditions or in different tissues. with the recent rapid increase in microarray expression datasets available in public databases, it has become possible to virtually monitor the global expression trends of a gene in diverse biological samples under various conditions. the availability of a large collection of microarray data in the ncbi (national center for biotechnology information) gene expression to whom correspondence should be addressed. omnibus (geo, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo;) provides a resource for the physiome-wide analysis of gene expression on a genome scale. however, the microarray datasets available in public domains have been contributed by many different research groups using a variety of experimental and data-normalization methods. the effects of normalization strategies have been extensively evaluated elsewhere . for example, two different transformations of the same data may produce two differential expression of gene (deg) lists with only 30 agreement . thus, the heterogeneity among groups of microarray datasets requires additional standardization of individual microarray samples before integrative analysis. to this end, we have attempted to rescale and integrate heterogeneous microarray datasets from the ncbi geo by using a two-step gene-oriented standardization procedure, genespecific large scale analysis of gene expression (gs-lage;). the analysis of the resulting integrated dataset provides insights into gene-specific global expression trends found in various microarray samples. these trends were then used to improve the statistical confidence of the marginal changes in gene expression between experiments . a major challenge in microarray experiments has been the identification of genes whose expression is significantly different between samples . many sophisticated statistical methods have been developed in attempts to achieve more reliable identification of differentially regulated genes . however, under many experimental conditions, the changes in gene expression are often moderate, as compared to the array-wide variability in expression, resulting in modest p-values that prevent conventional statistical models from identifying real changes in expression . in fact, all existing measures of deg from microarray fluorescence signals are optimized to have a linear correlation with the change in mrna levels . given that individual genes have unique expression levels and fluctuations (necessitated by their biological functions), a metric for the direct comparison of the changes in mrna expression between experiments cannot provide a relevant biological interpretation based only on the significance of the observed degs between genes. one gene may have an intrinsically large variation in expression in different biological samples or under different conditions, while another gene may require only small variations for its biological function. thus, it is reasonable that the observed deg (i.e. mrnapage: 1724 17231730in the proteinprotein interaction network, comp and collagen x have relatively few interacting partners compared to inhibin and collagen viii , suggesting that comp and collagen x are topologically and functionally peripheral in the cellular network, while inhibin and collagen viii are hub proteins. it has been reported that essential genes are likely to encode hub proteins and are expressed widely in most tissues .also found that the vast majority of disease genes were non-essential and without tendency of encoding hub proteins. they provided an explanation for most disease genes using an evolutionary argument, such that only disease-related mutations in the functionally and topologically peripheral regions of the cell have a higher chance of viability. consistently, the present study shows that two hub proteins, inhibin and collagen viii, are over-expressed in many different normal and cancer tissues, indicating that their expression is essential and not specific to a disease. on the other hand, two peripheral genes, comp and collagen x, show highly selective over-expression in breast cancers, thus suggesting that their expression is nonessential and specific to breast cancers. this analysis demonstrates that the gene-specific interpretation of transcriptome data is able to distinguish non-essential disease-related genes from essential genes with over-expression in various tissues. in conclusion, the selective expression of comp and collagen x in breast cancer, observed by qpcr experiments, supports the hypothesis that gene-specific interpretation of microarray data allows highly sample-specific gene expression to be distinguished from non-selective over-expression, without large-scale experiments on various samples. in a transcriptome-wide study, such as a microarray experiment, a large number of candidate genes with significant over-expression in target samples are often identified. thus, it is challenging to determine candidates of more direct or specific importance to a target disease or the metabolic regulation of specific samples. in this study, we have shown that gene-specific interpretation of microarray data can be used to prioritize genes with greater selective expression to specific tissues over many other over-expressed genes. we believe that a transcriptome-wide survey of the global trends in gene expression is of critical importance to better interpreting large-scale gene expression data. given that individual genes each have their own regulatory system for transcriptional activity, the analysis of global expression trends can provide a direct measure of a genes intrinsic expressional behavior. the present study shows that db-wide average and sd of gene (probe feature) expression are an effective measure of the intrinsic expressional behavior of a gene and that they can be used for better interpretation of microarray data. some of intrinsic properties observed in this study might reflect characteristics of probes themselves. thus, the present gene-specific rescaling method also minimizes the probe-specific variation in the interpretation of microarray data. rapid increases in public microarray data will further improve the quality of thisapproach and provide a unique tool for biological interpretation of gene expression data on a transcriptome basis. we are currently expanding the integrated microarray datasets to generalize the genespecific interpretation of transcriptome data to diverse organisms and experimental conditions. all of the resources used in the present study, including the integrated microarray datasets and analysis methods, are available at http://lage.sookmyung.ac.kr.  
