global copy number profiling of cancer genomes in this article, we introduce a robust and efficient strategy for deriving global and allele-specific copy number alternations (cna) from cancer whole exome sequencing data based on log r ratios and b-allele frequencies. applying the approach to the analysis of over 200 skin cancer samples, we demonstrate its utility for discovering distinct cna events and for deriving ancillary information such as tumor purity. availability and implementation: https://github.com/xfwang/closedna copy number alternations (cna) have been extensively studied in cancer. copy number amplifications and homozygous deletions from cna play an important role in the development of cancer. genome-wide cna detection of large number of tumor samples is a vital step to identify cancer driver events and to gain insights into cancer progression and prevention. next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies have quickly become the cna analysis platform of choice due to higher resolution and sensitivity compared to traditional array-based approaches such as comparative genomic hybridization (cgh). however, ngs-specific cna statistical and computational methods are currently not well established and are mostly based on the total copy number gains or losses as represented by the log ratio of sequence coverage in a tumor-normal pair. these relative measurements do not take into account tumor purity, clonality, as well as other valuable information accrued by ngs data. in this correspondence, we highlight a set of concepts and analytic tools that enables the fast and accurate dissection of wholegenome cna profiles by integrating the totality of information available from ngs data. based on whole exome sequencing (wes) data of 253 melanoma tumor-normal pairs, we demonstrate that our approaches allow for a more accurate estimation of copy number status and identification of otherwise undetectable cna patterns. well-developed array-based cna analytical tools are primarily based on the segmentation and smoothing of log r ratio (lrr) and b-allele frequency (baf) , which provide orthogonal evidence for copy number status. lrr corresponds to the difference in the hybridization signal in a particular genome region between normal and tumor dna, and baf measures the relative contributions of the maternal and paternal alleles to this signal. most ngs-based v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com tools, however, rely solely on lrr due to the inherent challenges in assessing baf. first, the density of observed single nucleotide variants (snvs) is relatively sparse, especially in wes. also, the accuracy of the baf measurement is dependent on the sequence coverage, which can vary between gene regions and sequencing modalities. finally, the baf is sensitive to sequencing and mapping errors. therefore, baf information remains underutilized in ngs experiments, and baf is often used in an ad hoc mannerin an attempt to validate the results obtained from lrr. in this paper, we propose a fast procedure that is based on both lrr and baf and that works seamlessly with existing ngs pipelines. we show that the derived multivariate cna profiles allow for an in-depth characterization of the somatic structural variations in cancer samples. a set of analysis scripts from vcf file preparation to the derivation of allele-specific copy numbers are provided in the pipeline package close (a toolkit for cna/loh analysis with sequencing data) and its companion r package close-r.  
