globalmit: learning globally optimal dynamic bayesian network with the mutual information test criterion motivation: dynamic bayesian networks (dbn) are widely applied in modeling various biological networks including the gene regulatory network (grn). due to the np-hard nature of learning static bayesian network structure, most methods for learning dbn also employ either local search such as hill climbing, or a meta stochastic global optimization framework such as genetic algorithm or simulated annealing. results: this article presents globalmit, a toolbox for learning the globally optimal dbn structure from gene expression data. we propose using a recently introduced information theoretic-based scoring metric named mutual information test (mit). with mit, the task of learning the globally optimal dbn is efficiently achieved in polynomial time. availability: the toolbox, implemented in matlab and c++, is available atbayesian network (bn) has found applications in modeling various biological networks including the gene regulatory network (grn). the two important limitations when applying static bn to these domain problems are: (i) bn does not have a mechanism for exploiting the temporal aspect of time-series data, such as time-series microarray data; and (ii) bn does not allow the modeling of cyclic phenomena, such as feedback loops, which are prevalent in biological systems . these drawbacks have motivated the development of the so-called dynamic bayesian network (dbn). its simplest model, the first-order markov stationary dbn, assumes that both the structure of the network and the parameters characterizing it remain unchanged over time. the value of a variable at time (t) is assumed to depend only on the value of its parents at time (t 1). dbn not only accounts for the temporal aspect of time-series data (i.e. an inter time-slice edge must always be directed forward in time), but it also allows the modeling of feedback loops. since its inception, dbn has received particular interest from the bioinformatics community (; kim to whom correspondence should be addressed).  
