gene expression global modeling of transcriptional responses in interaction networks motivation: cell-biological processes are regulated through a complex network of interactions between genes and their products. the processes, their activating conditions and the associated tran-scriptional responses are often unknown. organism-wide modeling of network activation can reveal unique and shared mechanisms between tissues, and potentially as yet unknown processes. the same method can also be applied to cell-biological conditions in one or more tissues. results: we introduce a novel approach for organism-wide discovery and analysis of transcriptional responses in interaction networks. the method searches for local, connected regions in a network that exhibit coordinated transcriptional response in a subset of tissues. known interactions between genes are used to limit the search space and to guide the analysis. validation on a human pathway network reveals physiologically coherent responses, functional relatedness between tissues and coordinated, context-specific regulation of the genes. availability: implementation is freely available in r and matlab atcoordinated activation and inactivation of genes through molecular interactions determines cell function. changes in cell-biological conditions induce changes in the expression levels of co-regulated genes in order to produce specific physiological responses. a huge body of information concerning cell-biological processes is available in public repositories, including gene ontologies , pathway models , regulatory information and protein interactions . less is known about the contexts in which these processes are activated , and how individual processes are reflected in gene expression . although gene expression measurements provide only an indirect view to physiological processes, their wide to whom correspondence should be addressed. availability provides a unique resource for investigating gene coregulation on a genome-and organism-wide scale. this allows the detection of transcriptional responses that are shared by multiple tissues, suggesting shared physiological mechanism with potential biomedical implications, as demonstrated by the connectivity map where a number of chemical perturbations on a cancer cell line were used to reveal shared transcriptional responses between conditions to enhance screening of therapeutic targets. in this work, we study transcriptional responses of different tissues but the same methods can be directly used for modeling sets of cellular conditions within a single or multiple tissues as well. transcriptional responses have been modeled using so-called gene expression signatures . a signature describes a co-expression state of the genes, associated with particular physiological states. well-characterized signatures have proven to be accurate biomarkers in clinical trials, and hence reliable indicators of cells physiological state. disease-associated signatures are often coherent across tissues or platforms . commercial signatures are available for routine clinical practice (nuyten and van), and other applications have been suggested recently . the established signatures are typically designed to provide optimal classification performance between two particular conditions. the problem with the classification-based signatures is that their associations to the underlying physiological processes are not well understood . our goal is to enhance the understanding by deriving transcriptional signatures that are explicitly connected to well-characterized processes through the network. we introduce and validate a novel approach for organismwide discovery and analysis of transcriptional response patterns in interaction networks. our algorithm has been designed to detect and model local regions in a network, each of which exhibits coordinated transcriptional response in a subset of measurements. in this study, the method is applied to investigate transcriptional responses of the network across a versatile collection of tissues across normal human body. the algorithm is independent of predefined classifications for genes or tissues. organism-wide analysis can reveal unique and shared mechanisms between disparate tissues , and potentially as yet unknown processes . the proposed netresponse algorithm provides an efficient model-based tool for simultaneous feature selection and class discovery that utilizes known interactions between genes to guide the analysis. related approaches include cmonkey and a modified version of samba biclustering .. organism-wide analysis of transcriptional responses in a human pathway interaction network reveals physiologically coherent activation patterns and tissue-specific regulation. one of the subnetworks and its tissue-specific responses, as detected by the netresponse algorithm is shown. the expression of each gene is visualized with respect to its mean level of expression across all samples. however, these are application-oriented tools that rely on additional, organism-specific information, and their implementation is currently not available for most organisms, including human. we provide a general-purpose algorithm whose applicability is not limited to particular organisms. netresponse makes it possible to perform data-driven identification of functionally coherent network components and their tissue-specific responses. this is useful since the commonly used alternatives, predefined gene sets or pathways, are collections of intertwined processes rather than coherent functional entities . this has complicated their use in gene expression analysis, and methods have consequently been suggested to identify the key condition-responsive genes of predefined gene sets , or to decompose predefined pathways into smaller functional modules represented by gene expression signatures . our network-based search procedure detects the coordinately regulated gene sets in a data-driven manner. gene expression provides functional information of the network that is missing in purely graph-oriented approaches for studying cell-biological networks . the network brings in prior information of gene function and connects the responses more closely to known processes than purely gene expression-based methods such as biclustering , subspace clustering or other feature selection approaches . a key difference to previous network-based clustering methods, including matisse and related approaches is that they assume a single correlated response between all genes in a module. netresponse additionally models tissue-specific responses of the network. this allows a more expressive definition of a functional module, or a signature. we validate the algorithm by modeling transcriptional responses in a human pathway interaction network across an organism-wide collection of tissues in normal human body. the results highlight functional relatedness between tissues, providing a global view on cell-biological network activation patterns.the validation results reported below demonstrate that the netresponse algorithm is readily applicable for modeling transcriptional responses in interaction networks on an organism-wide scale. while biomedical implications of the findings require further investigation, netresponse detects a number of physiologically coherent and reproducible transcriptional responses in the network, and highlights functional relatedness between tissues. it also outperformed the comparison methods in terms of reproducibility of the findings.cell-biological networks may cover thousands of genes, but any change in the physiological context typically affects only a small part of the network. while gene function and interactions are often subject to context-specific regulation , they are typically studied only in particular experimental conditions. organism-wide analysis could reveal highly specialized functions that are activated only in one or a few tissues. detection of shared responses between the tissues can reveal previously unknown functional connections and help to formulate novel hypotheses of gene function in previously unexplored contexts. we provide a well-defined algorithm for such analysis. the results support the validity of the model. netresponse detected the largest number of responses without compromising physiological coherence or reproducibility of the findings compared with the alternatives. the most highly reproducible results were obtained by netresponse. further analysis is needed to establish the physiological role of the findings. netresponse is readily applicable for modeling tissue-specific responses in cell-biological networks, including pathways, protein interactions and regulatory networks. the network connects the responses to well-characterized processes, and provides readily interpretable results that are less biased toward known biological phenomena than methods based on predefined gene sets that are routinely used in gene expression studies to bring in prior information of gene function and to increase statistical power. however, these are often collections of intertwined processes rather than coherent functional entities. for example, pathways from kegg may contain hundreds of genes, while only a small part of a pathway may be affected by changes in physiological conditions . this has complicated the use of predefined gene sets in gene expression studies.demonstrated that taking into account aspects of pathway topology, such as gene and interaction types can improve the estimation of pathway activity. while their spia algorithm measures the activity of known pathways between two predefined conditions, our algorithm searches for potentially unknown functional modules, and detects their association to multiple conditions, or tissues, simultaneously. this is useful since biomedical pathways are human-made descriptions of cellular processes, often consisting of smaller, partially independent modules . our data-driven search procedure can rigorously identify functionally coherent network modules where the interacting genes show coordinated responses. joint modeling increases statistical power that is useful since gene expression, and many interaction data types such as proteinprotein interactions, have high noise levels. the probabilistic formulation accounts for biological and measurement noise in a principled manner. certain types of interaction data such as transcription factor binding or protein interactions are directly based on measurements. this can potentially help to discover as yet unknown processes that are not described in the pathway databases . false negative interactions form a limitation for the current model because joint responses of co-regulated genes can be modeled only when they form a connected subnetwork. the need for principled methods for analyzing large-scale collections of gene expression data is increasing with their availability. versatile gene expression atlases contain valuable information about shared and unique mechanisms between disparate tissues which is not available in smaller and more specific experiments . for example,demonstrated that large-scale screening of cell lines under diverse conditions can enhance the finding of therapeutic targets. our model is directly applicable in similar exploratory tasks, providing tools for organism-wide analysis of transcriptional activity in normal human tissues , cancer and other diseases in a genome-and organism-wide scale. similar collections are available for several model organisms including mouse , yeast and plants . a key advantage of our approach compared with methods that perform targeted comparisons between predefined conditions is that it allows systematic organism-wide investigation when the responses and the associated tissues are unknown. the motivation is similar to samba and other biclustering approaches that detect groups of genes that show coordinated response in a subset of tissues , but the network ties the findings more tightly to cell-biological processes in our model. this can focus the analysis and improve interpretability. since the non-parametric mixture model adjusts model complexity with sample size, our algorithm is potentially applicable also in smaller and more targeted datasets. for example, it could potentially advance disease subtype discovery by revealing differential network activation in subsets of patients.  
