sequence analysis global sequence characterization of rice centromeric satellite based on oligomer frequency analysis in large-scale sequencing data motivation: satellite dna makes up significant portion of many eukaryotic genomes, yet it is relatively poorly characterized even in extensively sequenced species. this is, in part, due to methodological limitations of traditional methods of satellite repeat analysis, which are based on multiple alignments of monomer sequences. therefore, we employed an alternative, alignment-free, approach utilizing k-mer frequency statistics, which is in principle more suitable for analyzing large sets of satellite repeat data, including sequence reads from next generation sequencing technologies. results: k-mer frequency spectra were determined for two sets of rice centromeric satellite cento sequences, including 454 reads from chip-sequencing of cenh3-bound dna (7.6 mb) and the whole genome sanger sequencing reads (5.8 mb). k-mer frequencies were used to identify the most conserved sequence regions and to reconstruct consensus sequences of complete monomers. reconstructed consensus sequences as well as the assessment of overall divergence of k-mer spectra revealed high similarity of the two datasets, suggesting that cento sequences associated with functional centromeres (cenh3-bound) do not significantly differ from the total population of cento, which includes both centromeric and pericentromeric repeat arrays. on the other hand, considerable differences were revealed when these methods were used for comparison of cento populations between individual chromosomes of the rice genome assembly, demonstrating preferential sequence homogenization of the clusters within the same chromosome. k-mer frequencies were also successfully used to identify and characterize smrnas derived from cento repeats.highly abundant, tandemly arranged dna repeats, referred to as satellite dna, are among the major constituents of complex to whom correspondence should be addressed. eukaryotic genomes. they are composed of basic repeated units, or monomers, which are usually only tens to hundreds of nucleotides long . however, they can be amplified to millions of copies, making up to 20 of plant nuclear dna and even higher proportions in some insect or rodent genomes . up to megabase-sized arrays of head-to-tail arranged monomers constitute specific genomic regions appearing as heterochromatic bands or spots on mitotic chromosomes or interphase nuclei. satellite repeats are among the most dynamic components of eukaryotic genomes, undergoing rapid changes in their sequences and abundance, which often result in emergence of genus-specific or even species-specific repeats . in contrast to this rapid inter-specific diversification, monomers of a given satellite are usually highly homogenized within a species as a result of their concerted evolution . this uniformity, together with the genomic organization of satellite repeats into long contiguous arrays represent serious obstacles to their investigation using conventional cloning and sequencing approaches . consequently, large proportions of satellite sequences are left out from genome assemblies even in extensively studied model species. as the number of genomes investigated using large-scale sequencing increases, there is a mounting amount of unexplored satellite sequence data available in the repositories of unassembled reads. this increase has recently been accelerated by the development of next generation sequencing technologies, which have made whole genome shotgun sequencing possible in a wide range of species. all these sequencing projects generate a wealth of data, which, if properly analyzed, could be used to investigate the patterns of intra-and inter-specific evolution of satellite repeats. sequence analysis of satellite dna is traditionally based on a definition of basic repeated units (monomers or higher order repeats), which are subjected to pairwise or multiple sequence alignments to assess their similarities. while this approach is intuitive and in many respects convenient, it also includes several drawbacks: (i) it is prone to bias introduced by subjective decisions when defining individual repeat units within a longer sequence, especially in the case of less conserved repeats; (ii) processing large amounts of sequence data in this way is laborious; and (iii) multiple sequence alignments are feasible only with up to hundreds of monomers, as computational and visualization constraints arepage: 2102 21012108  
