glycananalysis plug-in: a database search tool for n-glycan structures using mass spectrometry tandem mass spectrometry (ms/ms or ms n) is a potent technique for characterizing n-glycan structures. glycananalysis searches a glycan database to support the identification of glycan structures from ms/ms spectra. it also calculates diagnostic ions of glycan structures registered in a glycan database (glycomedb or kegg glycan) and searches for ms/ms spectra of n-glycans that match diagnostic ions to determine the structures. this program functions as a plug-in for mass, a freeware mass spectrum visualization and analysis program. availability and implementation: the executable files of mass are available for free at http:// www.first-ms3d.jp/english/. the glycananalysis plug-in is included in the standard package of mass for windows. contactn-glycosylation is an important post-translational modification of proteins and has a wide variety of biological roles. n-glycans form branching-tree structures consisting of two main antennae, 6-antenna and 3-antenna. since these structures are assumed to be related to their biological functions, it is important to characterize the glycan structures. mass spectrometry (ms) is a powerful technique for analyzing n-glycans. the structures can be deduced using tandem ms (ms/ ms). typical n-glycan analysis using ms is performed in positiveion mode. in contrast, harveys method can be adopted in negativeion mode, which has proven useful for less ambiguous structural clarification (harvey, 2005a,b,c). harvey described the methodology to identify the glycan structure uniquely with the observed structure-specific diagnostic ions, which are included in only negative-ion ms/ms spectra. although various excellent computer programs (e.g.) have been developed for interpreting ms/ms spectra of n-glycans, they do not consider highly specific features of negative-ion mode analysis (e.g. diagnostic ions) (see supplementary material for details). recently, we developed more sensitive methods for analyzing n-glycan structures in negative-ion mode using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-ms with unique chemical labeling (, b). we thus developed glycananalysis software to provide support to routine processes in manual interpretation of mass spectrometric data for n-glycan structures, using diagnostic ions searching against the public glycan structural database. for this software, we developed an algorithm to calculate m/z values of fragment ions, including diagnostic ions, and to search for structures matching ms/ms spectra in glycan structural databases. glycananalysis is available as a free plug-in of mass, pluggable freeware for analyzing and visualizing ms data .  
