structural bioinformatics glycopattern: a web platform for glycan array mining glycopattern is web-based bioinformatics resource to support the analysis of glycan array data for the consortium for functional glycomics. this resource includes algorithms and tools to discover structural motifs, a heatmap visualization to compare multiple experiments, hierarchical clustering of glycan binding proteins with respect to their binding motifs and a structural search feature on the experimental data.glycans form complex structures since the 10 monosaccharides found in animal glycans are coupled in two possible anomeric forms ( or ) and multiple glycosidic linkages and include branched sequences unlike nucleic acids and proteins. the number of glycans in the human glycome is unknown but estimated to be 47000 . the interactions of glycans with glycan-binding proteins (gbp) are important in many biological functions, including cell adhesion, signaling and innate immunity, and most pathogens invade mammalian cells and tissues via initial proteinglycan interactions. printed microarrays of defined glycan structures are interrogated with gbp detected by fluorescence to determine bound glycans. knowing structures of glycans and the glycan determinants within glycans that are bound or not bound by a gbp provides valuable information about protein interaction and specificity. glycopattern is a publicly available web-based resource that allows investigators to analyze microarray data with the ability to discover motifs, cluster gbps based on binding affinity to defined determinants, search the array for glycans or substructure using a text-based search, and perform a heatmap comparison on glycan array expression data from different experiments. glycanmotifminer is a frequent subtree mining algorithm for motif discovery without using predefined motifs that we incorporated into glycopattern with other features to help with the analysis, visualization and searching of glycan array data.describe several glycomics databases and glycoinformatics tools, including glycosciences.de, unicarbkb, glycomedb and resource for informatics of glycomes at soka (rings). the consortium for functional glycomics (cfg) database mentioned in the review is the only resource we are aware of that contains glycan array data (among other types of data) but it is not considered a platform for mining glycan array data. rings is a web portal providing algorithmic and data mining tools to aid glycobiology research that includes tools for drawing structures, mining glycan subtrees, pathway prediction and glycan profiles, but is limited in the tools available for mining across multiple glycan array experiments. glycopattern was developed to provide broader mining of glycan microarray data and to discover the specificity of gbp.  
