structural bioinformatics glycoprofileassigner: automated structural assignment with error estimation for glycan lc data motivation: sequencing glycan structures is a difficult problem that requires the use of multiple experimental approaches. one powerful approach to glycan sequencing is the combination of liquid chromatography with sequential exoglycosidase digestions; however, interpreting this can be difficult and time-consuming. to aid this process, we introduce glycoprofileassigner, software for automated structural assignment of glycan profile data from liquid chromatography experiments. results: glycoprofileassigner has been tested on human igg data, and can retrieve the correct structure in 14 out of 16 peaks tested. availability and implementation: the programme and its source code is available at https:// bitbucket.org/fergaljd/glycoprofileassignerthe study of glycans and glycoproteins is central to understanding a wide range of biological problems. the majority of human proteins are glycosylated by oligosaccharides attached to asparagine (n-glycans) or serine/threonine (o-glycans). glycosylation is also the single most important post-translational modification observed on biotherapeutic proteins . glycans affect the stability, safety and efficacy of biotherapeutics and understanding which glycans are present on a glycoprotein is vital to understanding its function. glycan structures are challenging to analyze, because a large variety of possible monosaccharide linkages and complex isomeric branched structures may exist for any given monosaccharide composition. a large range of analytical tools have been developed to elucidate glycan structures, including liquid chromatography, mass spectrometry, and capillary electrophoresis . these approaches are often supplemented with exoglycosidase digestions to reduce glycan structures by sequentially removing defined monosacharrides to a well-defined sugar core . glycoprofileassigner is a software tool that assists in the interpretation of hilic-hplc and uplc data. hilic (; hydrophobic interaction chromatography) is a technique that separates structures on the basis of their hydrophilicity. for glycan data, this is roughly equivalent to glycan size. hplc and uplc are high and ultra performance liquid chromatography respectively. for glycan lc experiments, chromatographic retention times can be expressed in normalised glucose units (gu) for comparability across different experimental setups. combining lc-derived gu data with sequential enzyme digestions is a powerful method for analyzing the glycan structures and their relative abundances in a biological sample. the main difficulty with the current u/hplc approach is that assignment of glycan structures is difficult and time consuming as it can require manually ascertaining the correct digestion pathways for dozens of glycans between five or more digestion panels. glycoprofileassigner aims to aid this process by offering a fast and accurate method of enumerating and scoring glycan structure assignments .glycoprofileassigner is not the first time automated structural assignment software has been developed. autogu was the original work on this topic; however, this software was limited to experimentally observed glycan digestions. glycoprofileassigner represents a major advance on this software by being able to predict the activity of any common glycosidase on any n-or o-glycan structure, and by including an assignment score to estimate the likelihood of a correct assignment. glycoprofileassigner does have some limitations: it assumes a single glycan structure per chromatographic peak, and that all enzymatic digestion steps run to full completion. applying glycoprofileassigner to under-digested profile data, or profile data where glycan structures are not separated into unique peaks will result in poor quality assignments. glycoprofileassigner can also be a powerful tool in conjunction with mass spectrometry data. the glycoprofileassigner gui displays the theoretical mass of all the predicted assignments, allowing them to be easily compared with ms experimental data.  
