systems biology glycosylation network analysis toolbox: a matlab-based environment for systems glycobiology systems glycobiology studies the interaction of various pathways that regulate glycan biosynthesis and function. software tools for the construction and analysis of such pathways are not yet available. we present gnat, a platform-independent, user-extensible matlab-based toolbox that provides an integrated computational environment to construct, manipulate and simulate glycans and their networks. it enables integration of xml-based glycan structure data into sbml (systems biology markup language) files that describe glycosylation reaction networks. curation and manipulation of networks is facilitated using class definitions and glycomics database query tools. high quality visualization of networks and their steady-state and dynamic simulation are also supported. availability: the software package including source code, help documentation and demonstrations are available at http://sourceforge.net/ projects/gnatmatlab/files/.glycosylation is an important post-translational modification that alters a majority of mammalian-secreted and cell surface proteins. glycosylated proteins play structural and functional roles in diverse biological processes including inflammation, cancer and development. the recent development of advanced analytical tools has heralded the emergence of glycomics, a field where entire glycomes of cell systems are characterized. these data are starting to be stored in glycosylation-specific databases like the glycomedb and the consortium for functional glycomics (cfg) website . bioinformatics and statistical approaches developed to query glycomics databases offer an avenue to study glycosylation . systems-based mathematical modelling represents an alternate methodology, particularly if the emphasis is on the quantitative analyses of biochemical pathways that contribute to a given experimentally measured glycan distribution . software applications to construct and analyse glycosylation reaction networks do not exist. this manuscript describes a new matlab-based toolbox called glycosylation network analysis toolbox (gnat,pronounced naet). this package provides a streamlined approach for the construction, visualization and simulation of glycosylation reaction networks. it introduces a method to store glycan structure information in sbml format files . it provides basic data structure manipulation tools to tailor glycans and associated networks. it enables an environment where data obtained by querying of glycomics databases can be applied to refine reaction network model structure. it provides an interactive gui (graphical user interface) that allows linkage between individual glycans represented in glycosylation networks and corresponding data in glycomics repositories. finally, the toolbox facilitates steady-state and dynamic simulation of glycosylation reaction networks.  
