genome analysis gobe: an interactive, web-based tool for comparative genomic visualization gobe is a web-based tool for viewing comparative genomic data. it supports viewing multiple genomic regions simultaneously. its simple text format and flash-based rendering make it an interactive, exploratory research tool. gobe can be used without installation through our web service, or downloaded and customized with stylesheets and javascript callback functions. availability: gobe is a flash application that runs in all modern web-browsers. the full source-code, including that for the online web application is available under the mit license atas more genomic data and data formats are created, there is an increasing demand for a tool that accepts a simple text-based format and renders an interactive view of the data that can then be used to develop hypotheses and convey information. a web-based application has the advantage of being more accessible and easily deployable, allowing users to quickly visualize and share data. existing genome visualization tools such as gbrowse , genomegraphs and genoplotr generate useful static images but require installation, use in a specific programming language environment and do not provide interactivity. browsers such as anno-j (http://www.annoj.org) and the ucsc genome browser are interactive but more difficult to set up and do not easily support comparison of multiple genomic regions. other stand-alone viewers such as genomeview (http://genomeview.org/) and tablet excel in displaying next-generation sequence data but are less customizable. while tools such as vista do offer a comparative view, deletions, inversions and transpositions are not visible given that representation. we introduce gobe, a customizable, language-agnostic tool that can be run locally or used from an existing web-service. in either case, all data and styling are specified through a simple text format. optional javascript callbacks allow interactivity for web developers. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
