databases and ontologies go-module: functional synthesis and improved interpretation of gene ontology patterns go-module is a web-accessible synthesis and visualization tool developed for end-user biologists to greatly simplify the interpretation of prioritized gene ontology (go) terms. go-module radically reduces the complexity of raw go results into compact biomodules in two distinct ways, by (i) constructing biomodules from significant go terms based on hierarchical knowledge, and (ii) refining the go terms in each biomodule to contain only true positive results. altogether, the features (biomodules) of go-module outputs are better organized and on average four times smaller than the input go terms list (p = 0.0005, n = 16).gene ontology (go;) is a standardized representation of biological gene attributes organized in a directed acyclic graph structure, where nodes are go terms and edges are the hierarchical relationships between them. prioritized go terms are routinely computed in functional analyses of genomic studies such as gene expression profiles and high-throughput sequencing. enrichment and gene set analyses have been implemented to identify significant go terms from large prioritized gene lists, such as david , onto-express , global test , gostats , etc. however, when presented with the resulting extensive list of go terms, biologists cannot readily synthesize their relationships and rigorously prioritize hypotheses. two approaches have generally been used for refining overabundant go terms resulting from genomic studies. the first approach reduces the number of go terms studied thus decreasing the total prioritized ones. for instance, goslim contains a small list of 127 key terms (2010 august version) curated a priori by expert biologists, while gopad dynamically calculates the most informative subset of go terms from a prioritized gene list by disregarding other statistically significant go terms to whom correspondence should be addressed.. these approaches are designed to eliminate a massive number of go terms deemed as significant by statistics, thus severely limiting the expressiveness of the resulting list of go terms. a second group of approaches removes falsely prioritized go terms that are computational artifacts attributable to the inheritance of genes (signal) in the go hierarchy occurring in enrichment studies . for example, a bottom-up conditional hypergeometric test can conservatively remove inherited genes annotated to statistically significant descendants nodes before testing the parent go nodes . however, this test also eliminates true-positive go nodes such as those whose child nodes are all significant. we developed an approach that only prunes a parent node if its inherited signal is equal or worse to that of its most statistically significant child . this approach retains key parent go terms whose increased statistical significance is amplified by inheriting multiple childrens signals indicating an overarching systems property, a key go term, emerging from subsumed go terms. we hypothesized that grouping prioritized go terms in biomodules could further improve their interpretation by biologists, and would thus allow for the synthesis and reduction of the overall number of biological features while explicitly encapsulating subsumed go terms. this approach focuses on biomodules of go terms rather than of individual genes. while prioritized gene lists have been shown to aggregate in biomodules associated to go terms in co-expression and protein interaction studies , software designed to group gene lists into gene biomodules using go knowledge produce large numbers of go terms for interpretation without any coherent organization.  
