data and text mining goplot: an r package for visually combining expression data with functional analysis despite the plethora of methods available for the functional analysis of omics data, obtaining comprehensive-yet detailed understanding of the results remains challenging. this is mainly due to the lack of publicly available tools for the visualization of this type of information. here we present an r package called goplot, based on ggplot2, for enhanced graphical representation. our package takes the output of any general enrichment analysis and generates plots at different levels of detail: from a general overview to identify the most enriched categories (bar plot, bubble plot) to a more detailed view displaying different types of information for molecules in a given set of categories (circle plot, chord plot, cluster plot). the package provides a deeper insight into omics data and allows scientists to generate insightful plots with only a few lines of code to easily communicate the findings. availability and implementation: the r package goplot is available via cran-the comprehensive r archive network: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/goplot. the shiny web application of the venn diagram can be found at: https://wwalter.shinyapps.io/venn/. a detailed manual of the package with sample figures can be found at https://wencke.github.io/ contact: fscabo@cnic.es or mricote@cnic.esomics technologies have become standard tools in biological research for identifying and unraveling transcriptional networks, building predictive models and discovering candidate biomarkers. gene/protein/metabolomic expression data is especially challenging for investigators due to its high-dimensional nature. exploratory data analysis techniques are used to get a first impression of the important characteristics of the dataset and to reveal its underlying structure. statistical analyses are then performed to detect subsets of elements owing the ability to provide valuable insight into the underlying patterns of the investigated biological process. one common approach is to map the molecules to their associated biological annotations, e.g. gene ontology (go) terms, and to further perform an enrichment analysis. although many visualization methods, tools and packages have been developed, none of them enables the user to combine expression data with the results of functional analysis in a way that guarantees the preservation of the power of both analyses. r is commonly used by the omics community to analyze highdimensional expression data. we therefore developed the r package goplot based on the implementation of the grammar of graphics . goplot follows the path of deductive reasoning to allow the user to go from the most general to the most specific details of the functional analysis results. the package implements novel, original, high-quality plots which also allow the integration of other quantitative information about molecules, i.e. the expression levels. goplot improves understanding of omics data and aids the communication of biologically relevant findings in publications.  
