structural bioinformatics gossip: a method for fast and accurate global alignment of protein structures motivation: the database of known protein structures (pdb) is increasing rapidly. this results in a growing need for methods that can cope with the vast amount of structural data. to analyze the accumulating data, it is important to have a fast tool for identifying similar structures and clustering them by structural resemblance. several excellent tools have been developed for the comparison of protein structures. these usually address the task of local structure alignment, an important yet computationally intensive problem due to its complexity. it is difficult to use such tools for comparing a large number of structures to each other at a reasonable time. results: here we present gossip, a novel method for a global all-against-all alignment of any set of protein structures. the method detects similarities between structures down to a certain cutoff (a parameter of the program), hence allowing it to detect similar structures at a much higher speed than local structure alignment methods. gossip compares many structures in times which are several orders of magnitude faster than well-known available structure alignment servers, and it is also faster than a database scanning method. we evaluate gossip both on a dataset of short structural fragments and on two large sequence-diverse structural benchmarks. our conclusions are that for a threshold of 0.6 and above, the speed of gossip is obtained with no compromise of the accuracy of the alignments or of the number of detected global similarities. availability: a server, as well as an executable for download, are available atthe space of solved protein structures is increasing rapidly. new protein structures are being solved on a daily basis, allowing for a more complete understanding of the protein universe. the number of possible protein conformations is thought to be limited , which suggests the existence of a large structural redundancy in the protein structures to whom correspondence should be addressed. submitted to the pdb. the two gold standards for the structural classification of the pdb-scop and cath provide an answer for this redundancy, yet they cannot keep up with the rate of addition of new structures to the pdb. one of the reasons is the relatively high computational time required by protein structure comparisons. many excellent protein structure comparison methods have been devised over the years, for example holm and;;; zhang and skolnick (2005b). often they employ heuristics that allow them to be relatively efficient yet still accurate. in order to diminish computational costs, most methods use a c representation of the protein . some methods use an even more compact representation of secondary structural elements (sses) to reduce running times. the purpose of most of these methods is to find evolutionary relationships between different proteins. in many cases, this does not require the entire protein structures to be similar and hence, typical structure alignment methods aim at detecting equivalent substructures in different proteins. while this in itself is extremely important, it slows down the speed of the computation tremendously because the number of potentially similar substructures is exponential in the length of the protein. the method we describe here, named gossip (global structure superposition of proteins), is aimed at performing an allagainst-all global alignment of any given set of protein structures. it does not search for partial structural matches between regions of two aligned proteins, and hence does not aim to provide an alternative for existing local structural alignment methods. rather, we propose a method that provides fast, accurate, large-scale comparisons of protein structures. a significant advantage of our method is that it can be applied to any set of protein structures, represented by c coordinates, regardless of protein size. no preprocessing stage is necessary as in many other methods that are intended for fast one-against-all comparisons. moreover, no knowledge of secondary structure or other features of the protein is required. this allows the method to be applicable for structural fragments, where the secondary structure content is limited or non-existent (e.g. loops and coils). the motivation for our work comes from a problem we encountered during our research that required the creation of sequence profiles based on structural information. we needed to cluster several hundred thousand structural fragments with varying lengths. these fragments were roughly divided into groups according to secondary structure, which still left severalpage: 926 925932  
