alignment-free detection of local similarity among viral and bacterial genomes motivation: bacterial and viral genomes are often affected by horizontal gene transfer observable as abrupt switching in local homology. in addition to the resulting mosaic genome structure, they frequently contain regions not found in close relatives, which may play a role in virulence mechanisms. due to this connection to medical microbiology, there are numerous methods available to detect horizontal gene transfer. however, these are usually aimed at individual genes and viral genomes rather than the much larger bacterial genomes. here, we propose an efficient alignment-free approach to describe the mosaic structure of viral and bacterial genomes, including their unique regions. results: our method is based on the lengths of exact matches between pairs of sequences. long matches indicate close homology, short matches more distant homology or none at all. these exact match lengths can be looked up efficiently using an enhanced suffix array. our program implementing this approach, alfy (alignment-free local homology), efficiently and accurately detects the recombination break points in simulated dna sequences and among recombinant hiv-1 strains. we also apply alfy to escherichia coli genomes where we detect new evidence for the hypothesis that strains pathogenic in poultry can infect humans.in contrast to most eukaryotes, viruses and bacteria reproduce asexually. nevertheless, their genomes are littered with evidence of occasional and localized recombination, usually referred to as horizontal gene transfer. horizontal gene transfer is observable as an abrupt change in homology along an alignment of two or more sequences. the importance of horizontal gene transfer for the evolution of immune evasion and antibiotic resistance of pathogenic to whom correspondence should be addressed. microbes has been known for decades . correspondingly, there has been and still is a lot of interest in devising computer programs to automate the detection of mosaic gene or genome structure . most of the current methods for annotating mosaic genome structure are based on alignments and target viral genomes or individual bacterial genes . these methods are highly accurate but tend to be too slow for the analysis of whole bacterial genomes. recently,expanded their original monte carlo markov chain method for inferring recombination rates by also localizing the recombination events in alignments of whole bacterial genomes. however, even given such an alignment, the computational burden of their, again, highly accurate coalescent-based method is considerable. if speed is of concern, dramatic improvements are possible by simplifying or eliminating altogether any explicit model under which inference is made, and in addition by not basing the analysis on a full multiple sequence alignment.provide a web-based genotyping tool for viral genomes hosted by the ncbi. their algorithm essentially consists of sliding a window across the query sequence and blasting the windows against the set of subject sequences to determine the closest homologs across the query. an even more radical departure from model-and alignmentbased treatment of mosaic genome structure is the alignment-free method for hiv typing proposed by. alignmentfree methods of sequence comparison tend to be very fast, albeit less accurate than alignment-based sequence comparison . best known among the alignmentfree approaches are those based on k-word composition, which is also whathave used. here all substrings of length k are counted in the two sequences compared and a distance between the vectors of word counts is defined. unfortunately, it is difficult to convert distances between word count vectors to true evolutionary distances. we have recently developed two methods that start from the lengths of exact matches between pairs of sequences and convert these to substitutions per site . the advantage of this approach is that exact match lengths can be looked up efficiently using suffix trees implemented as their more recent abstractions known as enhanced suffix arrays and compressed suffix arrays . in this article, we use exact match lengths between a query and a potentially large set of subject sequences to solve a specialized,page: 1467 14661472in the following sections, we first apply alfy to simulated and then to empirical data to explore the efficiency and accuracy of the program.the conversion of data to knowledge is perhaps the greatest challenge in the field of genomics . this conversion depends on the availability of computational tools that match the  
