abcd: arbitrary coverage design for sequencing-based genetic studies recent advances in sequencing technologies have revolutionized genetic studies. although high-coverage sequencing can uncover most variants present in the sequenced sample, low-coverage sequencing is appealing for its cost effectiveness. here, we present abcd (arbitrary coverage design) to aid the design of sequencing-based studies. abcd is a user-friendly interface providing pre-estimated effective sample sizes, specific to each minor allele frequency category, for designs with arbitrary coverage (0.530) and sample size (2010 000), and for four major ethnic groups (europeans, africans, asians and african americans). in addition, we also present two software tools: shotgun and designplanner, which were used to generate the estimates behind abcd. shotgun is a flexible short-read simulator for arbitrary user-specified read length and average depth, allowing cycle-specific sequencing error rates and realistic read depth distributions. designplanner is a full pipeline that uses shotgun to generate sequence data and performs initial snp discovery, uses our previously presented linkage disequilibrium-aware method to call genotypes, and, finally, provides minor allele frequency-specific effective sample sizes. shotgun plus designplanner can accommodate effective sample size estimate for any combination of high-depth and low-depth data (for example, whole-genome low-depth plus exonic high-depth) or combination of sequence and genotype data [for example, whole-exome sequencing plus genotyping from existing genomewide association study (gwas)]. availability and implementation: abcd, including its downloadable terminal interface and web-based interface, and the associated tools shotgun and designplanner, including documentation, examples and executables, are available atmassively parallel sequencing (mps) technologies have transformed the field of genomic studies . high-coverage sequencing, which is able to detect essentially every variant present in the sequenced individuals , has been successful for the identification of genetic variants causing mendelian diseases , but it remains cost prohibitive for large samples required for the study of complex traits. recent studies have proposed low-coverage sequencing as a powerful alternative. however, there are no resources or software tools that directly evaluate the statistical power of an arbitrary coverage sequencing-based design to quantitatively guide the design decisions. here, we present abcd (arbitrary coverage design), a user-friendly interface with pre-estimated minor allele frequency (maf) and ethnicity-specific effective sample sizeswhich is directly associated with power of subsequent association studies for a wide range of sequencing-based designs with average sequencing depth ranging from 0.5 to 30 and sample size ranging from 20 to 10 000. in addition, we present shotgun and designplanner, two software tools that generate the effective sample size estimates behind abcd. we anticipate abcd and the two associated tools will greatly facilitate the design of sequencing-based studies.  
