databases and ontologies gpcr-okb: the g protein coupled receptor oligomer knowledge base rapid expansion of available data about g protein coupled receptor (gpcr) dimers/oligomers over the past few years requires an effective system to organize this information electronically. based on an ontology derived from a community dialog involving colleagues using experimental and computational methodologies, we developed the gpcr-oligomerization knowledge base (gpcr-okb). gpcr-okb is a system that supports browsing and searching for gpcr oligomer data. such data were manually derived from the literature. while focused on gpcr oligomers, gpcr-okb is seamlessly connected to gpcrdb, facilitating the correlation of information about gpcr protomers and oligomers. availability and implementation: the gpcr-okb web application is freely available atg protein-coupled receptors (gpcrs) are transmembrane (tm) helical proteins that are implicated in many biological responses, and thus serve as targets for a variety of therapeutic compounds . although still a matter of controversy for some gpcr subtypes, the very close proximity of two or more receptors has been demonstrated unambiguously in heterologous cell systems for several gpcrs using biochemical and biophysical techniques . the challenge now is to determine whether all gpcr complexes have functional significance in native tissues, as already demonstrated for a few pairs . information supporting the existence of functionally relevant gpcr dimers/oligomers is described in multiple articles published in the literature. this creates a challenge to researchers trying to gather experimental evidence and/or computational predictions about any given oligomer. our previous work focused on the design of an ontology to organize information about gpcr oligomerization, and its functional consequences in vitro and in vivo. the ontology was well received , demonstrating significant interest in an electronic system to access gpcr oligomer information. in this article, we describe the gpcr-okb system, which implements the gpcr-okb ontology and an electronic front-end to organize information about gpcr  
