systems biology gpu-meta-storms: computing the structure similarities among massive amount of microbial community samples using gpu motivation: the number of microbial community samples is increasing with exponential speed. data-mining among microbial community samples could facilitate the discovery of valuable biological information that is still hidden in the massive data. however, current methods for the comparison among microbial communities are limited by their ability to process large amount of samples each with complex community structure. summary: we have developed an optimized gpu-based software, gpu-meta-storms, to efficiently measure the quantitative phylogen-etic similarity among massive amount of microbial community samples. our results have shown that gpu-meta-storms would be able to compute the pair-wise similarity scores for 10 240 samples within 20 min, which gained a speed-up of 417 000 times compared with single-core cpu, and 42600 times compared with 16-core cpu. therefore, the high-performance of gpu-meta-storms could facilitate in-depth data mining among massive microbial community samples, and make the real-time analysis and monitoring of temporal or conditional changes for microbial communities possible. availability and implementation: gpu-meta-storms is implemented by cuda (compute unified device architecture) and c. source code is available at http://www.computationalbioenergy.org/meta-storms.html.because most microbes are not isolatable and cultivatable , metagenomic methods have been used to analyze a microbial community as a whole. next-generation sequencing techniques have enabled the fast profiling of structures for a large number of microbial communities. thus, a rapidly increasing amount of metagenomic profiles for microbial communities have been archived in public repositories and research laboratories around the world, such as mg-rast and camera2 , while ncbi (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) also contains thousands of metagenomic related projects with 4100 000 samples. with such a large volume of metagenomic profiling data, it has become possible and important to compare the complex structures of microbial communities in large scale for in-depth data mining to discover precious biological patterns hidden in those massive data. a number of methods have been proposed for comparison of different metagenomic samples. megan can compare multiple samples based on taxonomy levels without considering phylogenetic relationships among taxa. stamp , metarep and metarank process metagenomic data using standard statistical tests (mainly t-tests and principal component analysis with some modifications). some 16s rrna amplicon analysis toolkits, such as mothur and qiime , include unifrac and fast unifrac algorithms, which use distances among species to make phylogenetic beta diversity measurement more effective at showing ecological patterns. nevertheless, the restriction in the amount of samples for comparison, as well as running speed, limits the extension of these tools on analysis of huge number of microbial community samples. moreover, current needs for real-time monitoring of temporal or conditional changes for microbial communities in environment and energy research areas have made these methods inadequate. recently, we have proposed a more efficient method, metastorms , for quantitative comparison between microbial community samples based on a binary phylogenetic tree with a time complexity of nlog(n) (n is the number of species in one sample). however, as the amount of samples increases, the overall time complexity of m 2 nlog(n) (m is the number of samples) for the pair-wise comparison always leads to an unacceptable running time. therefore, such computingintensive tasks require novel ultra-high processing throughput.to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
