genome analysis alignment-free estimation of nucleotide diversity motivation: sequencing capacity is currently growing more rapidly than cpu speed, leading to an analysis bottleneck in many genome projects. alignment-free sequence analysis methods tend to be more efficient than their alignment-based counterparts. they may, therefore, be important in the long run for keeping sequence analysis abreast with sequencing. results: we derive and implement an alignment-free estimator of the number of pairwise mismatches, m. our implementation of m , pim, is based on an enhanced suffix array and inherits the superior time and memory efficiency of this data structure. simulations demonstrate that m is accurate if mutations are distributed randomly along the chromosome. while real data often deviates from this ideal, m remains useful for identifying regions of low genetic diversity using a sliding window approach. we demonstrate this by applying it to the complete genomes of 37 strains of drosophila melanogaster, and to the genomes of two closely related drosophila species, d.simulans and d.sechellia. in both cases, we detect the diversity minimum and discuss its biological implications. availability: pim is written in standard c and its sources can be downloaded fromthe study of sequence diversity within natural populations provides a powerful link between raw sequence data and functional knowledge. such population genetic studies have traditionally been centered on a few transcribed loci. however, the exponential decay of sequencing costs over the past two decades has recently made it possible to carry out population genetics on a genome scale. in a comprehensive early example of such studies,surveyed the resequenced genomes of six drosophila simulans lines with the closely related d.yakuba serving as outgroup. they described the large-scale patterns of within population diversity and between species divergence along the three major d.simulans chromosomes. while diversity declined toward the telomeres and centromeres, where recombination rates are low, divergence, and thus mutation rates, remained constant across the chromosomes, which is a classical hallmark of selection at linked sites . to whom correspondence should be addressed.similar genome-wide studies of population genetic processes are poised to become the norm. there are currently several projects under way aimed at sampling 1000 genomes of single model species. this shift to genome-scale sequence comparison has sparked interest in new population-centered sequence analysis methods. these fall into two categories: alignment-based and alignment-free. as to alignment-based methods, a number of recent studies have focused on the problem of estimating population mutation and recombination rates from aligned shotgun reads . the main challenge in this work is to account for variable coverage and the errors introduced by the diverse chemistries of next-generation sequencing approaches. in contrast, alignment-free methods of sequence comparison usually start from finished genomes or contigs. given two homologous sequences, the most popular approaches are based on one of two kinds of measurements: the correlation between the frequencies of short words such as 5mers found in each sequence , and the lengths of matches between sequences . in bioinformatics, such methods have a long tradition due to their superior computational efficiency when compared with sequence alignment . however, until recently a disadvantage of alignment-free sequence comparison was that word frequencies or match lengths could not be transformed into mutation rates. in order to combine the computational efficiency of alignmentfree sequence comparison with the biological relevance of alignment-based divergence estimation,have derived and implemented a moment-based estimator of the substitution rate from match lengths. this estimator can be used to rapidly compute meaningful phylogenies from closely related genomes ranging in size from 10 4 to 10 8 bases (domazet). here, we extend this work by deriving a maximum likelihood estimator of pairwise nucleotide diversity that can be computed without alignment. we explore the accuracy of this estimator using simulations. in addition, we survey the genetic diversity along the chromosomes of 37 strains of d.melanogaster and the genome-wide divergence between d.simulans and d.sechellia.in the following sections, we apply m to simulated data with and without recombination and to two empirical datasets: 37 genomes of d.melanogaster and the genomes of the two closely related drosophila species d.simulans and d.sechellia.much has recently been written about the impressive speed of next-generation sequencing equipment , which is driving the current generalization of population genetics to population genomics . however, technology change in sequence analysis algorithms has been equally remarkable. a substantial portion of these advances is based on the progressive abstraction of suffix trees to enhanced suffix arrays and, more recently, to highly memory efficient fm indexes .  
