sequence analysis graph accordance of next-generation sequence assemblies motivation: no individual assembly algorithm addresses all the known limitations of assembling short-length sequences. overall reduced sequence contig length is the major problem that challenges the usage of these assemblies. we describe an algorithm to take advantages of different assembly algorithms or sequencing platforms to improve the quality of next-generation sequence (ngs) assemblies. results: the algorithm is implemented as a graph accordance assembly (gaa) program. the algorithm constructs an accordance graph to capture the mapping information between the target and query assemblies. based on the accordance graph, the contigs or scaffolds of the target assembly can be extended, merged or bridged together. extra constraints, including gap sizes, mate pairs, scaffold order and orientation, are explored to enforce those accordance operations in the correct context. we applied gaa to various chicken ngs assemblies and the results demonstrate improved contiguity statistics and higher genome and gene coverage. availability: gaa is implemented in oo perl and is available here: http://sourceforge.net/projects/gaa-wugi/.the need for cost efficient whole genome assemblies has driven the adoption of many assembly programs exclusive to short sequence lengths, such as cabog , newbler (roche 454 life sciences), abyss , allpathslg and soapdenovo . compared to sanger read-based assemblies, ngs assemblies are less representative of genome content, especially in regions with repetitive structure, for example segmental duplications . furthermore, fragmentation of assemblies can limit further annotation processes, such as gene prediction in silico. several factors present challenges for ngs assembly. however, the predominant barriers to sequence assembly are repeats and polymorphism in genomes. typically, one assembly algorithm can outperform others in assembling certain genomic regions. even the same assembler performs differently over varying parameter settings such as different k-mer sizes. a longer k-mer is better for resolving high coverage repetitive regions, whereas a shorter k-mer is better for finding paths in low-coverage polymorphic regions. the latter is analogous to what is a known hurdle for transcriptome assemblies, which is significantly unbalanced representation of each transcript due to expression level variation in different tissue types. moreover, sequencing platforms have various biases , thus assemblies generated from different platforms can complement each other . therefore, a combination of assemblies from different sequencing platforms or algorithms (or parameter settings for the same algorithm) is very promising to improve assembly qualities. existing hybrid assembly and merging methods are mostly developed for small genomes, such as mira (http://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/mira-assembler/index.php? title=main_page), minimus2 (http://sourceforge.net/apps/media wiki/amos/index.php?title=minimus2) and maia . reconciliator and gam can only merge assemblies generated from the same dataset. we have developed an efficient algorithm to generate an accordance assembly from two or more large genome assemblies. it uses the blat aligner to align a query assembly to a target assembly. based on the alignment, we construct an accordance graph, which is searched for maximal sub-paths. contigs along each sub-path are candidates to be merged together. besides weighing the edges in the graph using alignment scores, contig lengths and overhang sizes, scaffold information including order, orientation and gap sizes, are fully explored to validate each merging event. the query and target assemblies go through a misassembly detection stage, where potential breakpoints were evaluated by the ce statistic . this algorithm is implemented as a program named gaa. it takes as inputs two draft assemblies, one as the target and the other as the query. the query is utilized to improve the target assembly.we applied gaa to the chicken genome (gallus gallus) with an estimated genome size of 1.2 gb. two 454 de novo assemblies were generated with newbler and cabog and one illumina assembly was generated with soapdenovo . the raw coverages of 454 data and illumina data are 14-and 74-fold, respectively .in the era of ngs assemblies with fragmented representation all methods need to be explored that will improve sequence contig and scaffold length. a post-assembly that will blend the strengths of different assembly algorithms or sequencing platforms is one option we have pursued here. gaa can significantly improve contiguity of ngs assemblies and resolve most assembly mistakes in the less stringent assembly. the proposed algorithm can also recover missing genes. our previous results showed that both 454 and illumina de novo assemblies can reveal some novel sequences that are missing in the sanger reference assembly . the significant improvement in the merged ns assembly further shows the advantages of cross-platform merging. the target assembly is the master and lays out the backbone of the final assembly. then the query assembly is explored to piece together fragmented regions in the target assembly. some errors from the query assembly could be introduced into the final assembly. if the query assembly is more accurate at the base level, we can update gaa in the future version to generate a more accurate merged assembly by swapping target assembly bases with query assembly bases. the underlying algorithm of gaa uses evidences from gap sizes, mate pairs to enforce the correct context and prevent query errors. there are more mate pairs that are satisfied in the merged assemblies, which shows the strength of gaa to generate better connectivity by merging assemblies in the context besides overlaps. since the gaa algorithm can detect and avoid most misassembled regions due to the lower stringency of query assemblies, we suggest choosing the more stringent assembly as the target and using the relaxed assembly to improve it. in summary, we have implemented a graph accordance assembly program, which can significantly improve the contiguity and gene coverage of ngs assemblies. it provides an efficient method for reducing biases of different sequencing platforms. gaa can also be easily adapted to combine transcriptome or metagenomic assemblies generated with different k-mer sizes as suggested by surget-groba and montoya-burgos (2010). funding: national human genome research institute (grant hg004968 to g.m.w.).  
