systems biology graphical algorithm for integration of genetic and biological data: proof of principle using psoriasis as a model motivation: pathway analysis to reveal biological mechanisms for results from genetic association studies have great potential to better understand complex traits with major human disease impact. however, current approaches have not been optimized to maximize statistical power to identify enriched functions/pathways, especially when the genetic data derives from studies using platforms (e.g. immunochip and metabochip) customized to have pre-selected markers from previously identified top-rank loci. we present here a novel approach, called minimum distance-based enrichment analysis for genetic association (meaga), with the potential to address both of these important concerns. results: meaga performs enrichment analysis using graphical algorithms to identify sub-graphs among genes and measure their closeness in interaction database. it also incorporates a statistic summarizing the numbers and total distances of the sub-graphs, depicting the overlap between observed genetic signals and defined function/pathway gene-sets. meaga uses sampling technique to approximate empirical and multiple testing-corrected p-values. we show in simulation studies that meaga is more powerful compared to count-based strategies in identifying disease-associated functions/pathways, and the increase in power is influenced by the shortest distances among associated genes in the interactome. we applied meaga to the results of a meta-analysis of psoriasis using immunochip datasets, and showed that associated genes are significantly enriched in immune-related functions and closer with each other in the proteinprotein interaction network. availability and implementation:in the past decade, association studies have been used to investigate genetic architecture of complex traits and diseases . studies ranging from genotyping-based genome-wide association studies (gwas;) to largescale meta-analyses of gwas , to the more recent next-generation sequencing-based association analysis , have facilitated the identification of genetic susceptibility loci for different traits and diseases. however, identification of the underlying biological mechanisms from these powerful datasets has not always been straightforward. to better understand these underlying biological mechanisms, it has been asked whether the identified loci contain genes enriched in v c the author 2014. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com certain gene-sets such as genes annotated with biological functions [e.g. gene ontology: go (or pathways [e.g. kegg (. it would also be possible to investigate if their encoding proteins could physically interact to form functional units such as heterodimeric cytokines (e.g. il23a and il12b as sub-units of cytokine il23) or transcription factor complexes (e.g. p53). while advances in genotyping technology have greatly increased the power of available datasets, the development of optimal strategies to bridge between genetic and functional results remains a major theoretical and experimental goal of genetics research. depending on the genotyping platform being used, loci densities and genomic distribution of the markers in the association analysis might vary. one of the challenges in enrichment testing is to select the proper set of background markers/genes as null observations to approximate its overlap against the gene-set in question. previous studies have proposed different strategies to approximate the null observations: aligator randomly samples markers from the original platform to mimic its empirical marker distribution; inrich exhibits a sampling strategy using genomic interval as unit, and the sampled intervals are constrained to have similar marker and gene densities as those from the input intervals (i.e. susceptibility loci). each of the sampled null observations from the above approaches would be used to construct empirical distributions for the numbers of overlap with functional gene-sets, and used to estimate the statistical significance of the observed data. both of the above count-based approaches enumerate the number of associated genes overlapping with each gene-set and work well in identifying biological functions or pathways if the platform was designed in genome-wide scale (i.e. most common genetic markers are well-tagged by the genotyped markers). recently, cost-effective genotyping platforms, such as the immunochip and metabochip , containing common and lowfrequency variants have been designed to facilitate the identification of novel association signals and with the goal to fine-map established loci . these platforms contain dense markers in the top-ranked loci from previous studies (e.g. studies in autoimmune diseases for immunochip; studies in metabolic and atherosclerotic/cardiovascular traits/diseases for metabochip). performing functional enrichment analysis on the signals identified using these customized platforms poses analytical challenges, as the pre-selected markers are enriched in potential or known susceptibility loci. the potential to identify the correct underlying biological mechanisms/pathways can be revealed only if sufficient gene-sets-overlapping genes from the significant loci are identified to provide enough statistical power. moreover, as different studies have identified interactions between genes in disease susceptibility loci , a gene-set enrichment approach that incorporates independent information from biological interaction data could thus increase the power to identify functions or pathways crucial to the disease. we present here a novel approach, called minimum distancebased enrichment analysis for genetic association(meaga), to perform functional/pathway enrichment test for results from association studies. instead of only enumerating the overlap between genes in the associated regions and genes annotated in a gene-set (i.e. count-based;), we use graphical algorithm and incorporates a statistic to measure the closeness between the overlapping genes in steiner tree(s) identified in a user-defined interaction database. here we demonstrate in simulation studies that meaga is more powerful than a countbased approach when protein-coding genes in associated regions tend to be closer with each other in an interaction network. we also applied meaga to the results of a meta-analysis of psoriasis, a common inflammatory and hyperproliferative skin disease, using immunochip datasets . although the original study did not identify any enriched biological functions among the identified loci, meaga is able to reveal associated genes are closer with each other in the proteinprotein interaction (ppi) network and are also significantly enriched in immune-related functions.  
