graph-regularized dual lasso for robust eqtl mapping motivation: as a promising tool for dissecting the genetic basis of complex traits, expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) mapping has attracted increasing research interest. an important issue in eqtl mapping is how to effectively integrate networks representing interactions among genetic markers and genes. recently, several lasso-based methods have been proposed to leverage such network information. despite their success, existing methods have three common limitations: (i) a preprocessing step is usually needed to cluster the networks; (ii) the incompleteness of the networks and the noise in them are not considered; (iii) other available information, such as location of genetic markers and pathway information are not integrated. results: to address the limitations of the existing methods, we propose graph-regularized dual lasso (gdl), a robust approach for eqtl mapping. gdl integrates the correlation structures among genetic markers and traits simultaneously. it also takes into account the incompleteness of the networks and is robust to the noise. gdl utilizes graph-based regularizers to model the prior networks and does not require an explicit clustering step. moreover, it enables further refinement of the partial and noisy networks. we further generalize gdl to incorporate the location of genetic makers and gene-pathway information. we perform extensive experimental evaluations using both simulated and real datasets. experimental results demonstrate that the proposed methods can effectively integrate various available priori knowledge and significantly outperform the state-of-the-art eqtl mapping methods. availability: software for both c++ version and matlab version is available atexpression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) mapping aims at identifying single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) that influence the expression level of genes. it has been widely applied to dissect genetic basis of complex traits . several important issues need to be considered in eqtl mapping. first, the number of snps is usually much larger than the number of samples . second, the existence of confounding factors, such as expression heterogeneity, may result in spurious associations . third, snps (and genes) usually work together to cause variation in complex traits . the interplay among snps and the interplay among genes can be represented as networks and used as prior knowledge . however, such prior knowledge is far from being complete and may contain a lot of noises. developing effective models to address these issues in eqtl studies has recently attracted increasing research interests . in eqtl studies, two types of networks can be utilized. one is the genetic interaction network (charles). modeling genetic interaction (e.g. epistatic effect between snps) is essential to understanding the genetic basis of common diseases, since many diseases are complex traits . another type of network is the network among traits, such as the proteinprotein interaction (ppi) network or the gene co-expression network. interacting proteins or genes in a ppi network are likely to be functionally related, i.e. part of a protein complex or in the same biological pathway (von). effectively utilizing such prior network information can significantly improve the performance of eqtl mapping .shows an example of eqtl mapping with prior network knowledge. the interactions among snps and genes are represented by matrices s and g, respectively. the goal of eqtl mapping is to infer associations between snps and genes represented by the coefficient matrix w. suppose that snp ffl is strongly associated with gene c. using the network prior, the moderate association between snp ffi and gene a may be identified since ffi and ffl; a and c have interactions. to leverage the network prior knowledge, several methods based on lasso have been proposed . in, the group-lasso penalty is applied to model the genetic interaction network. in and , the authors consider groupings of genes and apply a multi-task lasso penalty. in , the authors further extend the model to consider grouping information of both snps and genes. these methods apply a hard clustering of snps (genes) so that a snp (gene) cannot belong to multiple groups. however, a snp may affect multiple genes and a gene may function in multiple pathways. to address this limitation, in , the authors develop a model allowing overlap between different groups. despite their success, there are three common limitations of these group penalty based approaches. first, a clustering step is usually needed to obtain the grouping information. to address this limitation, introduce a network-based fusion penalty on the genes. however, this method does not consider the genetic-interaction network. a two-graph-guided multi-task lasso approach is developed in to make use of gene co-expression network and snp-correlation network. however, this method does not to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2014. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com consider the network prior knowledge. the second limitation of the existing methods is that they do not take into consideration the incompleteness of the networks and the noise in them (von). for example, ppi networks may contain false interactions and miss true interactions (von). directly using the grouping penalty inferred from the noisy and partial prior networks may introduce new bias and thus impair the performance. third, in addition to the network information, other prior knowledge, such as location of genetic markers and gene-pathway information are also available. the existing methods cannot incorporate such information. to address the limitations of the existing methods, we propose a novel approach, graph-regularized dual lasso (gdl), which simultaneously learns the association between snps and genes and refines the prior networks. to support soft clustering (allowing genes and snps to be members of multiple clusters), we adopt the graph regularizer to encode structured penalties from the prior networks. the penalties encourage the connected nodes (snps/genes) to have similar coefficients. this enables us to find multiple-correlated genetic markers with pleiotropic effects that affect multiple-correlated genes jointly. to tackle the problem of noisy and incomplete prior networks, we exploit the duality between learning the associations and refining the prior networks to achieve smoother regularization. that is, learning regression coefficients can help to refine the prior networks, and vice versa. for example, in, if snps and have strong associations with the same group of genes, they are likely to have interaction, which is not captured in the prior network. an ideal model should allow to update the prior network according to the learned regression coefficients. gdl can also incorporate other available prior knowledge such as the physical location of snps and biology pathways to which the genes belong. the resultant optimization problem is convex and can be efficiently solved by using an alternating minimization procedure. we perform extensive empirical evaluation of the proposed method using both simulated and real eqtl datasets. the results demonstrate that gdl is robust to the incomplete and noisy prior knowledge and can significantly improve the accuracy of eqtl mapping compared to the state-of-the-art methods.as a promising tool for dissecting the genetic basis of common diseases, eqtl study has attracted increasing research interest.the traditional eqtl methods focus on testing the associations between individual snps and gene expression traits. a major drawback of this approach is that it cannot model the joint effect of a set of snps on a set of genes, which may correspond to biological pathways. recent advancement in high-throughput biology has made a variety of biological interaction networks available. effectively integrating such prior knowledge is essential for accurate and robust eqtl mapping. however, the prior networks are often noisy and incomplete. in this article, we propose novel graphregularized-regression models to take into account the prior networks of snps and genes simultaneously. exploiting the duality between the learned coefficients and incomplete prior networks enables more robust model. we also generalize our model to integrate other types of information, such as snp locations and gene pathways. the experimental results on both simulatedthe most significant go category enriched with the associated gene set. the enrichment test was performed using david . the gene function is defined by go category. the involved go categories are: (i) telomere maintenance via recombination; (ii) branched chain family amino acid biosynthetic process; (iii). regulation of mating-type specific transcription, dna-dependent; (iv) sterol biosynthetic process; (v) pheromone-dependent signal transduction involved in conjugation with cellular fusion; (vi) cytogamy; (vii) response to pheromone. d number of genes that have enriched go categories. e,g,i,k number of associated genes that can also be identified using gdl, g-lasso, siol and lors, respectively. f,h,j,l number of genes that have enriched go categories and can also be identified by gdl, g-lasso, siol and lors, respectively. among these hotspots, hotspot (12) in bold cannot be detected by glasso.  
