grasp: analysis of genotype–phenotype results from 1390 genome-wide association studies and corresponding open access database we created a deeply extracted and annotated database of genome-wide association studies (gwas) results. grasp v1.0 contains 46.2 million snp-phenotype association from among 1390 gwas studies. we re-annotated gwas results with 16 annotation sources including some rarely compared to gwas results (e.g. rnaediting sites, lincrnas, ptms). motivation: to create a high-quality resource to facilitate further use and interpretation of human gwas results in order to address important scientific questions. results: gwas have grown exponentially, with increases in sample sizes and markers tested, and continuing bias toward european ancestry samples. grasp contains 4100 000 phenotypes, roughly: eqtls (71.5), metabolite qtls (21.2), methylation qtls (4.4) and diseases, biomarkers and other traits (2.8). cis-eqtls, meqtls, mqtls and mhc region snps are highly enriched among significant results. after removing these categories, grasp still contains a greater proportion of studies and results than comparable gwas catalogs. cardiovascular disease and related risk factors predominate remaining gwas results, followed by immunological, neuro-logical and cancer traits. significant results in gwas display a highly gene-centric tendency. sex chromosome x (or = 0.18[0.16-0.20]) and y (or = 0.003[0.001-0.01]) genes are depleted for gwas results. gene length is correlated with gwas results at nominal significance (p 0.05) levels. we show this gene-length correlation decays at increasingly more stringent p-value thresholds. potential pleotropic genes and snps enriched for multi-phenotype association in gwas are identified. however, we note possible population stratification at some of these loci. finally, via re-annotation we identify compelling functional hypotheses at gwas loci, in some cases unrealized in studies to date. conclusion: pooling summary-level gwas results and re-annotating with bioinformatics predictions and molecular features provides a good platform for new insights. availability: the grasp database is available at http://apps.nhlbi.nih. gov/grasp.genome-wide association studies (gwas) revolutionized the study of human genetics for numerous traits and diseases, but have rarely been used to synthesize results across traits and diseases (; johnson and o). biomolecular annotations of results from gwas are not uniformly applied across studies hampering comparisons even for fundamental aspects such as overlap with genes (johnson and o). scientists commonly use existing gwas results databases to provide evidence for association but these databases have significant limitations in annotations applied, and studies and results included . we collected 46.2 million available results from 1390 gwas papers to create a large results database deeply annotated in a uniform manner. in analysis of collected results, we observe temporal trends across gwas studies, demonstrate how deep annotation can lead to functional hypotheses often missed in original reports, and show how data mining across diverse phenotypes reveals putative pleiotropic loci and variants. the genome-wide repository of associations between snps and phenotypes (grasp) is freely available for query and download (http://apps.nhlbi.nih.gov/grasp), and plans to accept submission of additional results for public posting and archiving in future releases.  
