gregor: evaluating global enrichment of trait-associated variants in epigenomic features using a systematic, data-driven approach motivation: the majority of variation identified by genome wide association studies falls in non-coding genomic regions and is hypothesized to impact regulatory elements that modulate gene expression. here we present a statistically rigorous software tool gregor (genomic regulatory elements and gwas overlap algorithm) for evaluating enrichment of any set of genetic variants with any set of regulatory features. using variants from five phenotypes, we describe a data-driven approach to determine the tissue and cell types most relevant to a trait of interest and to identify the subset of regulatory features likely impacted by these variants. last, we experimentally evaluate six predicted functional variants at six lipid-associated loci and demonstrate significant evidence for allele-specific impact on expression levels. gregor systematically evaluates enrichment of genetic variation with the vast collection of regulatory data available to explore novel biological mechanisms of disease and guide us toward the functional variant at trait-associated loci. availability and implementation: gregor, including source code, documentation, examples, and executables, is available atthe list of common genetic variants associated with complex disease continues to grow as a result of increasingly powered genome wide association studies (gwas) . a large proportion of the associated variants are non-coding and it has proven difficult to identify the functional variant at loci with many variants in tight linkage disequilibrium (ld). in addition, these loci often account for only a small percentage of the trait heritability which makes any minor alteration of transcript levels difficult to detect. although eqtls in relevant tissues can highlight loci where variants likely impact transcription of nearby genes, fine-mapping of the causal variant is plagued by the same ld patterns that impact disease association studies. common variation located outside of proteincoding regions modulates regulatory elements in a cell-type specific manner . examining disease-associated variants in relation to genomic regions of functional importance can give insight into the molecular mechanisms leading to disease phenotypes, particularly when all associated variants are considered in aggregate. our understanding of the location of regulatory elements in the genome has expanded with the advent of chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput dna sequencing (chip-seq)). however, it is challenging to untangle meaningful biological understanding in a systematic manner, given the diverse set of data available from hundreds of cell types and tissues. with the notion that non-coding genetic variation plays a role in transcriptional regulation via regulatory epigenomic features, we can harness these data to gain knowledge of important biological mechanisms. for example, genetic variation that impacts local chromatin or methylation states and dna accessibility can impact transcription in a given cell. in a majority of associated genomic regions, the snp supported by encode data is a snp in strong ld with the top reported gwas snp . systematic chromatin profiling has revealed that variants linked with the gwas index variant, defined here as the most strongly associated variant, are often positioned within enhancer elements active in relevant cell types . furthermore, the overlap of particular histone methylation marks with trait associated variants is cell type-specific, suggesting that gene regulation is influenced by trait alleles in a cell type-specific manner ). however, these methods often do not consider an appropriate control set for evaluating enrichment and do not always carefully evaluate the most relevant tissues or cell types for enrichment of trait-specific variation. identifying causal variants and mechanisms at gwas loci remains a universal scientific challenge. with this motivation, we developed a statistically rigorous approach to quantify enrichment of trait-associated variants in experimentally annotated functional elements such as open chromatin states, histone marks and protein-binding sites in relevant cell types to develop a clearer understanding of the underlying regulatory mechanisms. we apply an algorithm and systematic scientific method for prioritizing functional candidate variants at genomewide significant trait-associated loci. our aims are threefold: (i) to elucidate the important tissue/cell types in which genetic variation impacts transcription for a particular trait, (ii) to narrow our focus of the regulatory features underlying transcription disrupted by trait-associated variants and (iii) to use positional overlap with selected regulatory domains to identify potential functional candidates at trait-associated loci. to address these aims, we evaluate genetic variation identified by gwas for five metabolic phenotypes: blood pressure (c. newton-cheh and p. munroe, unpublished data), body mass index , coronary artery disease (coronary artery disease (c4d)), lipids (global lipids genetics) and type 2 diabetes . we present gregor (genomic regulatory elements and gwas overlap algorithm), an open source tool for evaluating enrichment as a method to query the vast array of encode data for the design of functional experiments, enabling scientists with non-computational backgrounds to prioritize variants and loci for functional follow-up.  
