genome analysis greve: genomic recurrent event viewer to assist the identification of patterns across individual cancer samples greve has been developed to assist with the identification of recurrent genomic aberrations across cancer samples. the exact characterization of such aberrations remains a challenge despite the availability of increasing amount of data, from snparray to next-generation sequencing. furthermore, genomic aberrations in cancer are especially difficult to handle because they are, by nature, unique to the patients. however, their recurrence in specific regions of the genome has been shown to reflect their relevance in the development of tumors. greve makes use of previously characterized events to identify such regions and focus any further analysis. availability: greve is available through a web interface and open-source application (http://www.well.ox.ac.uk/greve).genomic aberrations have been the subject of much interest in the past decade with variable degrees of success. two categories have to be distinguished: exactly matching germline and unique, often somatic, aberrations. there has been much effort to identify and catalogue the former in order to treat them like regular markers such as snps . the first difficulty lies in the exact characterization of the breakpoints. furthermore, such inventory is impossible for somatic events that are by definition unique. still, the recurrence of overlapping regions can indicate a key controlling area, e.g. a small deletion on 9p in adolescent acute lymphoblastic leukemia . current approaches are essentially based on either the integration into a general-purpose browser to provide context, but no measure of overlap, or the creation of a heatmap where the copy number itself is used as a metric across all types of events to characterize the recurrence (cancer genome workbench, https://cgwb.nci.nih.gov/cgi-bin/heatmap;). this single continuous value is then used to construct a score at every location. greve is designed to look into further details by allowing the user to define further subgroups such as copy neutral loh that would be ignored otherwise. furthermore, greve provides a highly configurable interface and specific statistics on recurrent events. greve has been successfully used in numerous cancer studies where the cohort size varied from a handful to hundreds . highly flexible, greve provides the ability to statistically explore a given dataset and to present results in a ready-to-publish format.  
