genetics and population analysis gwatoolbox: an r package for fast quality control and handling of genome-wide association studies meta-analysis data the gwatoolbox is an r package that standardizes and accelerates the handling of data from genome-wide association studies (gwas), particularly in the context of large-scale gwas meta-analyses. a key feature of gwatoolbox is its ability to perform quality control (qc) of any number of files in a matter of minutes. the implemented workflow has been structured to check three particular data quality aspects: (i) data formatting, (ii) quality of the gwas results and (iii) data consistency across studies. output consists of an extensive list of quality statistics and plots which allow inspection of individual files and between-study comparison to identify systematic bias.meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies (gwas) have proven to be powerful tools to uncover novel loci associated with a variety of complex traits . current gwas meta-analyses often involve large numbers of studies (from dozens to 100 in large collaborative efforts such as those based on the metabochip). typically, each study provides summary statistics on the association between the study phenotype and 2.5 to 37 million single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), depending on whether hapmap or 1000 genomes project data are used as reference sets. as a result, analysts dealing with gwas metaanalyses need to process many files each of size 200 mb, even when only minimal information is shared. given that gwas involved in such meta-analyses may differ by study design, population structure, data management and statistical methods, the assessment of post-gwas data quality is important to uncover study-specific problems. available meta-analysis software, such as metal , plink and gwama address some of these issues (e.g. p-value inflation, snp filtering) during the meta-analysis to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. process. however, these tools perform only basic sanity checks before meta-analyzing the data and do not allow extensive qc of gwas result files (for an extensive comparison of popular tools, see supplementary). therefore, in-depth qc and handling of gwas result files are frequently performed using in-house scripts. these scripts are often not very efficient in handling dozens of large files, and issues may be addressed in a non-systematic way. in the absence of a rigorous and efficient qc, undetected bias at the individual study level can introduce spurious heterogeneity, which in turn can increase the false positive rate and decrease power of the meta-analysis . here we introduce the gwatoolbox, an r package that standardizes and accelerates the handling and qc of post-gwas data. its purposes are to make data handling easier, to support a more systematic qc and to facilitate the inspection of data quality prior to use of the gwas result files in a meta-analysis (supplementary).  
