a likelihood ratio based method to predict exact pedigrees for complex families from next-generation sequencing data motivation: next generation sequencing (ngs) technology considerably changed the way we screen for pathogenic mutations in rare mendelian disorders. however, the identification of the disease-causing mutation amongst thousands of variants of partly unknown relevance is still challenging and efficient techniques that reduce the genomic search space play a decisive role. often segregation-or linkage analysis are used to prioritize candidates, however, these approaches require correct information about the degree of relationship among the sequenced samples. for quality assurance an automated control of pedigree structures and sample assignment is therefore highly desirable in order to detect label mix-ups that might otherwise corrupt downstream analysis. results: we developed an algorithm based on likelihood ratios that discriminates between different classes of relationship for an arbitrary number of genotyped samples. by identifying the most likely class we are able to reconstruct entire pedigrees iteratively, even for highly consanguineous families. we tested our approach on exome data of different sequencing studies and achieved high precision for all pedigree predictions. by analyzing the precision for varying degrees of relatedness or inbreeding we could show that a prediction is robust down to magnitudes of a few hundred loci.in recent years high-throughput sequencing approaches have been successfully applied to identify thousands of novel pathogenic mutations in genetic disorders. however, due to the high variability of the human genome, there are several hundred variants of unclear significance in each individual and the analysis of such to whom correspondence should be addressed high dimensional data is still challenging. in order to reduce the search space, related individuals are usually sequenced for filtering purposes or linkage analysis, when studying unknown disorders. even in routine diagnostics sequencing of additional family members is common practice, whenever the disorder is highly heterogeneous and de novo mutations are the most promising candidates . however, these approaches rely on correct pedigree information and thus there is a great need for robust and easily manageable methods for checking the relationship between samples. so far it is common practice to infer relatedness with different kinds of genetic markers and a comprehensive overview of the existing methods is given by. most of the approaches that are based on likelihood ratios, lr, test different pre-defined relationship models and have already been thoroughly discussed by others . in our work we study the effectiveness of pedigree predictions when also rare markers are used, that become only accessible by direct sequencing. in general the accuracy of the prediction increases with the information content of the available markers. microsatellites are very variable in length and are thus highly informative. with 20 to 30 unlinked microsatellites it is usually possible to achieve accurate predictions about the relationship between samples. in contrast, snvs are mostly biallelic and in exomes their mean heterozygosity is only around 0.3. on the other hand, large numbers of snvs are detected in high-throughput sequencing projects and we will study in this work how the accuracy of pedigree predictions scales with the number of such markers. all models that have been developed for the prediction of relationships also have to account for genotyping errors. microsatellites are more difficult to genotype than snvs . additionally, the intrinsically higher rates of mutations can introduce biases in analyses that rely on identity by state, ibs . due to these technical challenges the evaluation of microsatellite data requires a high human expertise to avoid false parentage exclusions as discussed in dakin and avisein this work we analyzed the performance of reconstructing family structures with genotype data that become available in ngs sequencing studies, including rare variants. we were able to derive pedigrees with high precision for publicly available samples of families, as well as for in-house data, even for as little as a few hundred markers. our method is based on comparisons between likelihood ratios for different kinship classes and-as expected-the closer the coefficients of relationship were between two models, the more difficult it became to differentiate between them. the most challenging discrimination is between unrelated individuals in a highly inbred population and samples that are related by second-order relationship. so far highly polymorphic marker loci such as microsatellites have been used in paternity testing and to detect distant relationships. however, ancestry can also effectively be identified with the use of rare and family specific single nucleotide variants. we observed the biggest variance in likelihood ratios for all dyads for the comparison of the hypothesis h3, h0 (parent-child unrelated). one drawback of our approach is that different quality levels of the data are not considered. we simulated technical replicates with a high error rate by decreasing the coverage per base in the alignments and studied the influence on the classification process. some replicates with a large difference in coverage and quality were misclassified as full siblings instead of technical replicates, as visualized in(violet dots for lr(h1, h2)). with decreasing coverage, the error rates-especially for heterozygous calls-increase. however, the site-specific error probabilities that are reported by standard genotype callers are usually vastly underestimated for rare variants. allegedly small error rates pose a problem especially in the identification of replicates. another approach to estimate genotyping errors on exome variant lists, that also considers allele frequencies from population studies, reported a mean genotyping error rate of e=0.001 as more accurate for most current exomes .this error rate also yielded the best performance in our tests and is therefore suggested as a default setting. the consequences of an unsuitable choice of this parameter on the likelihood ratios is discussed in more detail in the supporting information. in summary we have shown that genotype data from ngs studies can also be used to deduce pedigree information with high precision. our approach doesnt require any additional generation of data and will thus be easy to integrate into existing analysis pipelines. this will help to identify sample mix-ups at an early stage and improve the overall quality in the diagnostic procedure.  
