genome analysis h 3 m 2 : detection of runs of homozygosity from whole-exome sequencing data motivation: runs of homozygosity (roh) are sizable chromosomal stretches of homozygous genotypes, ranging in length from tens of kilobases to megabases. rohs can be relevant for population and medical genetics, playing a role in predisposition to both rare and common disorders. rohs are commonly detected by single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) microarrays, but attempts have been made to use whole-exome sequencing (wes) data. currently available methods developed for the analysis of uniformly spaced snp-array maps do not fit easily to the analysis of the sparse and non-uniform distribution of the wes target design. results: to meet the need of an approach specifically tailored to wes data, we developed h 3 m 2 , an original algorithm based on heterogeneous hidden markov model that incorporates inter-marker distances to detect roh from wes data. we evaluated the performance of h 3 m 2 to correctly identify rohs on synthetic chromosomes and examined its accuracy in detecting rohs of different length (short, medium and long) from real 1000 genomes project data. h 3 m 2 turned out to be more accurate than germline and plink, two state-of-the-art algorithms, especially in the detection of short and medium rohs. availability and implementation: h 3 m 2 is a collection of bash, r and fortran scripts and codes and is freely available at https://sourceforge. net/projects/h3m2/.runs of homozygosity (roh) are chromosomal stretches that in a diploid genome appear in the homozygous state, that is, display identical alleles at multiple contiguous loci. the study of roh can be relevant for both population and medical genetics. genomic roh patterns are governed by a number of factors, among which population genetic history (e.g. historical bottleneck, geographic isolation and population size), evolutionary forces (e.g. selective sweeps) and cultural habits or historical and geographical factors. recent parental relatedness favors the formation of long roh (several megabases) that occur because of ibd (identity by descent, when the two alleles at a locus match because they originate from the same common ancestor), as opposed to identity by state (when the two alleles at a locus match simply by coincidence). homozygosity originating from the occurrence of individual ibd regions owing to parental relatedness (autozygosity) is known to possibly contain recessive highly penetrant deleterious disease-causing mutations surrounded by an unusually long homozygous haplotype. this is the principle that inspired homozygosity mapping in the study of rare recessive disorders affecting inbred individuals . in outbred individuals, short (up to few hundreds of kilobases) or mediumsized roh (from hundreds of kilobases to a few megabases) can surround disease-causing mutations as well , playing a role in predisposition to disease through the effect of mildly deleterious recessive variants . to date, roh detection has been achieved by microarraybased technologies. currently available single nucleotide polymorphism (snp)-array platforms contain millions of markers from the hapmap project and have a mean snp-to-snp distance of around 3 kb. the past few years have seen the emergence of several next-generation sequencing (ngs) platforms that are capable to sequence a full human genome per week at a cost 400-fold less than the previous methods. the advent of ngs platforms has revolutionized our ability of studying human genetic variation allowing the achievement of large-scale re-sequencing projects, such as the 1000 genomes project (1000gp) and the cancer genome atlas (www.cancergenome.nih.gov). recently, the 1000gp consortium, by combining low-coverage whole-genome sequencing (wgs) and high-coverage whole-exome sequencing (wes) of 1092 individuals from 14 populations, has genotyped $38 million single nucleotide polymorphic positions (1000 genomes). this provided a genetic map characterized by a mean snp-to-snp distance of 73 bp and with475 of the inter-marker distances under 200 bp. this catalog captures up to 98 of accessible snps with minor allele frequency of !1. to whom correspondence should be addressed. at present, the cost and the computational complexity still limit the routine use of wgs and make wes an effective alternative that has been successfully used for the discovery of single-nucleotide variants , short indels and copy number variants and that can be applied to the detection of roh . however, the sparse nature of the wes target design makes this latter application challenging. the distance between adjacent 1000gp exomic snps ranges from 1 bp to 26 mb (with an average value of around 500 bp), and consequently, large roh may be covered by few and not uniformly spaced snps, whereas small and isolated roh may display exceptionally high marker density. currently available sliding-window methods, such as plink or germline , were developed for the analysis of uniformly spaced snp-array maps and do not fit easily to the analysis of the sparse and non-uniform distribution of wes snp maps. the identification of long roh, typically those detected in a context of consanguinity, may be faced by applying these methods to wes data . however, medium or short roh cannot be as easily captured from wes data by using traditional sliding-windows approaches. to meet the need of an approach specifically tailored to wes data, which could overcome the inherent limitations of currently available tools, we developed a novel computational approach [homozygosity heterogeneous hidden markov model (hmm),for the identification of roh. the algorithm is based on a heterogeneous hmm that, incorporating the distance between consecutive polymorphic positions into the transition probabilities matrix, is able to detect with high sensitivity and specificity roh of every genomic size. the key feature of the algorithm is its heterogeneity, which makes it well-suited for wes data. to evaluate the capability of this novel method to detect roh of different sizes, we applied it to the analysis of a synthetic dataset and compared its performance with that of plink and germline on real wes data. another method for homozygosity ibd detection from sequences based on a hmm algorithm, ibdseq, has recently been reported . we did not compare h 3 m 2 with ibdseq because this latter method is conceived explicitly for genome sequences and has never been applied to wes data. as a whole, the results we obtained in these analyses demonstrated that h 3 m 2 has the potentiality to capture most of the genomic roh that overlap regions covered by exomic targets, and that it outperforms the existing algorithms especially in the detection of medium and short roh.  
