gene expression halo—a java framework for precise transcript half-life determination recent improvements in experimental technologies now allow measurements of de novo transcription and/or rna decay at whole transcriptome level and determination of precise transcript half-lives. such transcript half-lives provide important insights into the regulation of biological processes and the relative contributions of rna decay and de novo transcription to differential gene expression. in this article, we present halo (half-life organizer), the first software for the precise determination of transcript half-lives from measurements of rna de novo transcription or decay determined with microarrays or rna-seq. in addition, methods for quality control, filtering and normalization are supplied. halo provides a graphical user interface, command-line tools and a well-documented java application programming interface (api). thus, it can be used both by biologists to determine transcript half-lives fast and reliably with the provided user interfaces as well as software developers integrating transcript half-life analysis into other gene expression profiling pipelines. availability: source code, executables and documentation are available attranscript levels in a cell are determined by a constant turnover driven by de novo synthesis by polymerases and degradation by nucleases. while constant transcript levels are due to an equilibrium between rna synthesis and decay, changes in transcript levels reflect alterations in either of them . while standard gene expression profiling methods now allow measurements of total rna levels on a genome-wide scale, they cannot distinguish whether changes in total rna levels are due to changes in de novo transcription or rna decay. previously, rna decay rates have been determined by arresting transcription and subsequently monitoring ongoing rna decay over time . this is based on the assumption that rna decay is not affected to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors by transcription inhibition. however, it has been shown that a stress response, such as, e.g. induced by transcriptional arrest, can lead to a substantial stabilization of individual transcripts . alternatively, nuclear run-on assays have been used to measure de novo transcription and the relative contributions of transcription rate and mrna decay to steady-state mrna levels . recently, new methods have been introduced for the non-disruptive quantification of de novo transcription based on biosynthetic labeling (rna tagging) of newly transcribed rna with 4-thiouracil (4tu;) or 4-thiouridine (4su;). after labeling newly transcribed rna, total rna can be separated into the labeled newly transcribed rna and the unlabeled preexisting rna and de novo transcription and decay can be quantified in a single experimental setting. using any of these methods, transcript half-lives, i.e. the speed of rna turnover, can be determined for individual genes and the relative contributions of transcription rate and rna decay to gene expression regulation can be evaluated. in this way, alterations of rna decay have been confirmed as an important regulatory mechanism for many genes . moreover, as transcript half-lives are correlated to gene function and regulation , they can provide interesting insights into differential regulatory mechanisms for closely related genes and the regulation of protein complexes . in this article, we present halo (half-life organizer), a software environment for the calculation of transcript half-lives from measurements of total rna levels, de novo transcription or rna decay obtained with any of the above described methods. as it is independent of the quantification method used in the process, it can be applied both to microarray and rna-seq measurements. in addition, it provides methods for filtering and normalization of data and quality control of the microarray or rna-seq experiments. moreover, these algorithms are not restricted to rna half-lives. recent improvements in proteomics technologies, particularly stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (silac;) will soon be suitable to measure protein half-lives based on newly synthesized to total protein ratios. to support these developments, halo has been designed to be easily extendable to new methods. thus, it will prove valuable for further studies on the role of half-lives in the regulation of many biological processes.halo is an extensible java framework providing state-of-theart methods for transcript half-life calculation as well as quality control, filtering and normalization. it can be used as a standalone tool or can be integrated into other gene expression profiling frameworks. the intuitive gui makes it accessible for users without programming skills aiming to calculate transcript half-lives in a fast and straightforward way from new measurements of de novo synthesis and/or decay both for microarrays or rna-seq. in addition, researchers developing new software programs and methods can easily incorporate and extend the available methods of halo in their own programs. thus, halo will be a valuable tool for the analysis of transcript half-lives and, thus, an important prerequisite for the analysis of the regulation of biological systems.  
