halvade: scalable sequence analysis with mapreduce motivation: post-sequencing dna analysis typically consists of read mapping followed by variant calling. especially for whole genome sequencing, this computational step is very time-consuming, even when using multithreading on a multi-core machine. results: we present halvade, a framework that enables sequencing pipelines to be executed in parallel on a multi-node and/or multi-core compute infrastructure in a highly efficient manner. as an example, a dna sequencing analysis pipeline for variant calling has been implemented according to the gatk best practices recommendations, supporting both whole genome and whole exome sequencing. using a 15-node computer cluster with 360 cpu cores in total, halvade processes the na12878 dataset (human, 100 bp paired-end reads, 50 coverage) in 3 h with very high parallel efficiency. even on a single, multi-core machine, halvade attains a significant speedup compared with running the individual tools with multithreading. availability and implementation: halvade is written in java and uses the hadoop mapreduce 2.0 api. it supports a wide range of distributions of hadoop, including cloudera and amazon emr. itsthe speed of dna sequencing has increased considerably with the introduction of next-generation sequencing platforms. for example, modern illumina systems can generate several hundreds of gigabases per run with a high accuracy. this, in turn, gives rise to several hundreds of gigabytes of raw sequence data to be processed. post-sequencing dna analysis typically consists of two major phases: (i) alignment of reads to a reference genome and (ii) variant calling, i.e. the identification of differences between the reference genome and the genome from which the reads were sequenced. for both tasks, numerous tools have been described in literature, see e.g.for an overview. especially for whole genome sequencing, applying such tools is a computational bottleneck. to illustrate this, we consider the recently proposed best practices pipeline for dna sequencing analysis that consists of the burrow-wheeler aligner (bwa) for the alignment step, picard (http://picard.sourceforge.net) for data preparation and the genome analysis toolkit (gatk) for variant calling. on a single node, the execution of this pipeline consumes more time than the sequencing step itself: a dataset consisting of 1.5 billion paired-end reads (illumina platinum genomes, na12878, 100 bp, 50-fold coverage, human genome)halvade was benchmarked on a whole genome human dataset (na12878 from illumina platinum genomes). the dataset consists of 1.5 billion 100 bp paired-end reads (50-fold coverage) stored in two 43 gb compressed (gzip) fastq files. the software was benchmarked on two distinct computer clusters, an intel-provided bigdata cluster located in swindon, uk and a commercial amazon emr cluster.  
