data and text mining hcs-analyzer: open source software for high-content screening data correction and analysis motivation: high-throughput screening is a powerful technology principally used by pharmaceutical industries allowing the identification of molecules of interest within large libraries. originally target based, cellular assays provide a way to test compounds (or other biological material such as small interfering rna) in a more physiologically realistic in vitro environment. high-content screening (hcs) platforms are now available at lower cost, giving the opportunity for universities or research institutes to access those technologies for research purposes. however, the amount of information extracted from each experiment is multiplexed and hence difficult to handle. in such context, there is an important need for an easy-to-use, but still powerful software able to manage multidimensional screening data by performing adapted quality control and classification. hcs-analyzer includes: a user-friendly interface specifically dedicated to hcs readouts, an automated approach to identify systematic errors potentially occurring during screening and a set of tools to classify, cluster and identify phenotypes of interest among large and multivariate data. availability: the application, the c .net source code, as well as detailed documentation, are freely available at the following url:high-content screening (hcs) can be seen as an extension of highthroughput screening when multiplexing readout. this technology usually relies on complex biological systems such as cells. combined with novel automated imaging platforms, this technology currently allows acquisition of a huge amount of experimental data. followed by image analysis, this approach performs the extraction of high-dimensional signatures called phenotypes. here we propose an open source front end interface dedicated to analyze high-dimensional data generated during hcs campaigns. we embedded weka, alglib (http://www. alglib.net/) and accord (http://accord-net.origo.ethz.ch) open source scientific libraries and created a link to the kegg database soap server (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg). in a very easy and efficient way, to whom correspondence should be addressed. the users can import screening datasets, visualize them, evaluate and correct potential biases (edge effect, dispensing effect, etc.), cluster and classify the data, all in a supervised or unsupervised mode. in the case of sirna screening, gene and pathway information can be extracted, as well as pathways frequency. in addition, one can export the results and generate a report including tables, graphs and annotated images. thus, our application is well suited for analysis of complex hcs data. this method can be used to further develop high-level plugins, taking advantage of statistical and mathematical toolboxes which can be shared within the community.the stand-alone software presented here aims to simplify the process of correcting and analyzing multivariate screening datasets. the full c source code is available as well as a plugin sample (supplementary), allowing the user to adapt or to extend the currently provided version of the application. a tutorial as well as visual documentation can be downloaded at the same url. further development of the application is expected to adapt the software to evolving community requirements.  
