heat*seq: an interactive web tool for high-throughput sequencing experiment comparison with public data better protocols and decreasing costs have made high-throughput sequencing experiments now accessible even to small experimental laboratories. however, comparing one or few experiments generated by an individual lab to the vast amount of relevant data freely available in the public domain might be limited due to lack of bioinformatics expertise. though several tools, including genome browsers, allow such comparison at a single gene level, they do not provide a genome-wide view. we developed heatseq, a web-tool that allows genome scale comparison of high throughput experiments chromatin immuno-precipitation followed by sequencing, rna-sequencing and cap analysis of gene expression) provided by a user, to the data in the public domain. heatseq currently contains over 12 000 experiments across diverse tissues and cell types in human, mouse and drosophila. heatseq displays interactive correlation heatmaps, with an ability to dynamically subset datasets to contextualize user experiments. high quality figures and tables are produced and can be downloaded in multiple formats.high throughput sequencing is now becoming routine for many biological assays including transcriptome analysis through rnasequencing (rna-seq), or transcription factor (tf) binding sites identification through chromatin immuno-precipitation followed by sequencing (chip-seq). additionally, collaborative projects such as bgee , encode and roadmap epigenomics have generated genome-wide datasets across hundreds of cell types or tissues. despite this large data being freely available in the public domain, the lack of computational tools accessible to experimental scientists with no or elementary computational skills prohibits the use of this data to its full potential for discovery. though genome browsers, including summary tracks provided by many consortia, are extremely useful to study a few genes, promoters or single nucleotide polymorphisms, they lack the genome-wide overview. only a few public resources such as the codex database (s anchez) and the blueprint genomestats tool allow a genome-wide comparison with the user data. we therefore developed heatseq, a free, open source, web application providing fast and interactive comparison against high throughput sequencing experiments in the public domainwith heatseq, comparing rna-seq, chip-seq or cage experiments to hundreds of publicly available datasets becomes a trivial task. researchers can now investigate the relationships betweenvarious high-throughput sequencing experiments fast and interactively without requiring any programming skills. such analysis can assess data quality, cell variability and generate novel regulatory hypotheses.  
