hierarchical boosting: a machine-learning framework to detect and classify hard selective sweeps in human populations downloaded from motivation: detecting positive selection in genomic regions is a recurrent topic in natural population genetic studies. however, there is little consistency among the regions detected in several genome-wide scans using different tests and/or populations. furthermore, few methods address the challenge of classifying selective events according to specific features such as age, intensity or state (completeness). results: we have developed a machine-learning classification framework that exploits the combined ability of some selection tests to uncover different polymorphism features expected under the hard sweep model, while controlling for population-specific demography. as a result, we achieve high sensitivity toward hard selective sweeps while adding insights about their completeness (whether a selected variant is fixed or not) and age of onset. our method also determines the relevance of the individual methods implemented so far to detect positive selection under specific selective scenarios. we calibrated and applied the method to three reference human populations from the 1000 genome project to generate a genome-wide classification map of hard selective sweeps. this study improves detection of selective sweep by overcoming the classical selection versus no-selection classification strategy, and offers an explanation to the lack of consistency observed among selection tests when applied to real data. very few signals were observed in the african population studied, while our method presents higher sensitivity in this population demography. availability and implementation: the genome-wide results for three human populations from the 1000 genomes project and an r-package implementing the hierarchical boosting framework are available atover the past decades, many different methods to detect positive selection from polymorphism data in genomic regions have been developed (for reviews see). such methods rely on the different genomic patterns left by a hypothetical selection event occurring in an idealized population: a beneficial de novo mutation arises and increases in frequency in relatively few generations until eventually it reaches population fixation. this specific mode of positive selection is known as the hard sweep model (maynard). through the effect of genetic hitchhiking, this process leaves some characteristic patterns in the region surrounding the beneficial allele (selective sweep), such as skewed site frequency spectrum toward low-frequency variants , strong linkage disequilibrium (ld) patterns leading to extended haplotype homozigosity (ehh) , and population differentiation . computational methods developed to distinguish such patterns have helped to identify the genetic basis of some examples of human adaptation, such as the lactase persistence allele or the malaria resistance gene variants . however, most of those methods usually lack consistency in reporting the same selective events along the genome , causing a loss of confidence in the approach. this disagreement was thought to appear due to specific power of the different methods to uncover selection patterns under some local features of a given genomic region (such as specific recombination map), or due to specific demographic dynamics of the studied populations. thus, during the last decade, special effort was made to incorporate population-specific demographic models and region-specific recombination maps to approximate the neutral model to more complex and realistic scenarios . while these approaches clearly improve the sensitivity to detect positive selection, they did not explain the continued lack of concordance between methods, which raised concerns on false positive and false negative rates . recently, a new family of selection tests started to appear: statistics based on composite approaches combining different positive selection tests, and tuned using neutral and selection simulations . individual tests are sensitive to different modes and tempos of adaptation according to the specific molecular pattern they are aimed to identify. however, individual positive selection tests and most of the composite methods implemented so far address the selection analysis as a binary classification problem (i.e. selection versus no selection), ignoring the specific features of the analyzed selective sweeps, such as the extent of completeness (i.e. final frequency of the selected allele) or the time depth of the event (recent versus ancient selective events). in this study, we developed a hierarchical classification framework based on a boosting algorithm (using a similar approach to that presented in) to scan the whole genome for several evolutive scenarios. we trained the algorithm with simulations under different selective scenarios considering different final allele frequencies (faf) for the selected allele (completeness of a selective sweep) and with different timespanning selective events (age of a selective sweep). we demonstrate that our approach achieves high sensitivity toward general hard selective sweeps, and can provide information about their relative age of onset. once calibrated, we applied it to empirical genome-wide data from the 1000 genomes project (the 1000 genomes project consortium, 2012). we provide the results of our analysis for three continental human populations as ucsc tracks that can be easily loaded in any ucsc genome browser server and an r-package implementing the hierarchical boosting framework (http://hsb.upf. edu/). we detected a $13-fold and $15-fold decrease in significant signals in the african population as compared with the european and east asian populations, respectively, while our method showed better sensitivity in african-ancestry simulations.  
