higher classification sensitivity of short metagenomic reads with clark-s the growing number of metagenomic studies in medicine and environmental sciences is creating increasing demands on the computational infrastructure designed to analyze these very large datasets. often, the construction of ultra-fast and precise taxonomic classifiers can compromise on their sensitivity (i.e., the number of reads correctly classified). here we introduce clark-s, a new software tool that can classify short reads with high precision, high sensitivity and high speed. availability: clark-s is freely available atone of the primary goals of metagenomic studies is to determine the taxonomical identity of bacteria and viruses in a heterogenous microbial sample (e.g., soil, water, urban environment, human microbiome). this analysis can reveal the presence of unexpected bacteria and viruses in a newly explored microbial habitat, or in the case of the human body, elucidate relationships between diseases and imbalances in the microbiome. arguably, the most effective and unbiased methods to study these microbial samples is via high-throughput sequencing. the associated computational problem is to assign sequenced (short) reads to a taxonomic unit. several methods and software tools are available, but faster and more accurate algorithms are needed to keep pace with the increasing throughput of modern sequencing instruments. inwe introduced clark, a taxonomy-dependent binning method whose classification speed is currently unmatched. a recent independent evaluation of fourteen taxonomic binning/profiling methods (kraken by wood and salzberg, 2014, megan by, and many others) showed that the classification precision of clark is comparable (sometimes better) than the state-of-the-art classifiers . while clarks speed and precision are very high, its classification sensitivity (i.e., the fraction of reads that it correctly classifies) can be significantly improved with the methods described next. we recall that clark is a k-mer based method. briefly, it assigns a read r to a reference genome g if r and g share more discriminative k-mers (i.e., k-mers that appear exclusively in one reference genome) than other genomes in the database. here we show that the classification sensitivity can be increased by allowing mismatches between shared kmers in a limited number of (carefully predetermined) positions, while maintaining the requirement for k-mers to be discriminative. the idea of allowing mismatches to improve the sensitivity of seed-and-extend alignment methods was pioneered inwith the notion of spaced seed. while spaced seeds have been used in some metagenomic binning/profiling methods (e.g., megan), the use of discriminative spaced k-mers is novel. here we describe an extension of the algorithmic infrastructure of clark based on spaced seed, called clark-s.  
