highly accurate sequence-based prediction of half-sphere exposures of amino acid residues in proteins downloaded from motivation: solvent exposure of amino acid residues of proteins plays an important role in understanding and predicting protein structure, function and interactions. solvent exposure can be characterized by several measures including solvent accessible surface area (asa), residue depth (rd) and contact numbers (cn). more recently, an orientation-dependent contact number called half-sphere exposure (hse) was introduced by separating the contacts within upper and down half spheres defined according to the ca-cb (hseb) vector or neighboring ca-ca vectors (hsea). hsea calculated from protein structures was found to better describe the solvent exposure over asa, cn and rd in many applications. thus, a sequence-based prediction is desirable, as most proteins do not have experimentally determined structures. to our best knowledge, there is no method to predict hsea and only one method to predict hseb. results: this study developed a novel method for predicting both hsea and hseb (spider-hse) that achieved a consistent performance for 10-fold cross validation and two independent tests. the correlation coefficients between predicted and measured hseb (0.73 for upper sphere, 0.69 for down sphere and 0.76 for contact numbers) for the independent test set of 1199 proteins are significantly higher than existing methods. moreover, predicted hsea has a higher correlation coefficient (0.46) to the stability change by residue mutants than predicted hseb (0.37) and asa (0.43). the results, together with its easy ca-atom-based calculation, highlight the potential usefulness of predicted hsea for protein structure prediction and refinement as well as function prediction. availability and implementation: the method is available at http://sparksmeasuring exposure of amino acid residues of proteins to solvent is important for understanding and predicting protein structure, function and interactions . the most common measure is solvent accessible surface area (asa) (with applications ranging from protein structure prediction to protein function prediction . the inability of asa to discriminate deeply buried residues from those buried just beneath the surface leads to development of residue depth by averaging the distance to the nearest atom on the protein surface. both asa and residue depth, however, require precise evaluation of the protein surface in full atomic details that is time consuming. having a timeconsuming calculation and requiring an all-atomic model limited the usefulness of asa and residue depth in the ab initio prediction of protein structure where protein conformation is often represented by main-chain atoms or only ca atoms in initial conformational sampling. another measure of residue exposure to solvent is contact number (cn), which counts the number of residues within specific distance cut offs. the distances are based on the positions of ca or cb atoms. thus, unlike asa and residue depth, only a coarse-grained model is needed for evaluating cns. different distance cut offs have been used in earlier studies . it was shown that cn with a distance cut off between 12 and 14 a is the best for protein fold recognition . all above-mentioned solvent-exposure measures, however, do not contain explicit information regarding the orientation of side chains that are important for functional and structural studies. hamelryck designed a new measure by splitting the sphere around the ca atom into two half spheres along the vector of ca-cb atoms . the half sphere containing the cb atom was defined as upper and the other as down half spheres. the numbers of ca atoms enclosed in these two half-spheres were named as half-sphere exposure (hse)-up and hse-down, respectively. in addition, he has substituted the vector ca-cb with a pseudo vector generated from the sum of vectors ca i-1-ca i and ca i1-ca i. this hse is denoted as hsea (-up and-down) to distinguish from the hse calculated based on the ca-cb vector (here and hereafter, it will be annotated as hseb). hsea does not require the positions of cb-atoms. one advantage of hse is that its value is independent of amino acid type because it describes a residues coordination environment rather than a quantity related to its size such as asa and rd. interestingly, hsea-up outperforms other solvent exposure measures including cn, asa, relative asa, residue depth and the other three hse definitions (hseb-up, hseb-down and hsea-down) in correlation to changes in protein stability due to mutations and to conservation of amino acid residues . more recently, hse was found to be better than asa for prediction of b cell epitopes of proteins from their three dimensional structures . hse has also been found useful in many other applications . most of these applications obtained hse based on known protein structures. because the structures for most proteins are not known experimentally, a sequence-based prediction is desirable. many sequence-based methods were developed for predicting asa and cn . however, there is no method available for prediction of hsea and only one (hsepred) for the prediction of hseb . we found that the correlation coefficients between actual hseb and those predicted by hsepred (up and down, respectively) are less than 0.43 for our dataset of 1199 proteins. one possible factor is that hsepred was trained on a small dataset of 632 proteins and was not tested on independent datasets. therefore, a more accurate method is clearly needed. recently, we developed a method called spider 2 that utilized predicted secondary structures, backbone torsion angles and asa, iteratively, in order to improve their accuracies. the method achieved 82 accuracy for secondary structure prediction, 0.76 for the correlation coefficient between predicted and actual solvent accessible surface area, 19 and 30 for mean absolute errors of backbone u and w angles, respectively, and 8 and 32 for mean absolute errors of ca-based h and s angles, respectively, for an independent test dataset of 1199 proteins. here, we expand the iterative technique to the prediction of hsea (-up anddown), hseb (-up and-down) and cn by employing a large dataset containing 4590 protein chains. the method was independently tested in a dataset of 1199 proteins and a dataset of 69 proteins from the critical assessment of structure prediction technique (casp 11, 2014). as a result, highly accurate and robust prediction was obtained (e.g. a correlation coefficient of 0.73 for hseb-up, 0.69 for hseb-down and 0.76 for contact number on the independent test set). comparison to two previous methods for contact prediction and hseb confirmed the superior performance of the method obtained. the hsea and hseb predictors are incorporated as a package in spider 2 available at http://sparks-lab.org or downloadable as a standalone package.  
