high-order neural networks and kernel methods for peptide-mhc binding prediction motivation: effective computational methods for peptide-protein binding prediction can greatly help clinical peptide vaccine search and design. however, previous computational methods fail to capture key nonlinear high-order dependencies between different amino acid positions. as a result, they often produce low-quality rankings of strong binding peptides. to solve this problem, we propose nonlinear high-order machine learning methods including high-order neural networks (honns) with possible deep extensions and high-order kernel support vector machines to predict major histocompatibility complex-peptide binding. results: the proposed high-order methods improve quality of binding predictions over other prediction methods. with the proposed methods, a significant gain of up to 2540 is observed on the benchmark and reference peptide datasets and tasks. in addition, for the first time, our experiments show that pre-training with high-order semi-restricted boltzmann machines significantly improves the performance of feed-forward honns. moreover, our experiments show that the proposed shallow honn outperform the popular pre-trained deep neural network on most tasks, which demonstrates the effectiveness of modelling high-order feature interactions for predicting major histo-compatibility complex-peptide binding. availability and implementation: there is no associated distributable software.complex biological functions in living cells are often performed through different types of proteinprotein interactions. an important class of proteinprotein interactions are peptide (i.e. short chains of amino acids)-mediated interactions, and they regulate important biological processes such as protein localization, endocytosis, post-translational modifications, signalling pathways and immune responses, etc. moreover, peptide-mediated interactions play important roles in the development of several human diseases including cancer and viral infections. because of the high medical value of peptide-protein interactions, a lot of research has been done to identify ideal peptides for therapeutic and cosmetic purposes, which renders in silico peptide-protein binding prediction by computational methods an important problem in immunomics and bioinformatics. in this article, we propose novel machine learning methods to study a specific type of peptide-protein interaction, i.e. the interaction between peptides and major histocompatibility complex class i (mhc i) proteins, although our methods can be readily applicable to other types of peptide-protein interactions. peptide-mhc i protein interactions are essential in cell-mediated immunity, regulation of immune responses, transplant rejection and vaccine design. therefore, effective computational methods for peptide-mhc i binding prediction will significantly reduce cost and time in clinical peptide vaccine search and design. previous computational approaches to predicting peptide-mhc interactions are mainly based on linear or bi-linear models, and they fail to capture key non-linear high-order dependencies between different amino acid positions. although previous kernel support vector machine (svm) and neural network (netmhc) approaches can capture nonlinear interactions between input features, they fail to model the direct strong high-order interactions between features. as a result, the quality of the peptide rankings produced by previous methods is not good. producing high-quality rankings of peptide vaccine candidates is essential to the successful deployment of computational methods for vaccine design. for this purpose, we need to effectively model direct non-linear high-order feature interactions to directly capture interactions between primary (anchor) and secondary amino acid residues involved in the formation of peptide-mhc complexes. deep learning models such as deep neural networks (dnns) pretrained with restricted boltzmann machine (rbm) have been successfully applied to handwritten digit classification, embedding, image recognition and many other applications . but they have never been successfully applied to peptide-protein interaction problems. in this article, we propose using high-order semi-rbms to pretrain a feed-forward high-order neural network (honn) and propose high-order kernel svm for peptide-mhc binding prediction, including identification of mhc-binding, naturally processed and presented (npp) and immunogenic peptides (t-cell epitopes). our proposed models achieved a significant gain of up to 2540 over the state-ofthe-art approach on benchmark and reference peptide datasets and tasks. furthermore, our shallow honns even outperformed popular powerful pre-trained dnns that was applied to model peptide-mhc binding prediction for the first time by this work.we first present results for mhc-i binding prediction on benchmark datasets and experimental data from our lab (section 5.1). we show next results on predicting peptides np by the mhc pathway (section 5.2). finally, we show results for predicting promising t-cell epitopes for clinical development (section 5.3). the following auc and ndcg scores are shown in percentage.  
