sequence analysis high quality snp calling using illumina data at shallow coverage motivation: detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) has been a major application in processing second generation sequencing (sgs) data. in principle, snps are called on single base differences between a reference genome and a sequence generated from sgs short reads of a sample genome. however, this exercise is far from trivial; several parameters related to sequencing quality, and/or reference genome properties, play essential effect on the accuracy of called snps especially at shallow coverage data. in this work, we present slider ii, an alignment and snp calling approach that demonstrates improved algorithmic approaches enabling larger number of called snps with lower false positive rate. in addition to the regular alignment and snp calling, as an optional feature, slider ii is capable of utilizing information about known snps of a target genome, as priors, in the alignment and snps calling to enhance its capability of detecting these known snps and novel snps and mutations in their vicinity.the ability to perform an unambiguous alignment of sequence reads and the detection of sequence variants is an essential task in processing the output of second generation sequencing. as this technology evolves, algorithms used in alignment and single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) calling need to be modified to adapt to rapidly changing parameters such as read length, overall read quality, the number of reads and the sequence coverage being generated. furthermore, information about reference genomes, in particular known polymorphisms, have the potential to improve the alignment and snp calling accuracy. for example, the current human reference sequence typically used for alignment reflects, within any region, a single haplotype that will contain private snps as well as ones of low frequency within the human population. such polymorphic regions, through their generation of an alignment mismatch, will impede the ability to determine nearby mutations of interest. a commonly used application for alignment and snp calling from illumina reads is the maq aligner . maq uses to whom correspondence should be addressed. hash tables to align the most probable sequence of each read to a reference genome, and then uses the bayesian theorem to construct consensus sequence from these aligned and calibrated most probable reads, a list of snps are called on differences between the reference sequence and the consensus, and filtered by a set of threshold cutoff parameters such as snp quality score, minimum and maximum coverage, the maximum allowed number of snps in a small window (dense snps) and the size of this small window. previously, we reported on the ability of the slider algorithm to use a merge-sort approach for aligning the probability (prb) values at each position of illumina short reads. by utilizing the probability values to reconstruct likely sequences from each read, slider was able to achieve considerably higher alignment accuracy, reducing the number of mis-mapped reads arising due to sequence error. the algorithmic approach of slider ii continues to utilize the probability of all four possible nucleotides generated by illumina to improve the overall alignment. this information has also been incorporated to improve snps calling quality. in brief, slider ii high snp calling accuracy is a result of higher alignment accuracy of slider , higher snp calling capability achieved in utilizing information provided in prb data and higher snps filtering accuracy: @bullet high alignment accuracy: while most aligners are designed to align the most probable sequence, higher alignment accuracy is achieved by slider by aligning the prb sequences for all four bases . slider ii uses the merge-sort approach of slider to align seeds of the first 31 bases (higher quality bases) of each read and then extend these seeds to full reads. @bullet after the alignment step, slider ii utilizes more information provided in prb data for snp calling: @bullet using all four prb values in a consensus construction yield a more discriminatory probability accumulation compared to only using the probability of the most probable base (mpb). @bullet with heterozygous snps, the expectation is to have approximately equal coverage representation for the reference nucleotide and the allele nucleotide, however, this coverage, due to the low numbers, is likely to be skewed in favor of one nucleotide or another. since probability accumulates exponentially to the level of coverage, such coverage unbalance is likely to mask the probability of the under represented nucleotide, therefore, in order to overcome this, slider ii builds a coverage probability consensus that only include data when the reference nucleotide has a lower probability than some threshold value. again, having the probability values of all four nucleotides enables more accurate filtering of these bases.page: 1030 10291035we utilized 68 illumina lanes of human breast cancer whole genome shotgun sequencing paired-end sequence data, representing a total of 906 million reads ranging in size from 36 to 42 bases . these data were processed using both slider ii version 1.1 and maq version 0.7.1. reads were first aligned to the human genome hg18 resulting in an average coverage of 7.5. for each aligner, snps were called and sorted in descending order, using the snp score for slider ii and the phred-like consensus quality score provided by maq. we used the concordance of the called snps with the ensembl variation database (version 50) snps to compare snp calling accuracy. we postulate that a higher level of concordance with the variation database, given its large size, and yet relative rarity of snps in the reference can only reflect a higher degree of accuracy in snp calling. although snp concordance does not give an exact estimate of snp calling accuracy, it provides a good relative measure of performance. concordance provides a lower boundary of this accuracy (and an upper boundary to the novel snps in the sample), for example, in a set of n called snps, if we have a concordance of x, this means that: @bullet our snps calling accuracy is at least x. it is exactly x when the sample data contain only known snps.@bullet the snps in our sample data has at most (1 x) novel snps. the percentage of novel snps is exactly (1 x) when we have no calling errors.therefore, if the sample data contain y novel snps and (0 y 1 x), novel snps accuracy is z, and z = y/(1 x).shows the concordance of top-scored snps for slider ii without using known snps as priors (slider ii a), with known snps as priors (slider ii b) and for maq at minimum coverage depths of 3, 2 and 1. whereas for slider ii, the called snps concordance is correlated with their scores,; the maq concordance dropped significantly for snps reported with high quality scores. this phenomenon appears to be contributed by snps generated as a result of alignment to paralogous or duplicated regions since maq does not have the capability of filtering out such snps. to provide a more comparable analysis, we filtered out snps indicating sequence coverage higher than 15 within the page: 1034 10291035maq output in order to reduce those inaccurately called snps at high quality scores.shows that slider ii using the probabilities of all four bases is able to identify more snps with higher accuracy than maq. the results in figures 6 and 7 also show that the usage of polymorphism priors (slider ii b) enables the detection of a larger number of snps with substantially higher calling accuracy.shows the output overlap for slider ii snps (not including prior knowledge of known snps) with score greater than 25, counting 1 911 839 (or about 75 top scoring snps) and all of the maq called snps with coverage in the rangesnps, slider ii does not rely on such heuristic values, instead utilizes the expected ratio of polymorphism in the reference genome for identifying snps at each position. in addition, an automated approach filters out paralogous snps without a user instantiated cut off value for maximum coverage.in this article, we presented a comprehensive snps calling tool from prb values of illumina short reads, which aligns illumina short prb reads to a reference genome, utilizes alignment information in calibrating all four prb values and accumulates bases probability using bayes approach, and finally snps are called on nucleotide differences between the accumulated bases probabilities and the reference genome, when our confidence in a consensus accumulated from the reads is higher than our confidence of the used reference. each called snp is associated with a single score that ranks its accuracy among the set of called snps. snps that are likely to be a result of genomic rearrangements are either down scored or removed. as an optional feature, known snps of a target genome can be utilized as priors in alignment and snps calling, which increases the capability of detecting known snps. results show that slider ii calls more snps with higher accuracy than the leading competitive tools; fromwe see that the concordance with ensembl known snps for slider ii is higher than that of maq at every output size, for example, at concordance of 90, slider ii was able to call more than 2 million snps whereas maq called about 1.58 million snps. we contribute this higher snps calling accuracy of slider ii to two factors:(1) the use of prb values: prb values result in higher alignment quality and more discriminatory probability accumulation outcome, compared to qcal value of the mpb, which enabled  
