high-throughput feature counting and measurement of roots the original roottrace tool has proved successful in measuring primary root lengths across time series image data. biologists have shown interest in using the tool to address further problems, namely counting lateral roots to use as parameters in screening studies, and measuring highly curved roots. to address this, the software has been extended to count emerged lateral roots, and the tracking model extended so that strongly curved and agravitropic roots can be now be recovered. here, we describe the novel image analysis algorithms and user interface implemented within the roottrace framework to handle such situations and evaluate the results. availability: the software is open source and available from http:// sourceforge.net/projects/roottrace.high-throughput measurement of plant roots is a key requirement in systems biology. the nature of biological experiments means the observation of many plants is necessary in order to understand growth processes, e.g. responses to stimuli and hormones. traditionally, changes in growth were monitored by manual measurement of plants. today, image analysis algorithms are being developed which allow such measurements as root length, curvature and/or architectural properties to be taken semi-automatically from an image. some software also enables multiple measurements on sequences of images with little interaction from the user . such analysis opens the door to high throughput quantification of plant growth. previous work has seen the release of such a tool, roottrace which is able to measure primary length of many individual roots, given standard digital camera images of plants grown on agar plates in growth chambers, as is common practice. roottrace is able to record the growth of these roots over time-lapse image sequences. it is also able to record the curvature properties of each root trace, with user input only required on the first frame. in this article, we describe important extensions to the roottrace algorithms, which additionally allow the counting of lateral roots, and a new tracking model which is able to track to whom correspondence should be addressed. increasingly curved roots, the addition of which allows different biological questions to be answered. both these extensions add to the high-throughput screening capabilities of the software.the top-down model-based approach used by roottrace can now be intuitively tailored to meet the individual requirements of the biological data being analyzed. a new, gravity-independent tracking framework has been included, and a method of detecting lateral roots on typically straighter roots has been implemented.  
