abc-sysbio—approximate bayesian computation in python with gpu support motivation: the growing field of systems biology has driven demand for flexible tools to model and simulate biological systems. two established problems in the modeling of biological processes are model selection and the estimation of associated parameters. a number of statistical approaches, both frequentist and bayesian, have been proposed to answer these questions. results: here we present a python package, abc-sysbio, that implements parameter inference and model selection for dynamical systems in an approximate bayesian computation (abc) framework. abc-sysbio combines three algorithms: abc rejection sampler, abc smc for parameter inference and abc smc for model selection. it is designed to work with models written in systems biology markup language (sbml). deterministic and stochastic models can be analyzed in abc-sysbio.in the last decade, modeling of biochemical systems using ordinary and stochastic differential equations (ode and sde) has become increasingly popular as quantitative ideas have begun to pervade the biomolecular sciences. inferring model parameters and ranking alternative models is necessary in order to gather reliable future predictions about the dynamical behavior of such systems. the problem of parameter estimation in deterministic systems has been addressed by using local and global non-linear optimization methods as well as maximumlikelihood estimation and within a bayesian framework . an approximate bayesian computation (abc) scheme based on sequential monte carlo (smc) has been developed for likelihood-free parameter inference in deterministic and stochastic systems . furthermore, this approach also allows to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint first authors. for model selection, i.e. evidence-based ranking of alternative models. because in abc methods the evaluation of the likelihood is replaced by simulations, the implementation of these methods hides some numerical and technical problems. this includes finding numerically the solution of stiff ode systems or stochastic systems described by sdes or a master equation. this requires a flexible and adaptive implementation of abc methods to address each specific model with its biochemical as well as dynamical problems. here we present an extensible python package, abc-sysbio, which implements approximate bayesian computation for parameter inference and model selection in deterministic and stochastic models. the package supports the standard models exchange format, sbml, as well as user-defined models written in python. in addition, graphical processing unit support is provided via pycuda . user-defined algorithmic parameters allow for the adaptation and tuning of the inference procedures included in the package to suit each specific dynamical model. note that in contrast to other packages for parameter inference in a bayesian framework, e.g. diyabc and biobayes , abc-sysbio allows for parameter inference and model selection of both deterministic and stochastic models. its implementation is flexible and user friendly: it supports important model exchange standards and is easily integrated into existing computational pipelines and systems biology frameworks through the flexibility of python.  
