data and text mining hipub: translating pubmed and pmc texts to networks for knowledge discovery we introduce hipub, a seamless chrome browser plug-in that automatically recognizes, annotates and translates biomedical entities from texts into networks for knowledge discovery. using a combination of two different named-entity recognition resources, hipub can recognize genes, proteins , diseases, drugs, mutations and cell lines in texts, and achieve high precision and recall. hipub extracts biomedical entity-relationships from texts to construct context-specific networks, and integrates existing network data from external databases for knowledge discovery. it allows users to add additional entities from related articles, as well as user-defined entities for discovering new and unexpected entity-relationships. hipub provides functional enrichment analysis on the biomedical entity network, and link-outs to external resources to assist users in learning new entities and relations. availability and implementation: hipub and detailed user guide are available at http://hipub.korea.many of the biomedical research papers are about the interactions between genes, proteins or drugs in a specific biological context. new hypotheses could be formulated by mining these papers and designing new sets of experiments to validate (or refute) hypotheses in the knowledge discovery process. however, the volume and rate of current biomedical publications are far larger and more rapid than our ability to extract and use them in this knowledge discovery cycle. for example, pubmed and pubmed central (pmc) currently have more than 26 million abstracts and 4 million full-text articles, respectively, in their collections, and pubmed receives more than 3000 new abstracts per day. hence, it is impossible for researchers to manually go through all the records to extract relevant information for their research.to address these challenges, we developed hipub, a chrome browser plug-in that automatically highlights, annotates and translates biomedical entities (e.g. genes, proteins, drugs and diseases) from texts into networks for knowledge discovery. compared with related tools, hipub has the following unique features and advantages (supplementary): and best entity extractor (best ee) (@bullet hipub visualizes texts as interactive biomedical entity networks using information from texts and external resources. @bullet hipub integrates biomedical entities in similar articles into the biomedical entity network. @bullet hipub provides an interactive user interface for network exploration, enrichment analyses and link-outs to external databases.  
