genome analysis histogram-based dna analysis for the visualization of chromosome, genome and species information motivation: we describe a novel approach to explore dna nucleotide sequence data, aiming to produce high-level categorical and structural information about the underlying chromosomes, genomes and species. results: the article starts by analyzing chromosomal data through histograms using fixed length dna sequences. after creating the dna-related histograms, a correlation between pairs of histograms is computed, producing a global correlation matrix. these data are then used as input to several data processing methods for information extraction and tabular/graphical output generation. a set of 18 species is processed and the extensive results reveal that the proposed method is able to generate significant and diversified outputs, in good accordance with current scientific knowledge in domains such as genomics and phylogenetics. availability and implementation: source code freely available for download at http://www4.dei.isep.ipp.pt/etc/dnapaper2010, implemented in free pascal and unix scripting tools.phylogenetics concerns the study of the evolutionary relations between groups of organisms. nowadays phylogenetics benefits from molecular sequencing data techniques to gather extensive data for analyses, aiming to improve research in areas such as the evolutionary tree of life , grouping of organisms, among many others. with the advent of genome sequencing and genome databases, a large volume of information is available for computational processing, allowing worldwide research on decoding the informational structure present in dna sequences. a massive amount of dna information is being collected and decoded, as result of a large collaborative effort among many to whom correspondence should be addressed. individuals and research institutions around the world, and is available for scientific research. in, this evolving area was addressed by applying mathematical tools to genome data, revealing new information patterns. in this study, we analyze the dna code in the perspective of identifying structural patterns in the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. understanding dna may be one of the most challenging problems posed to the human knowledge (nobel prize web site, http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1968/). the decoding of the dna complex structure may not only have a primary level of biochemical detail, but also other levels of information . this vision motivated the association of logical and mathematical concepts, namely, histogram, correlation and analysis/visualization tools such as multidimensional analysis, directed graphs and dendograms. once established the methodology for several species, its dna data is used to pursue the vision. in the chosen dna repository a substantial part, corresponding to genes and short repetitive sequences (as defined in the university of california santa cruz genome bioinformatics web site), is organized into chromosomes, which is our input data. in this study, we consider the available nuclear and mitochondrial genomes of 18 species: 10 mammals, 2 birds (aves), 2 fishes, 1 insect, 2 nematodes and 1 fungus. we note that in most of the species the association of genes to chromosomes is not yet incomplete. in, we present the chromosomal characteristics of those species. the dna implements an alphabet composed by the symbols t, c, a, g. any simple translation to a numerical counterpart may impose bias and destroy intrinsic information. consequently, it was decided to directly process the non-numerical code. due to the immense volume of information, a histogram-based measure was adopted. nevertheless, in general, histograms do not capture dynamics. in order to overcome this limitation, a flexible pattern detection algorithm based on counting the sequence of symbols was considered . by flexible we mean that the algorithm can count sequences of length n items, each one composed by one of the four base symbols. with the exception of yeast (sc), the available chromosome data includes a fifth symbol (n), corresponding to masked dna symbols not belonging to the genome, which typically appear in large contiguous sequences. for example, in the human y chromosome file there are 59 373 566 bp, of which 33 710 000 bp are n (56.78) arranged in 17 sequences, the largest one with 30 000 000 symbols. another example is the chicken ga25 chromosome, with 2 051 775 bp, of which 663 879 are n (32.67)arranged in 274 sequences, the largest one with 500 000 symbols. hoy and ga25 are just two examples of chromosomes with a percentage of n symbols 10, but most of the chromosomes have smaller percentages. we decided not to use n in sequences as a fifth symbol or not to replace it by any of symbols t, c, g, a, because that would introduce an unknown bias in the sequence processing. we then considered two approaches: (a) removing all n symbols in a preprocessing step or (b) process sequences but ignoring any sequence with an n. although (a) and (b) may seem different, we concluded that differences were minimal and that (a) could beadvantageously used without compromising the quality of results and conclusions. using as examples ho, ck, tn, ag nuclear chromosomes and a sequence length of n = 8,rightmost column synthesizes the differences for the (a) and (b) approaches. for ga25, the pearsons correlation coefficient r between (a) and (b) sequences with length n = 8 yields r 0.9999717, while for hoy the corresponding coefficient r is 0.9999999. we conclude that both approaches are statistically equivalent for the envisaged dna decoding. therefore, we opted to discard the n symbol before histogram construction. different statistics may be produced when considering the length ranging from n = 1, representing merely a static counting of m = 4 1 states, up to n = 8, representing the dynamics of a system with m = 4 8 (65 536) states. for bin counting a one base sliding window (i.e. shift of one base and overlap of n1 consecutive bases) method was adopted.shows the differences between the relative frequencies of human x and human y chromosomes histograms for n = 6. the large number of bins (4096) visually helps understanding the differences in the dna base sequences of both chromosomes. these differences are our main motivation to study the genomic dna and find out if some high-level structural information will emerge. in short, for our dna sequence analysis process we adopted(i) the histogram for translating the t, c, a, g symbols into numerical values; (ii) the dynamical code characterization by means of n-tuple sequences; (iii) the sequence similarity comparison using a correlation method; and (iv) the identification of hidden patterns in the numerical sequence and subsequent high-level visualization of those patterns.we described a novel approach to dna analysis, based on a methodology that takes as input whole-genomic chromosome sequences and then, using alignment-free sequence techniques, extracts high-level information from histogram correlations. this information is used to generate several types of tabular and/or graphical outputs relating chromosomes or species.in this study, an important parameter is the word length n, used in the sequence processing and histogram constructions steps. the n = 1 case is just a mere counting of t, c, a, g, but when n goes from 2 to 8 the corresponding 3d mds plots reveal increasingly evident spatial and structural patterns related to chromosomes, as shown infor n = 8. in this 3d rendering (with shadows on the floor), we can observe the individual chromosomes and many page: 1212 12071214spatial groupings: a big grouping including all the mammals (with op slightly apart); a grouping with ga and tg; and a grouping with ce and cb. fish species zf and tn are spatially far away from each other. it is also noteworthy the existence of spatial structure in most species: other than cb, ce, sc, zf, the remaining species reveal a chromosomal linear organization, with lines mostly parallel between species. in most of the species, it is the sexual chromosome that lies more far apart from the corresponding species line, but this also happens with other non-sexual chromosomes.we do not have an immediate explanation for this remarkable structuring, but it may be related with higher levels of information in chromosomes and genomes. the emergence of this apparently new structural knowledge from chromosomal dna seems to be unique to our approach and suggests novel ways to investigate the higher levels of information referred by . we also performed a study using nuclear and mitochondrial chromosomes from 18 species, with results at the chromosome, genome and species levels: @bullet 3d mds plots of nuclear and mitochondrial chromosomes have shown the emergence of intra-and interspecies spatial patterns, based on an alignment-free sequencing and data mining of the whole-chromosomal dna data, instead of genes or other small sequences.@bullet directed graphs of nuclear and mitochondrial chromosomes demonstrated that chromosomal relationships can be derived from histogram correlations, as well as genomic/species relationships. @bullet chromosomal-based dendograms have shown that histogram correlations can be used to compute diagrams depicting hierarchical clusterings of chromosomes and species.  
