allerdictor: fast allergen prediction using text classification techniques motivation: accurately identifying and eliminating allergens from biotechnology derived products are important for human health. from a biomedical research perspective, it is also important to identify aller-gens in sequenced genomes. many allergen prediction tools have been developed during the past years. although these tools have achieved certain levels of specificity, when applied to large-scale al-lergen discovery (e.g. at a whole-genome scale), they still yield many false positives and thus low precision (even at low recall) due to the extreme skewness of the data (allergens are rare). moreover, the most accurate tools are relatively slow because they use protein sequence alignment to build feature vectors for allergen classifiers. additionally, only web server implementations of the current allergen prediction tools are publicly available and are without the capability of large batch submission. these weaknesses make large-scale allergen discovery ineffective and inefficient in the public domain. results: we developed allerdictor, a fast and accurate sequence-based allergen prediction tool that models protein sequences as text documents and uses support vector machine in text classification for allergen prediction. test results on multiple highly skewed datasets demonstrated that allerdictor predicted allergens with high precision over high recall at fast speed. for example, allerdictor only took $6 min on a single core pc to scan a whole swiss-prot database of $540 000 sequences and identified 51 of them as allergens. availability and implementation: allerdictor is implemented in python and available as standalone and web server versions atallergy is one of the most important chronic diseases worldwide. it is also one of the main causes of asthma and asthma exacerbations, which has been an increasing health issue in developed countries . allergic hypersensitivity (ige-type response) in sensitized individuals is elicited by allergens. the allergenige interaction often results in mast cells and/or basophils releasing multiple inflammatory mediators such as histamine, leukotrienes, cytokines and chemokines. these mediators can cause a variety of symptoms from mild to severe including sneezing, itching, rashes, hives, difficulty in breathing and asthma attacks that can lead to death . it is important to identify and eliminate potential allergens from biotechnology-derived products, such as genetically modified crops, vaccines and therapeutics, as well as identifying allergens from sequenced genomes. however, ige-mediated allergenicity is costly and difficult to assess without human data because no single factor has been recognized as a primary identifier for allergenicity . therefore, bioinformatics approaches have been widely used to prescreen novel sequences . the fao/who guideline to assess allergenicity of genetically modified crops uses relaxed sequence similarity criteria. a protein is identified as a potential allergen if it harbors 435 identity with a known allergen over a window of 80 amino acids or has six contiguous amino acids that are also found in a known allergen (fao/). these criteria are implemented in most of the allergen databases and tools . however, the fao/who guideline focuses on sensitivity to prevent potential new allergens entering the food market rather than accurate prediction. therefore, these criteria yield high falsepositive (fp) rates such that their application is limited . the current codex guideline does not recommend the use of the six contiguous amino acid match criterion. many methods for allergen prediction have been developed and are more accurate than the fao/who pure sequence similarity-based approach. the majority of these methods is based on supervised machine learning and differs in ways to extract useful features from amino acid sequences. most of them rely on sequence similarity to allergen-specific peptides or motifs, including stadler and stadler (2003),, weballergen , evaller and sortaller , or to known ige epitopes, such as algpred , or with known allergens and putative non-allergens, such as allerhunter . other methods use physicochemical representation of protein structure, such as appel and the structural database of allergen proteins (sdap) , or amino acid/dipeptide composition, such as algpred . although current methods are significantly more accurate than the fao/who approach, large-scale allergen prediction using these methods is still ineffective and inefficient. on large-scale to whom correspondence should be addressed. data where non-allergens are naturally more abundant, the number of fp often exceeds the number of true positives (tp) that lowers the precision and thus the usefulness of the prediction. moreover, the most accurate methods are relatively slow, as they rely on homology and use sequence alignment to construct feature vectors. additionally, current allergen prediction methods come pretrained in the form of web servers without the capability of large batch submission making large-scale allergen prediction even more difficult. in this article, we propose a new sequence-based allergen prediction method (allerdictor) that can run in linear time of sequence length and is capable of producing high precision over high recall, even on highly skewed data. allerdictor models sequences as text documents in which words are represented as overlapping k-mers generated from the sequences. we found that the k-mer approach is particularly effective in allergen prediction. feature construction is much faster than sequence alignmentbased methods and can be performed in linear time of sequence length. allerdictor was implemented with both naive bayes (nb) and support vector machine (svm) classifiers. svm outperformed nb on more difficult datasets where the level of sequence similarity between allergens and non-allergens is higher. thus, we will mostly discuss results for the svm-based version. the advantages of allerdictor make it practical for large-scale allergen prediction in applications such as whole-genome annotation, biotechnology-derived gene product screening and allergen discovery from large public sequence databases.this article presented an accurate sequence-based allergen protein prediction method (allerdictor) that is much faster than the current most accurate methods while still maintaining comparable or better predictive performance (when compared with allerhunter). the main idea is the use of the k-mer feature representation of sequences, and thus linear prediction time is achieved for both feature construction and prediction using a linear svm model. moreover, the k-mer approach is particularly effective for allergen prediction because supervised machine learning methods such as svm can learn the k-mers shared by many allergens such as the one found in ige epitopes and assign higher weights to these k-mers. the prevalence of asthma has been an increasing human health issue. approximately 235300 million people worldwide were diagnosed with asthma with annual deaths of $250 000 . the majority of asthmatic patients have allergic asthma in which allergic reactions (caused by allergens) exacerbate asthmatic symptoms. to facilitate our understanding and prevention of this disease, it is important to identify potential allergens from massive amounts of protein sequences produced every day via both genome sequencing and sequence synthesis. because experimental allergenicity assessment is still expensive and difficult (especially at large scale), computational allergen identification is an alternative first step. allerdictor addresses the shortcomings of the current allergen prediction tools. with high precision over high recall and fast speed, allerdictor is not only useful for general sequence allergenicity assessment in applications such as screening of novel proteins introduced to genetically modified crops but also particularly suitable for allergen discovery on a large scale in applications such as whole-genome annotation and quick screening of synthesized sequences.  
