structural bioinformatics hitpick: a web server for hit identification and target prediction of chemical screenings motivation: high-throughput phenotypic assays reveal information about the molecules that modulate biological processes, such as a disease phenotype and a signaling pathway. in these assays, the identification of hits along with their molecular targets is critical to understand the chemical activities modulating the biological system. here, we present hitpick, a web server for identification of hits in high-throughput chemical screenings and prediction of their molecular targets. hitpick applies the b-score method for hit identification and a newly developed approach combining 1-nearest-neighbor (1nn) similarity searching and laplacian-modified navenave bayesian target models to predict targets of identified hits. the performance of the hitpick web server is presented and discussed. availability: the server can be accessed atchemical biology experiments are increasingly used to search for chemical modulators of biological processes in cell-based and even whole-organism assays as illustrated by the thousands of phenotypic screenings stored in public repositories . in these assays, the identification of the molecular targets of hits is essential to understand the molecular basis of the chemical activities in the bioassay. recently, drug target prediction methods have been applied to the hits of cells and zebrafish phenotypic screenings showing that computational approaches are suitable tools that facilitate the interpretation of the biological activity of chemicals. although diverse in silico methods have been proposed to identify hits and predict targets for chemicals [reviewed in (, only few of them are available as easy-to-use online tools . to overcome this situation and assist in the analysis and interpretation of chemical phenotypic screens, we introduce hitpick, the first web server for hit identification and target prediction of chemical screenings. hitpick provides the functionality to detect bioassay hits using the b-score method and predicts targets of a chemical of interest using a new integrative approach that combines 1-nearest-neighbor (1nn) similarity searching and a machine-learning method. on cross-validation, the target prediction approach of hitpick performs better than each of the methods alone, achieving a sensitivity of 60.94, a specificity of 99.99 and a precision of 92.11.  
