hitwalker2: visual analytics for precision medicine and beyond the lack of visualization frameworks to guide interpretation and facilitate discovery is a potential bottleneck for precision medicine, systems genetics and other studies. to address this we have developed an interactive, reproducible, web-based prioritization approach that builds on our earlier work. hitwalker2 is highly flexible and can utilize many data types and prioritization methods based upon available data and desired questions, allowing it to be utilized in a diverse range of studies such as cancer, infectious disease and psychiatric disorders. availability and implementation: source code is freely available at https://github.com/biodev/ hitwalker2 and implemented using python/django, neo4j and javascript (d3.js and jquery). we support major open source browsers (e.g. firefox and chromium/chrome).across domains, the need to integrate and prioritize genes or variants is a common themefor therapeutic selection, as well as for mechanistic and perturbation studies. network-context methods can facilitate the ranking of genes and associated genetic variants/mutations. for instance, some serve to rank the variant genes of individual subjects relative to orthogonal biological assay data whereas others can be used for gwas or qtl studies . as a whole, these approaches can integrate different data types and statically report results, but up to now have not focused on making the data accessible with respect to discovery, interpretation and knowledge acquisition. to this end we developed hitwalker2, which is a highly customizable approach to both producing a ranked list of genes utilizing network and external information and exploring these results using graph-centric interactive visualizations. details of the hitwalker2 workflow and framework itself can be found in the supplementary material.hitwalker2 provides a visual, reproducible and flexible framework for prioritization that is applicable to a large number of clinical, translational and basic science use cases. the interactive framework facilitates discovery and guide interpretation in a robust and scalable way. this is timely given the growing recognition for more emphasis on humandata interactions. the hitwalker2 framework is datatype agnostic and can include any type of experiment/assay which at the end suggests an effect on a gene such as variant/mutation data, copy number variation, expression as well as sirna or drug screens.. nras mutant skin cell lines mutations in the tlr3 cascade pathway. the set of cell lines with nras mutations in the exome data was first retrieved and subsetted to only those cell lines derived from skin. drug treatment data were used to identify mapk7 as the most frequently perturbed gene target (genescore). the user can then explore the mutational burden of the pathways containing mapk7, in this example, the toll-like receptor 3 cascade pathway from reactome  
