genetics and population analysis hiv therapy simulator: a graphical user interface for comparing the effectiveness of novel therapy regimens computer simulation models can be useful in exploring the efficacy of hiv therapy regimens in preventing the evolution of drug-resistant viruses. current modeling programs, however, were designed by researchers with expertise in computational biology, limiting their accessibility to those who might lack such a background. we have developed a user-friendly graphical program, hiv therapy simulator (hivsim), that is accessible to non-technical users. the program allows clinicians and researchers to explore the effectiveness of various therapeutic strategies, such as structured treatment interruptions, booster therapies and induction-maintenance therapies. we anticipate that hivsim will be useful for evaluating novel drug-based treatment concepts in clinical research, and as an educational tool. availability: hiv therapy simulator is freely available for mac os and windows atthe current standard for the management of uncomplicated hiv infection is triple-drug therapy. for patients whose therapeutic options have become limited due to the development of drug resistance, more complex regimens consisting of four to six drugs have been attempted . unfortunately, efforts to improve suppressive efficacy can also increase the likelihood of adverse drug reactions and reduce patient adherence . because newly arising resistance mutations may be incorporated into the latently infected cd4+ t cell reservoir, improperly designed primary or salvage regimens may perpetuate a downward spiral of progressively more limited and poorly tolerated therapeutic options . it is therefore critical to select antiviral regimens that are well tolerated and optimally tuned to achieve viral suppression and limit resistance. mathematical models that simulate the dynamics of viral infection are powerful tools for exploring the effects of therapy regimens on virus . current modeling programs, however, were designed for theoretical research use, limiting their accessibility to clinical researchers and others to whom correspondence should be addressed. who might lack a computational background. to bridge this gap, we have developed hiv therapy simulator (hivsim), a graphical program that enables users to easily explore potential outcomes under different therapy strategies.mathematical models can be used to examine the impact of antiretroviral therapies on hiv infection. we have developed an intuitive graphical program, hiv therapy simulator, which allows users without a technical background to compare the efficacy of standard and novel hiv therapy regimens in suppressing viral replication and the emergence of drug-resistant strains. hivsim may be useful as an educational tool for illustrating the strengths and weaknesses of various hiv therapy strategies, as well as teaching evolutionary concepts such genetic drift and epistasis. hivsim may also enable clinical researchers to evaluate the logic of novel treatment strategies such as cycling or recycling pharmacologic agents, and structured treatment interruptions of various lengths and frequencies. this approach may be particularly helpful in planning for and evaluating clinical trials in which it is not possible for ethical reasons to have a true placebo arm. however, we caution against using hivsim to inform individual treatment decisions, as simulation models are necessarily simplified and cannot substitute for the judgment of a trained clinician. potential future directions for hivsim include porting to additional platforms, adding additional biological features and extending the program to other infections such as hepatitis c.  
