homology-driven assembly of non-redundant protein sequence sets (nomess) for mass spectrometry to enable mass spectrometry (ms)-based proteomic studies with poorly characterized organisms, we developed a computational workflow for the homology-driven assembly of a non-redundant reference sequence dataset. in the automated pipeline, translated dna sequences (e.g. ests, rna deep-sequencing data) are aligned to those of a closely related and fully sequenced organism. representative sequences are derived from each cluster and joined, resulting in a non-redundant reference set representing the maximal available amino acid sequence information for each protein. we here applied nomess to assemble a reference database for the widely used model organism xenopus laevis and demonstrate its use in proteomic applications. availability and implementation: nomess is written in c. the source code as well as the executables can be downloaded from http://www.biochem.mpg.de/cox. execution of nomess requires blastp and cd-hit in addition.within the shotgun proteomics workflow, identification and quantification of proteins relies on comprehensive databases, which are used to calculate theoretical peptide spectra that can be searched against the experimentally determined ms/ms spectra. therefore, the database should ideally represent the amino acid sequences of all the expressed proteins of the biological system. this information can be deduced from the sequencing of expressed sequence tags (ests) as well as from rna deep-sequencing experiments. these short reads are assembled into larger contigs using genomic sequence information of the same organism as a scaffold. however, for many organisms an accurately assembled genomic sequence is still lacking, leaving investigators with large and redundant sequence repositories that are impractical and of limited use for proteomic studies. to overcome these limitations, we developed nomess, an automated pipeline for the assembly of available sequence information (e.g. ests, contigs, rnaseq, exome sequencing data etc.) into a non-redundant reference dataset based on homology to a closely related species . as a test organism, we chose xenopus laevis, which represents a widely used model organism for developmental and cell cycle studies. because x.laevis underwent allotetraploidization , sequencing efforts have been focused predominantly on its diploid cousin x.tropicalis, whose complete genome sequence was published in 2010. however, many experiments can only be carried out with x.laevis due to its larger size and the availability of species-specific reagents. using x.tropicalis as a scaffold, nomess was able to consolidate sequence information from various repositories (e.g. xenbase,), uniprot, tigr) into a single non-redundant fasta file containing about 13 500 protein sequences, which in most cases cover the entire open reading frame of the corresponding x.tropicalis homolog.  
