homology of smp domains to the tulip superfamily of lipid-binding proteins provides a structural basis for lipid exchange between er and mitochondria mitochondria must uptake some phospholipids from the endoplasmic reticulum (er) for the biogenesis of their membranes. they convert one of these lipids, phosphatidylserine, to phosphatidylethanolamine, which can be re-exported via the er to all other cellular membranes. the mechanisms underlying these exchanges between er and mitochondria are poorly understood. recently, a complex termed ermitochondria encounter structure (ermes) was shown to be necessary for phospholipid exchange in budding yeast. however, it is unclear whether this complex is merely an inter-organelle tether or also the transporter. ermes consists of four proteins: mdm10, mdm34 (mmm2), mdm12 and mmm1, three of which contain the uncharacterized smp domain common to a number of eukaryotic membrane-associated proteins. here, we show that the smp domain belongs to the tulip superfamily of lipid/hydrophobic ligand-binding domains comprising members of known structure. this relationship suggests that the smp domains of the ermes complex mediate lipid exchange between er andmitochondria are organelles of endosymbiotic origin, found in virtually all eukaryotic organisms. they are the main generators of adenosine triphosphate (atp)the energy currency of the cell. additionally, they participate in a series of other important processes, including apoptosis, amino acid and lipid metabolism, ironsulphur cluster assembly and the regulation of calcium levels within the cell . however, only a small fraction of the biopolymers required to carry out these functions is synthesized in the mitochondria, the rest must be imported from the outside. for example, they only produce some of the phospholipids that make up their membranes, whereas the remainder originates from the endoplasmic reticulum (er). interestingly, mitochondria not only import phospholipids but also export a particular one, phosphatidylethanolamine (ptdetn), to the er, where to whom correspondence should be addressed.it is methylated to form the phospholipid phosphatidylcholine . mitochondria synthesize ptdetn by decarboxylating phosphatidylserine, a phospholipid imported from the er. the mechanisms responsible for the influx and efflux of phospholipids are unclear. unlike most organelles, mitochondria do not exchange phospholipids via vesicular transport. previous studies have suggested that this exchange takes place via ermitochondria associations . more recently,identified a complex, the ermitochondria encounter structure (ermes), that acts as a molecular tether between er and mitochondria in saccharomyces cerevisiae and is required for efficient inter-organelle phospholipid exchange. however, it remained unclear whether ermes merely tethers these organelles together, thereby aligning proteins that carry out the actual transport, or also recruits and transfers phospholipids itself. ermes comprises four proteins : the mitochondrial outer membrane protein mdm10, the putative outer membrane protein mdm34 (mmm2), the er-resident mmm1 and the cytosolic mdm12 . these proteins have also been implicated in other mitochondrial functions, including morphology maintenance and protein import . two of the ermes components, mmm1 and mdm12, were reported to contain the uncharacterized smp domain (synaptotagmin-like, mitochondrial and lipid-binding proteins), which is also present in a number of other eukaryotic membrane-associated proteins . smp domaincontaining proteins have been classified into four broad groups: c2 domain synaptotagmin-like, ph domain-containing ht-008, pdzk8 and mitochondrial protein families . the functions of these proteins are poorly understood.the number of structural solutions available to a polypeptide chain is limited, making protein structures multiply convergent (cheng), while the combinatorial possibilities in sequence space are nearly endless. for this reason, sequence similarity is considered the primary marker of homology. we thus used sensitive sequence comparisons, as implemented in hhpred, to find homologs of the smp domain in a database concatenating several complete genomes with pdb70 (see methods section). the search was seeded with the smp domain from mmm1. the best hits were to other proteins that have previously been described to contain this domain . in addition, we detected a hitherto unknown smp domain in the ermes protein mdm34. this protein has been reported as an  
