databases and ontologies homolonto: generating homology relationships by pairwise alignment of ontologies and application to vertebrate anatomy motivation: the anatomy of model species is described in ontologies, which are used to standardize the annotations of experimental data, such as gene expression patterns. to compare such data between species, we need to establish relations between ontologies describing different species. results: we present a new algorithm, and its implementation in the software homolonto, to create new relationships between anatomical ontologies, based on the homology concept. homolonto uses a supervised ontology alignment approach. several alignments can be merged, forming homology groups. we also present an algorithm to generate relationships between these homology groups. this has been used to build a multi-species ontology, for the database of gene expression evolution bgee. availability: download section of the bgee websitedatabases dedicated to model species rely on the usage of ontologies, for example the zebrafish anatomy for zfin , or the mouse gross anatomy and development . such ontologies of anatomy and development facilitate the organization of functional data pertaining to a species. for example, all gene expression patterns described in zfin are annotated using the zebrafish anatomical ontology. a list of such ontologies is kept on the open biomedical ontologies (obo) website . to pool the experimental data from different model species, we need to encode corresponding information between ontologies which describe different anatomies (e.g. zebrafish and human). for example, we are interested in integrating and comparing gene expression patterns between several species . the most widely accepted criterion to make such comparisons in biology is homology . when we compare two elements, whether or not they are derived from the same ancestral element defines our expectation of similarity to whom correspondence should be addressed. between them, and the interpretation of differences. for example, if a chicken wing is not homologous to a fly wing, we do not expect the same underlying structures, and similarities can be attributed to functional convergence. whereas the chicken wing is homologous (as a limb) to the human arm, thus we do expect the same underlying structures, and differences can be attributed to divergent evolution. there are different definitions of homology , and our algorithm does not in itself impose one on the user. we do recommend choosing an explicit definition and using it consistently throughout the analysis. in practice, hundreds of terms must be compared between ontologies that may differ both in the actual biology modeled (i.e. a fish is not a mammal) and in the representation used. although a purely manual annotation of homologies is possible, it would be too time consuming to be done for all terms between several divergent species.have used a manual approach to find similarities between simplified anatomy ontologies for human and mouse. as both are mammals, they share most structures and terminology. there are also on-going efforts to integrate anatomical ontologies , which are often geared towards the comparison of phenotypes . as far as we know, the question of using homology to align anatomical ontologies has never been explicitly addressed. since the problem is to find correspondences between the concepts of two ontologies, we draw on methods from schema matching, or ontology alignment . as opposed to more generalist solutions, we present a algorithm which is specialized in the alignment of anatomical ontologies. the specificities of these ontologies include high redundancy of terms, and few types of relations. finally, a specific issue is that structures which have the same name and are related to similar concepts may not be homologous. this is the case of the insect eye and the mammalian eye. while some underlying molecular mechanisms are similar, these structures evolved independently and are not considered homologous (discussed in). unsupervised alignment algorithms would misleadingly align such similarities; this is for instance the case for the loom software used on the ncbo portal . in principle, an alignment algorithm should aim at finding the largest number of true positives, while avoiding false positives. in practice, our experience is that the size and structure of anatomical ontologies leads to very large numbers of false positives if a naive approach is taken (i.e. common words). thus, the basic aim of homolonto is to propose in priority to the user the best candidateto date, the use of homolonto, followed by a curation process, has allowed to define 1002 hogs, involving 4459 structures from seven anatomical ontologies: zfa , ehdaa , ev , emapa , ma , xao and fbbt . the algorithm to design relationships amongst the hogs inferred 1411 relations. with the most stringent parameters (ontology coverage = 1, withinontology agreement = 1, inter-ontology agreement = 1), 222 of them were defined automatically as part_of, 15 as is_a, all the others as broader_than. after curation, there are 1179 part_of and 232 is_a relations. the resulting alignments are used in the database bgee . thus an important result is that we have been able to implement in a practical manner anatomical homology relationships. here, we present, in more detail, two alignments : first, zebrafish/xenopus, which illustrates a best case scenario of two consistent ontologies, conforming to the caro standards , with annotations of synonyms and definitions, and low redundancy. on the other hand, xenopus (a frog) and zebrafish (a ray-finned fish) present important differences in anatomy. and second, human/mouse which, despite the similarity in anatomy, page: 1770 17661771the main feature of homolonto is its efficiency in identifying and ranking valid pairs of terms. although most homologies concern terms with the same name, the algorithm is successful both in generating relevant propositions for terms with different names, and in ranking poorly terms with the same name which are not homologs. the algorithm has been shown to perform well in proposing valid pairs of homologous terms for two quite different cases. zebrafish and xenopus have divergent anatomies, from the two major branches of vertebrates (ray-finned fishes and tetrapodes), but are described by ontologies which follow consistent guidelines . the xenopus ontology is also relatively small. conversely, human and mouse have very similar anatomies (both are mammals), but are described by large ontologies with little structured information. despite these differences, the results of homolonto are consistent, proposing almost exclusively valid pairs in a first series of iterations covering approximately half of the smaller ontology: 250 iterations for xenopus/zebrafish, 1400 iterations for human/mouse. the size of some biological ontologies makes the user interface important. the gui of homolonto provides rapid access to information about the terms considered, and includes keyboard shortcuts. the combination of an algorithm which proposes relevant pairs of terms, and of this gui, allows the alignment of large ontologies of anatomy in reasonable time (i.e. weeks). as all propositions have to be manually validated, the expertise of the curator is important to consider. in our experience, most propositions between closely related species represent text-book knowledge, that do not require the curator to be an anatomy expert (although she/he needs to be a biologist). on the other hand, when dealing with complex structures (e.g. substructures of the brain) or distant species (e.g. alignment of insect and vertebrate anatomies), such an expertise might be needed. future development of homolonto should include more relationships than simple homology. for example, homoplasy (analogy in the common sense of the word) may be relevant in cases of functional equivalence, such as the vertebrate and insect eyes. also, it would be of interest to model explicitly serial homology, to improve the management of e.g. somites.  
