structural bioinformatics how significant is a protein structure similarity with tm-score = 0.5? motivation: protein structure similarity is often measured by root mean squared deviation, global distance test score and template modeling score (tm-score). however, the scores themselves cannot provide information on how significant the structural similarity is. also, it lacks a quantitative relation between the scores and conventional fold classifications. this article aims to answer two questions: (i) what is the statistical significance of tm-score? (ii) what is the probability of two proteins having the same fold given a specific tm-score? results: we first made an all-to-all gapless structural match on 6684 non-homologous single-domain proteins in the pdb and found that the tm-scores follow an extreme value distribution. the data allow us to assign each tm-score a p-value that measures the chance of two randomly selected proteins obtaining an equal or higher tm-score. with a tm-score at 0.5, for instance, its p-value is 5.5 10 7 , which means we need to consider at least 1.8 million random protein pairs to acquire a tm-score of no less than 0.5. second, we examine the posterior probability of the same fold proteins from three datasets scop, cath and the consensus of scop and cath. it is found that the posterior probability from different datasets has a similar rapid phase transition around tm-score = 0.5. this finding indicates that tm-score can be used as an approximate but quantitative criterion for protein topology classification, i.e. protein pairs with a tm-score 0.5 are mostly in the same fold while those with a tm-score 0.5 are mainly not in the same fold.protein structure comparison is essential in almost every aspect of modern structural biology, ranging from experimental protein structure determination to computer-based protein folding and structure prediction, from protein topology classification to structure-based protein function annotation and from proteinligand docking to new compound screening and drug design . the most to whom correspondence should be addressed. commonly used means to compare protein structures is to calculate the root mean squared deviation (rmsd) of all the equivalent atom pairs after the optimal superposition of the two structures . however, because all atoms in the structures are equally weighted in the calculation, one of the major drawbacks of rmsd is that it becomes more sensitive to the local structure deviation than to the global topology when the rmsd value is big. for example, the rmsd of two protein structures can be high if the tails or some loops have a different orientation even though the global topology of the core part is the same; this cannot be distinguishable, based on the rmsd value alone, from the case where two structures have completely different topologies. aiming at developing protein topology-sensitive measures,proposed a global distance test score (gdt-score), which counts the number of c pairs which have a distance 1, 2, 4 and 8 after the optimal superposition .proposed maxsub to identify the maximum substructures which have c pairs 3.5 . these measurements were extensively used in the community-wide casp and cafasp experiments for assessing the modeling accuracy of protein structure predictions . however, the distance cutoffs in both gdt and maxsub scores are subjective and may need to be manually tuned for different categories of modeling targets . moreover, similar to rmsd, the magnitude of the gdt and maxsub scores for random structure pairs has a power-law dependence with the protein length , which renders the absolute value of the scores less meaningful. some structural alignment-based scores, e.g. the mammoth score and the dali z-score , have also been often exploited to access the accuracy of protein structure prediction. however, these measurements neglect the alignment accuracy of the structure modeling. for example, a structure model built on a template protein with a wrong alignment will have the same structural alignment scores as the model on the same template but with a correct alignment. these scores also have the drawback that the similarity of related proteins strongly depends on their length . to address these issues, zhang and skolnick recently developed a template modeling score (tm-score) , which counts all residue pairs using the levittgerstein weight and therefore does not need discrete distance cutoffs. since the short distance in the levittgerstein matrix is weighted stronger than the long distance, the tm-score  
