how threshold behaviour affects the use of subgraphs for network comparison motivation: a wealth of proteinprotein interaction (ppi) data has recently become available. these data are organized as ppi networks and an efficient and biologically meaningful method to compare such ppi networks is needed. as a first step, we would like to compare observed networks to established network models, under the aspect of small subgraph counts, as these are conjectured to relate to functional modules in the ppi network. we employ the software tool graphcrunch with the graphlet degree distribution agreement (gdda) score to examine the use of such counts for network comparison. results: our results show that the gdda score has a pronounced dependency on the number of edges and vertices of the networks being considered. this should be taken into account when testing the fit of models. we provide a method for assessing the statistical significance of the fit between random graph models and biological networks based on non-parametric tests. using this method we examine the fit of erdsrnyi (er), er with fixed degree distribution and geometric (3d) models to ppi networks. under these rigorous tests none of these models fit to the ppi networks. the gdda score is not stable in the region of graph density relevant to current ppi networks. we hypothesize that this score instability is due to the networks under consideration having a graph density in the threshold region for the appearance of small subgraphs. this is true for both geometric (3d) and er random graph models. such threshold behaviour may be linked to the robustness and efficiency properties of the ppi networks.recent advances in experimental science and in literature mining techniques have generated a considerable amount of proteinprotein interaction (ppi) data from several organisms. these interactions are often integrated to form networks, which can help put the proteins into their functional and physiological context. a reliable and efficient method for large network comparison would be very useful . such a comparison may yield mechanistic and evolutionary insights, help to identify missing links and even aid network validation for those organisms where experimental data are scarce. a first step is to establish a method for network comparison with well-studied random network models. current ppi networks are unfortunately still very incomplete and rife with noise (von). they tend to have a to whom correspondence should be addressed. large number of false positives and false negatives. these obscure meaningful conclusions and offer challenges to robust methods of analysis . network comparison is also a computationally difficult task because typical ppi networks are relatively large, e.g. saccharomyces cerevisiae already has about 18 440 binary ppis in the dip database. depending on the aspect under which networks are to be compared, short lists of summary statistics are often used. classical summary statistics used include the degree distribution, the mean path length and the clustering coefficient (seefor an overview and many more summary statistics). here, we compare networks based on small subgraphs, since cell biology is thought of as modular; many pathways and feedback loops are inherently seen as detachable modules . while it has been shown that network motifs alone do not determine function in general , there is the possibility of a close connection between subgraphs and biological functionality . our aim is to compare biological networks and random graph models under the aspect of similar subgraph counts. such subgraph counts were introduced bywith the aim of detecting over-represented small subgraphs. they compared counts for connected 34 node subgraphs in real-world networks to those of certain random networks, and called those patterns network motifs; see alsofor a review. counting small connected subgraphs in large ppi networks is computationally demanding. moreover, the number of possible subgraphs of n-nodes increases exponentially with n, e.g. for n = 3 we have two differently connected subgraphs, and 21 for n = 5.disregarded the frequency subjacent to the definition of motifs and counted connected induced subgraphs with 35 nodes, which they call graphlets . a subgraph s of g is said to be induced if it contains all the edges that appear in g over the same subset of nodes. for example, the only induced subgraphs of a triangle are edges. methods have also been developed to count 6-and 7-node graphlets .used a combinatorial colour-coding technique to count up to 10-node non-induced subgraphs, arguing that these are more relevant to compare the incomplete and noisy networks currently available. to combine the distributions that result from these graphlet counts, the so-called relative graphlet frequency (rgf) distance and the graphlet degree distribution agreement (gdda) have been suggested . the rgf distance identifies all subgraphs with 35 nodes in two networks and compares the frequency of their appearance, while the gdda statistic defines node-specific permutation groups, called automorphism orbits, within each of the 29 (25 nodes) possiblepage: i612 i611i617  
