bioimage informatics html5 pivotviewer: high-throughput visualization and querying of image data on the web motivation: visualization and analysis of large numbers of biological images has generated a bottle neck in research. we present html5 pivotviewer, a novel, open source, platform-independent viewer making use of the latest web technologies that allows seamless access to images and associated metadata for each image. this provides a powerful method to allow end users to mine their data.bioimaging and associated informatics are generating unprecedented amounts of data. new sophisticated imaging techniques yield large, heterogeneous, multidimensional datasets that need to be viewed, analysed, annotated, queried and shared . development of automated image analysis methods has been facilitated by various tools such as imagej/fiji using the built-in macro functions, but when there are large amounts of data and associated images, reviewing and analysing the results is burdensome. there are no powerful and intuitive web tools available that allow filtering and sorting of images based on the derived properties of these images. omero provides a comprehensive database for storing and viewing large amounts of images, however, viewing and querying thousands of images using the omero.insight client or omero.web is slow. microsoft live labs pivot has been used in a neuroimaging setting but the silverlight version, although powerful, required a specific plug-in and was not accessible on all platforms and cannot be easily extended. in addition, support for silverlight is being phased out. our goal was to develop an open-source extensible viewer specifically designed using the standard html5 canvas element and javascript technologies. this enables informaticians to create dynamic and interactive visualizations of the results of image analysis or large image datasets, providing a powerful but simple and intuitive front end that works in any modern web browser. it allows users to see their data, filter, sort and identify relationships based on the metadata supplied for each image. because the technology is based on open standards, there is potential to integrate with other html5-based libraries, such as d3 (http://d3js.org/), icanplot for statistical visualization and scribl for multiple region genomic visualization.  
