htt-db: horizontally transferred transposable elements database motivation: horizontal transfer of transposable (htt) elements among eukaryotes was discovered in the mid-1980s. as then, 300 new cases have been described. new findings about htt are revealing the evolutionary impact of this phenomenon on host genomes. in order to provide an up to date, interactive and expandable database for such events, we developed the htt-db database. results: htt-db allows easy access to most of htt cases reported along with rich information about each case. moreover, it allows the user to generate tables and graphs based on searches using transposable elements and/or host species classification and export them in several formats. availability and implementation: this database is freely available on the web at http://lpa.saogab-riel.unipampa.edu.br:8080/httdatabase. htt-db was developed based on java and mysql with all major browsers supported. tools and software packages used are free for personal or non-profit projects. contact:transposable elements (tes) are mobile genes that replicate inside the host genome moving from one genomic location to another. tes are known as genomic parasites, since they do not contribute to host fitness and exploit the hosts molecular machinery for their replication. however, an increasing amount of evidence suggests that tes can also act as evolutionary engine of organism adaptations . once these elements invade a new species, they may be vertically transmitted to the entire progeny through the host gametes . however, due to their repetitive and mobile nature, tes can damage the host genome, through chromosome rearrangements and new insertions, hence being counter selected at the host level . in addition, tes can be lost from host genomes through stochastic loss or genetic drift . all of these processes contribute to the extinction of tes from host genomes. despite that, almost all organism analysed to date have a proportion of its genomes composed by). one hypothesis suggested to explain such contradiction is that tes are capable of invading new genomes through horizontal transfer (ht) then escaping the natural fate of vertical extinction . the horizontal transfer of transposable (htt) elements between reproductively isolated eukaryotic species has been intriguing geneticists and evolutionary biologists since it was first reported in the mid 1980s . several new cases have been reported since then, highlighting the potential impact of invading tes on host genome evolution. such a large amount of data boosted the) due to the ever-increasing number of htt events reported and the impact of such events on the host genomes, we decided to create the htt database, providing an easy way for researchers to browse the data and take knowledge based decision for future research on this topic.  
