human cell structure-driven model construction for predicting protein subcellular location from biological images motivation: the systematic study of subcellular location pattern is very important for fully characterizing the human proteome. nowadays, with the great advances in automated microscopic imaging , accurate bioimage-based classification methods to predict protein subcellular locations are highly desired. all existing models were constructed on the independent parallel hypothesis, where the cellular component classes are positioned independently in a multi-class classification engine. the important structural information of cellular compartments is missed. to deal with this problem for developing more accurate models, we proposed a novel cell structure-driven classifier construction approach (sc-psorter) by employing the prior biological structural information in the learning model. specifically, the structural relationship among the cellular components is reflected by a new codeword matrix under the error correcting output coding framework. then, we construct multiple sc-psorter-based classifiers corresponding to the columns of the error correcting output coding codeword matrix using a multi-kernel support vector machine classification approach. finally, we perform the classifier ensemble by combining those multiple sc-psorter-based classi-fiers via majority voting. results: we evaluate our method on a collection of 1636 immunohistochemistry images from the human protein atlas database. the experimental results show that our method achieves an overall accuracy of 89.0, which is 6.4 higher than the state-of-the-art method. availability and implementation: the dataset and code can be downloaded from https://github. com/shaoweinuaa/.one important task in the research of proteomics is to explore the natural function of proteins in performing and regulating the activities of an organism at cell level . it is widely recognized that the function of a protein is closely associated with its corresponding cellular compartments . proteins can only find their correct interacting molecules at the right place. thus, subcellular location can provide important clues for understanding the function of a protein. with the breakthrough of genome sequencing and bioimaging techniques, traditional timeconsuming and expensive wet-laboratory experimental approaches cannot catch up with the speed of newly known proteins . hence, finding an automatic computational way to determine the subcellular locations of proteins has been becoming a focus in computational biology . from the perspective of machine learning, this task can be transformed, where we first need to figure out a proper feature representation way for encoding the protein data, which then will be fed into a trained machine learning model for label decision. there are two major research categories depending on how the protein data are represented, i.e. one-dimensional amino sequence and two-dimensional image . on one hand, if a protein is represented in amino acid sequence, pseaac , pssm and gene ontology are among the applied sequence-based features. in the second step, various machine learning algorithms have been proposed. for instance, researchers in yoon and lee (2012) adopted a boosting framework to accomplish the classification task, and in, a random label selection method was presented to learn the label correlations from training dataset to guide the classification for multi-label proteins. on the other hand, accompanied with the explosive increments in genomic data, we witnessed great advances in automated microscopic imaging in recent years . because of the intuitive characteristics of images compared with amino acid sequence, bioimage-based protein subcellular distribution pattern analysis has attracted much attention. for example, it is found that image-based analysis can be successfully used to detect protein biomarkers, which will dynamically change their subcellular locations in the cancerous tissues . if proteins are represented with two-dimensional images, e.g. through fluorescent or immunohistochemistry microscopy, the most widely used image features can be grouped into two categories, i.e. global and local features. for global feature, the dna feature is designed to characterize dna distribution in a cell image. since there is high co-occurrence of protein and dna in a protein image, we can infer the relative position of protein according to the dna distribution. besides, haralick feature based on db wavelet is another global feature to describe image texture such as inertia and isotropy, which is demonstrated to be robust to cell rotations and translations . as to local feature, lbp feature is the most frequently applied descriptor to characterize the spatial structure of images involving flat areas, edges and spots. some extensions are also reported.constructed a mixed local feature set by adding two extensive forms of lbp, i.e. ltp and lqp .) applied the surf feature to handle the classification problem in cell images. considering different features will have their own advantages, a common strategy is to fuse multiple types of features. for instance, different features are concatenated as a long vector to perform the subsequent classification task . intuitively, since single type of features cannot reflect all the information of a protein image, fusing multiple types of features together is expected to be a more promising way. for learning algorithms design,applied neural networks to classify four protein types;proposed a probability-based support vector machine (svm) to predict the subcellular location of proteins in human reproductive system. by considering a high ratio of human proteins co-exist at different locations,designed a multi-label classification classifier. other efforts includeused a multiresolution approach, and logistic regression algorithm with latent variables was proposed inalthough much progress has been achieved in designing different statistical classifiers, to the best of our knowledge, none of the existing image-based classifiers takes the biological cell structure information into consideration, which has already been demonstrated to be effective in solving biological sorting problems . the basic hypothesis of existing predictors is to parallelly consider every cellular component class regardless of their organizations in the cell. it is expected that better performance will be achieved when we incorporate the cell nature component organization structure into the model construction. to enable the learned model to incorporate the subcellular component organization structure, we propose a new classifier learning approach by utilizing the error correcting output coding (ecoc) framework . this new approach can decompose the multi-class problem into several binary classification problems according to the prior human cell structural information. the final decision will then be made by combining the results of these binary classifiers. in the new structure-driven learning approach, we first construct a codeword matrix to reflect the biological structure of cellular compartments with ecoc. then, for each binary classifier corresponding to the columns of the ecoc codeword matrix, we use kernel combination method to fuse different types of features rather than the direct combination strategy. finally, we perform the classifier ensemble by combining multiple classifiers via majority voting. the experimental results show that our method performs much better than several state-of-the-art methods, because the proposed approach has incorporated the cell structure prior knowledge into model generation.in this article, we develop and test a novel prediction model, scpsorter, for determining image-based protein subcellular locations. specifically, we first devise a novel codeword matrix by considering the biological structural information under the ecoc framework, and then for each binary classifier corresponding to the columns of the ecoc codeword matrix, we adopt kernel combination method to fuse different types of features. finally, we develop a classifier ensemble by combining multiple sc-psorter-based classifiers via majority voting. in this study, our method has been shown effective in case of each protein corresponding to only one location. however, as a matter of fact, nearly 20 percentage of human proteins co-exist more than two locations , and thus we will design a new method to solve this multi-label-based protein classification problem. also, since different biomarker may provide complementary information for the prediction of protein subcellular location , we will add non-image data (e.g. amino acid sequence) to our image-based predictor for further performance improvement.  
