databases and ontologies human interactome resource and gene set linkage analysis for the functional interpretation of biologically meaningful gene sets motivation: a molecular interaction network can be viewed as a network in which genes with related functions are connected. therefore, at a systems level, connections between individual genes in a molecular interaction network can be used to infer the collective functional linkages between biologically meaningful gene sets. results: we present the human interactome resource and the gene set linkage analysis (gsla) tool for the functional interpretation of biologically meaningful gene sets observed in experiments. gsla determines whether an observed gene set has significant functional linkages to established biological processes. when an observed gene set is not enriched by known biological processes, traditional enrichment-based interpretation methods cannot produce functional insights, but gsla can still evaluate whether those genes work in concert to regulate specific biological processes, thereby suggesting the functional implications of the observed gene set. the quality of human interactome resource and the utility of gsla are illustrated with multiple assessments.a wide range of genome-wide profiling technologies has emerged during the past decade, and these have become a foundation of current biological research . the challenge is no longer obtaining the profiling data; instead, the challenge is the interpretation of molecular profiles, to elucidate biological mechanisms and overcome the curse of spreadsheets . the traditional approach to interpreting a molecular profile is to focus on a handful of the most significantly changed genes. because of the noise inherent in profiling technologies and the poor annotation of many genes, this approach has significant limitations . to better interpret the biological significance of a molecular profile, annotation enrichment-based approaches have been developed. these approaches examine whether members of a gene set defined by an established biological concept (i.e. an annotation term, typically a biological process) tend to be enriched in the list of significantly changed genes or occur toward the top/bottom of the ranked list of all genes . in this manner, these approaches determine whether an established biological concept (and the gene set defined by it) is correlated with the molecular profile. because annotation enrichment-based analyses tend to produce results that are more reproducible and interpretable than individual gene-based analyses , they have quickly become popular . however, these approaches are not always useful, as that whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent . annotation enrichment-based approaches examine whether genes that constitute well-established biological concepts are enriched in a molecular profile. therefore, these approaches essentially map the observed molecular profiles to established biological concepts (i.e. defining what these profiles are), and the researchers are left to interpret the functional implications of these molecular profiles using their knowledge regarding the biology of the mapped concepts. for a truly novel molecular profile that does not have established concepts to describe it, annotation enrichment-based approaches would fail to map to established concepts; consequently, researchers would be unable to appreciate the functional implications of observing such a profile by examining the identity of the profile. however, it is important to understand the functional implications of novel molecular profiles because novel molecular profiles are often the basis for the introduction of new biological concepts that expand our knowledge. to meet this analytical challenge, we developed a tool called gene set linkage analysis (gsla), which detects significant functional linkages between biologically meaningful gene sets, i.e. experimentally observed significantly changed genes and gene sets defined by established biological concepts. functional linkages that relate an observed molecular profile to well-established biological concepts might assist in interpreting the functional implications of the observed molecular profile even in a case in which no established concept can be found to describe (i.e. be enriched in) the observed molecular profile. to identify these collective functional linkages between gene sets, we developed the gsla tool, which evaluates a largely homogenous functional interactome, the human interactome resource (hir). here, homogenous functional interactome means that the functional interactions in the interactome have similar strengths and represent an unbiased sample of the true (complete) functional interactome. in a homogenous functional to whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. interactome, the density of inter-gene-set interactions will be able to indicate the overall strength of the functional linkage between two gene sets. the idea of exploring interaction density for functional inference has been discussed previously . based on the coverage and reliability of hir, we designed a pair of tests that validate both the strength and the biological significance of the observed inter-gene-set interaction density to detect substantial functional linkage at the gene set level. in the following sections, we provide a description of our method for obtaining a largely homogenous functional interactome hir and the details of our gsla approach. the quality of hir and the utility of gsla were evaluated in a series of systematic evaluations and case studies.gsla summarizes functional linkages at the individual gene level to identify functional linkages at the gene set level. therefore, the quality of the reference network has a critical impact on the usefulness of the approach. the reason why gsla produced biologically interesting functional linkages in our assessments is most likely because gsla used an interaction network that has balanced coverage and specificity. for example, assuming that we aim to identify functional linkages between specific biological concepts and, in particular, that we aim to identify functional linkages between two small biological processes, each consisting of 20 genes, if 10 functional interactions between genes in these two processes were good evidence for a biologically interesting gene set interaction, then we would need a reference network that can cover at least 20 of the true interactome to observe at least two inter-gene-set functional interactions. in this case, a false-positive rate of only 5 10 3 false interactions per pair of genes would result in two random false interactions between two 20-gene processes. if hir had a false-positive rate this high, such a signal-to-noise ratio would make it difficult to identify biologically meaningful functional linkages. as detailed in the supplemental material, the interactions in hir were predicted using data before january 10, 2011. using new interactions reported after this date, we estimated that hir covered 22.1 of the physical human interactome with a per-interaction reliability of 41.0. this per-interaction reliability corresponds to a false-positive rate of 5.08 10 4 false protein interactions per pair of genes or 0.2 random false protein interactions between two 20-gene processes. this signal-to-noise ratio was likely to allow the identification of biologically meaningful functional linkages at the gene set level. before this work, several other human interactomes have been developed, e.g. the string database and the humannet . these interactomes were not rigorously assessed for their coverage and reliability using newly reported interactions. typically, they included half a million interactions or more (42.5 10 3 interactions per pair of genes). in contrast, the rate of yeast protein interactions is $1.3 10 3 per pair of genes , and we estimated in this work that the rate of human interactions is $1.5 10 3 per pair of genes (supplemental material). therefore, the false-positive rates in these interactomes are likely high, which might not provide sufficient signal-to-noise ratios for gsla to identify biologically meaningful gene set interactions. for example, if humannet or string was used in the above statin case study, gsla would no longer be able to connect the expression changes in statin-sensitive cells to apoptosis-related biological processes. to further improve our network-powered functional implication interpretation approach, we believe that the bottleneck is the creation of a high-quality network that can provide a sufficient signal-to-noise ratio for downstream approaches to accurately summarize gene level functional interactions into gene set level functional linkages. our approach to building a protein interaction-like functional interactome shows promise: gsla identified biologically meaningful functional linkages in a series of assessments. however, this approach is still limited, primarily because its theoretical basis involves many concepts that are still poorly defined, particularly the strength of a functional interaction. we hope that this work inspires future research to define a rigorous and consistent measurement of the strength of a functional interaction as suggested by multiple types of data, which is likely the key to building accurate functional interactomes and useful network-powered gene set interpretation approaches.  
