bioinformatics discovery note structural bioinformatics human structural proteome-wide characterization of cyclosporine a targets motivation: off-target interactions of a popular immunosuppressant cyclosporine a (csa) with several proteins besides its molecular target, cyclophilin a, are implicated in the activation of signaling pathways that lead to numerous side effects of this drug. results: using structural human proteome and a novel algorithm for inverse ligand binding prediction, ilbind, we determined a comprehensive set of 100+ putative partners of csa. we empirically show that predictive quality of ilbind is better compared with other available predictors for this compound. we linked the putative target proteins, which include many new partners of csa, with cellular functions, ca-nonical pathways and toxicities that are typical for patients who take this drug. we used complementary approaches (molecular docking, molecular dynamics, surface plasmon resonance binding analysis and enzymatic assays) to validate and characterize three novel csa targets: calpain 2, caspase 3 and p38 map kinase 14. the three targets are involved in the apoptotic pathways, are interconnected and are implicated in nephrotoxicity.first identified in 1972, cyclosporine a (csa) was purified from the fungus tolypocladium inflatum . this drug is primarily used an immunosuppressant to prevent rejection in solid organ transplants . the mechanism of action of csa involves binding to its therapeutic target cyclophilin a and forming a complex with calcineurin . cyclophilin a is a peptidylprolylisomerase located in the cytoplasm that is inhibited by binding of csa . peptidylprolylisomerases are involved in the isomerization of proline peptide bonds in oligopeptides and allow accelerated folding of a protein. calcineurin is a calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine/threonine protein phosphatase that is specifically involved in the dephosphorylation of transcription factors involved in signaling events, including nuclear factor of activated t cells (nfat). the binding of csa to cyclophilin and calcineurin prevents the dephosphorylation of nfat, thwarting transit to the nucleus. nfat is critical for initiation of promoters that stimulate the production and activation of t cells; consequently, the immune response is shut down . csa is also used to treat several disease states, including heart failure, psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis. unfortunately, use of csa is associated with severe side effects, including nephrotoxicity, fibrosis, hepatotoxicity and cardiotoxicity, and their mechanistic details remain unclear . csa was shown to interact with many proteins other than its molecular target, cyclophilin a. these off-target interactions could be involved in the activation of signaling pathways that lead to the undesirable symptoms, and their knowledge could be exploited in other disease states. as a few examples, csa-induced nephrotoxicity involves renal tubular dysfunction that is thought to result from a blockade of the mitochondria permeability transition pore component cyclophilin d . csa also causes endoplasmic reticulum (er) stress by inhibiting the er-localized cyclophilin b and indirectly activates other proteins, such as tgf-that is involved in fibrosis . motivated by the ubiquity of the proteincsa interactions, we used inverse ligand binding predictions to comprehensively determine putative partners of csa. this prediction uses structures of a few proteinligand (drug) complexes, in our case, the available csacyclophilin complexes, to predict other targets of csa on the structural human proteome scale. the predictions were generated with the ilbind method that was recently shown to accurately find distant targets (targets that have structurally different folds compared with the proteins that are known to interact with the given compound) for a diverse set of 430 small organic ligands . similar inverse ligand binding-based approaches that used older predictors were used to find novel targets for other compounds, such as comtan , cholesteryl ester transfer protein (cetp) inhibitors and raloxifene . we empirically show that predictive performance of ilbind is better when compared with other available predictors. we assessed selected top-ranked putative partners of csa in the to whom correspondence should be addressed.we performed a large-scale structural human proteome-wide study to find protein off-targets of csa using state-of-the-art computational method, ilbind. we empirically demonstrate that predictions generated by ilbind offer good predictive performance. we compiled a comprehensive list of 100+ putative targets of this drug and then linked these targets with an assortment of cellular functions, canonical pathways and toxicities, which are typical for patients who take csa. we used a complementary arsenal of approaches, including ilbind, molecular dynamics, molecular docking, spr and enzymatic assays to identify and characterize in detail three novel targets of csa. we show that csa likely binds to and may be an exogenous agonist of capn2 and mapk14, and that it also activates casp3 but to a lesser extent. a detailed discussion of the functional roles of these interactions is provided in the supplementary materials. our study may also lead to new discoveries for a wide range of toxic responses to csa for which we found previously unknown putative proteins targets. moreover, our pipeline could be used to provide insights into side effects and mechanisms of action of other small molecule drugs that target proteins.  
