data and text mining hum calculator and hum package for r: easy-to-use software tools for multicategory receiver operating characteristic analysis receiver operating characteristic (roc) analysis is usually applied in bioinformatics to evaluate the abilities of biological markers to differentiate between the presence or absence of a disease. it includes the derivation of the useful scalar performance measure area under the roc curve for binary classification tasks. as real applications often deal with more than two classes, multicategory roc analysis and the corresponding hypervolume under the manifold (hum) measure have become a topic of growing interest. to support researchers in carrying out multicategory roc analysis, we have developed two tools in different programming environments which feature user-friendly, object-oriented and flexible interfaces and enable the user to compute hum values and plot 2d-and 3d-roc curves. availability: the software is freely available from our web sitereceiver operating characteristic (roc) analysis as an alternative to classification accuracy has been used extensively to estimate the discriminative power of classifiers in two-class classification problems . during the last decade several theoretical investigations in the field of multicategory roc analysis have provided different approaches to calculate the hypervolume under the manifold (hum), the equivalent to the area under the roc curve (auc) of binary roc analysis in a multidimensional setting. the special case of 3-class roc analysis is described in , where for each class the two possible misclassifications are treated equally (a so-called one-versus-rest scenario). in the average of all one-versus-rest aucs is proposed as an approximation of the auc. we recently reported a new extension of roc analysis which uses a simple scheme to compare two or more classifiers in their abilities to differentiate among multiple categories . this approach to multicategory roc analysis expresses the discriminatory ability of the classifier as a hum measure, with perfect discrimination corresponding to a hum of 1 and the hum of the null hypothesis to 1/n!, where n corresponds to the number of categories to be separated. several r packages for two-class roc analysis exist , but they do not allow to take into account multiple categories. we here present two software tools that should make multicategory roc analysis available to a broader scientific community.  
