genome analysis hybridspades: an algorithm for hybrid assembly of short and long reads motivation: recent advances in single molecule real-time (smrt) and nanopore sequencing technologies have enabled high-quality assemblies from long and inaccurate reads. however, these approaches require high coverage by long reads and remain expensive. on the other hand, the inexpensive short reads technologies produce accurate but fragmented assemblies. thus, a hybrid approach that assembles long reads (with low coverage) and short reads has a potential to generate high-quality assemblies at reduced cost. results: we describe hybridspades algorithm for assembling short and long reads and benchmark it on a variety of bacterial assembly projects. our results demonstrate that hybridspades generates accurate assemblies (even in projects with relatively low coverage by long reads) thus reducing the overall cost of genome sequencing. we further present the first complete assembly of a genome from single cells using smrt reads. availability and implementation: hybridspades is implemented in c as a part of spades genome assembler and is publicly available atwhile de novo sequencing from long and inaccurate smrt reads results in accurate assemblies , these projects require high coverage of a genome by reads and thus remain expensive. moreover, for oxford nanopore technology (with even higher error rates than in smrt reads), accurate de novo assemblies remain challenging even in high coverage sequencing projects . for example, the highest reported accuracy of assemblies from oxford nanopore reads (99.5) is significantly below the acceptable standards for finished genomes. on the other hand, recently developed hybrid approaches for assembling long (and inaccurate) and short (and accurate) reads proved to be useful in generating high-quality assemblies at a relatively low cost . in some complex applications (e.g. metagenomics and single cell genomics), the hybrid approaches may represent an attractive alternative to de novo assembly for long reads. we describe hybridspadesa hybrid assembly approach that benefits from synergy between accurate short and error-prone long reads. hybridspades uses the same algorithms for both pacific biosciences reads (about 14 error rate) and oxford nanopore reads (an even higher error rate), e.g. recently, hybridspades was applied to studies of bacterial plankton using assembly of illumina and pacific biosciences reads and for analyzing antibiotics resistance using assembly of illumina and oxford nanopore reads .we benchmark hybridspades against other hybrid assembly tools and demonstrate that it enables accurate assemblies even in the case when the number of long reads is relatively small. we further show that hybridspades works well even in the difficult case of single cell genome assembly resulting in the complete circular chromosome assembly of the elusive candidate phylum tm6 that remains uncultivated.  
