hybrid spatial gillespie and particle tracking simulation motivation: cellular signal transduction involves spatialtemporal dynamics and often stochastic effects due to the low particle abundance of some molecular species. others can, however, be of high abundances. such a system can be simulated either with the spatial gillespie/stochastic simulation algorithm (ssa) or brownian/smoluchowski dynamics if space and stochasticity are important. to combine the accuracy of particle-based methods with the superior performance of the ssa, we suggest a hybrid simulation. results: the proposed simulation allows an interactive or automated switching for regions or species of interest in the cell. especially we see an application if for instance receptor clustering at the membrane is modeled in detail and the transport through the cytoplasm is included as well. the results show the increase in performance of the overall simulation, and the limits of the approach if crowding is included. future work will include the development of a gui to improve control of the simulation. availability of implementation: www.bison.ethz.ch/research/spatial_ simulations.existing methods to model the spatialtemporal dynamics in signal transduction can be grouped into (i) partial differential equation (pde) methods ; (ii) spatially resolved markovian population models, often simulated with the ssa/gillespie method or other lattice-based methods and (iii) particle-based methods such as smoldyn , greens function reaction dynamics (gfrd) (van zon and ten) and others . naturally, more detailed methods are computationally much more demanding, which requires careful selection of the right method for the biological problem in focus. note that particle numbers and parameters are very heterogeneous in biological systems: molecule abundances range from 1 (gene) to several thousands of proteins of each class, similarly the size of the molecules and structures ranges from atoms/ions ( 1nm) to molecular complexes (225nm) and further to cellular sub-compartments and cytoskeleton structures (50+nm), whereas chemical interaction rate constants cover several orders of magnitude . hybrid methods can be employed to optimize the use of the computational resources in such a multi-scale environment . to whom correspondence should be addressed.the present article aims at coupling a brownian dynamics particle tracking method with the spatial gillespie method to preserve the stochastic nature of the underlying signaling processes. low-abundance species should for instance be always tracked as individual particles and high abundance species on the gillespie level. similarly subvolumes in focus of the simulation, e.g. receptor clustering on the plasma membrane, should be on the particle level. these two switches both on the species and the simulation volume level have to be accommodated in one simulation accordingly.  
