structural bioinformatics hydropace: understanding and predicting cross-inhibition in serine proteases through hydrophobic patch centroids motivation: proteinprotein interfaces contain important information about molecular recognition. the discovery of conserved patterns is essential for understanding how substrates and inhibitors are bound and for predicting molecular binding. when an inhibitor binds to different enzymes (e.g. dissimilar sequences, structures or mechanisms what we call cross-inhibition), identification of invariants is a difficult task for which traditional methods may fail. results: to clarify how cross-inhibition happens, we model the problem, propose and evaluate a methodology called hydropace to detect conserved patterns. interfaces are modeled as graphs of atomic apolar interactions and hydrophobic patches are computed and summarized by centroids (hp-centroids), and their conservation is detected. despite sequence and structure dissimilarity, our method achieves an appropriate level of abstraction to obtain invariant properties in cross-inhibition. we show examples in which hp-centroids successfully predicted enzymes that could be inhibited by the studied inhibitors according to brenda database.enzyme inhibition occurs when a molecule binds to an enzyme, thus decreasing its activity. inhibitors may be proteic or non-proteic; they can decrease the enzymes ability to bind substrates or can lower the enzymes catalytic activity or a combination of both. inhibition is an important biochemical mechanism that is involved in metabolism regulation. it controls many intra-and extracellular pathways, inflammatory and immunological processes, virus replication and many other biological functions furthermore, once this natural phenomenon is understood, it might be used for biotechnological purposes including the development of drugs, insecticides, pesticides and disinfectants. a particular case is the inhibition of peptidases; on this subject, the merops database is currently one of the most important peptidase to whom correspondence should be addressed. repositories . the merops database groups both proteases and inhibitors hierarchically into families (sequence-related entities) and clans (structure-related entities). a careful merops search highlighted a well-known but intriguing phenomenon: some protease inhibitors lack specificity and involve different 3d structures and catalytic mechanisms. for instance, turkey ovomucoid and englin c act in different serine peptidase clans such as pa(s) (all trypsin-like folds) and sb (/ subtilisinlike folds) and soybean kunitz trypsin inhibitor decays proteolytic activity as much in serine peptidases as in metallopeptidases (which have very different enzymatic mechanisms). we call this lack of specificity cross-inhibition. our main challenge in this article is to create a methodology that helps to understand and predict this phenomenon. proteaseinhibitor recognition and binding are determined by a complex orchestration of interactions and entropic factors that involve the entire proteaseinhibitorsolvent system. fortunately, the experimental binding energetics of many proteaseinhibitor complexes have already been thermodynamically determined. it is known, for example, that the binding of turkey ovomucoid with elastase at 25 @bullet c is characterized by a negative gibbs free energy in which enthalpy change is almost negligible but entropy change is largely positive . furthermore, we spot a clear trend of higher apolar/polar accessible surface area ratio toward interface (supplementary), which is an evidence of the importance of the hydrophobic interactions in proteaseinhibitor complex formation. that said, we particularly focus our attention on the search for conserved hydrophobic interaction patterns. we define these patterns as invariant hydrophobic regions (or patches) that are in contact with the same apolar complementary parts of the inhibitor (supplementary figs 3 and 4). we show (supplementary) a strong linear relationship (pearsons correlation coefficient of 0.98) between the inferred solvation entropy change and the extension of hydrophobic patches, measured in terms of the number of hydrophobic atoms inside them. although there are many biochemical studies that analyze diversity in inhibition processes [e.g. (;, experimental characterization of inhibition is a labor-intensive process. the large amount of possible inhibitors for a given enzyme can make tests costly; hence, in silico methods can contribute to predicting inhibitorenzyme recognition. despite its evident importance, there are few models and algorithms that identify recognition and interaction patterns thatin this section, we present and discuss the results of the case study of serine peptidases (trypsin-like and subtilisin-like) that are cross-inhibited by eglin c and turkey ovomucoid. we also compare the quality of the conserved hp-centroids that are obtained by the different proposed methods.  
