systems biology hypermodules: identifying clinically and phenotypically significant network modules with disease mutations for biomarker discovery correlating disease mutations with clinical and phenotypic information such as drug response or patient survival is an important goal of personalized cancer genomics and a first step in biomarker discovery. hypermodules is a network search algorithm that finds frequently mutated gene modules with significant clinical or phenotypic signatures from biomolecular interaction networks.establishing functional links between genetic variation and human disease is a key goal of cancer genome sequencing and genome-wide association studies . complex diseases like cancer are often driven by infrequent changes in multiple genes in pathways . network analysis helps interpret mutations in systems context and find disease genes, pathways and biomarkers for precision medicine . discovery of modules (subnetworks) in biological networks helps isolate systems with disease-related properties and reduces interactome complexity. a growing number of methods are available for this purpose. a landmark paper combines gene expression signatures with proteinprotein interactions (ppi) to find predictive modules of cancer outcome . the netbag method studies genetic associations and copy number variants to find autism-related modules . hotnet detects frequently mutated pathways in networks . net-cox builds prognostic cancer signatures in network analysis of gene expression data . the reactome fi cytoscape plugin uncovers prognostic gene modules from networks and gene expression data . network-based stratification predicts tumor subtypes from mutations in network regions . such modules maximize a feature of genes such as differential expression, disease mutation frequency or enrichment of interactions. because clinical profiles of patients are increasingly available in cancer genomics efforts such as the the cancer genome atlas (tcga) pan-cancer project , new methods are needed to discover multivariate biomarkers in networks. we recently analyzed cancer mutations in phosphorylation signaling and found that kinasesubstrate networks are informative of patient survival and therapy response . in particular, we found network modules with rare mutations in ovarian cancer patients with improved prognosis. we created the hypermodules method to systematically discover clinically correlated modules from gene and protein networks based on our earlier work on functional subnetwork discovery . here we present the previously unavailable software in open-source java as a command line tool for automated work and a cytoscape app for interactive graphical analysis. type of clinical analysis and columns in data table (survival time or variable such as tumor relapse). survival analysis requires follow-up time and vital status of patients. detected modules are studied further with network visualization, survival curves and data export. we tested hypermodules on protein networks to find survival modules with cancer mutations. we extracted three human ppi networks of variable size from irefweb , and five cancer mutation datasets from the international cancer genome consortium portal version 12 (supplementary). for example, network analysis of 30 000 interactions with 121 liver cancer patients, 686 mutated genes and 10 000 permutations takes 10 min on an 8-core computer with 16 gb ram. hypermodules is thus applicable to a range of networks and mutation datasets.hypermodules is a biological network-mining algorithm that reveals modules of interacting genes with clinically informative disease mutations. diverse biomolecular interaction networks can be analyzed, including ppi networks, gene regulatory networks and curated biological pathways. disease mutations are also broadly defined. although we initially studied cancer point mutations, other types of alterations such as copy number and gene expression changes can be used. hypermodules finds correlations with groups of genes where mutations may be infrequent but the signature strengthens through network integration. such modules are not often directly usable as biomarkers because of small sample size; however, we believe that our approach helps discover genes and pathways as potential multivariate biomarkers for further experiments.  
