a logical model of hiv-1 interactions with the t-cell activation signalling pathway motivation: human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (hiv-1) hijacks host cellular processes to repli-cate within its host. through interactions with host proteins, it perturbs and interrupts signaling pathways that alter key cellular functions. although networks of viralhost interactions have been relatively well characterized, the dynamics of the perturbation process is poorly understood. dynamic models of infection have the potential to provide insights into the hiv-1 host interaction. results: we employed a logical signal flow network to model the dynamic interactions between hiv-1 proteins and key human signal transduction pathways necessary for activation of cd4 t lymphocytes. we integrated viralhost interaction and host signal transduction data into a dynamic logical model comprised of 137 nodes (16 hiv-1 and 121 human proteins) and 336 interactions collected from the hiv-1 human interaction database. the model reproduced expected patterns of t-cell activation, co-stimulation and co-inhibition. after simulations, we identified 26 host cell factors, including mapk1&3, ikkb-ikky-ikka and pka, which contribute to the net activation or inhibition of viral proteins. through in silico knockouts, the model identified a further nine host cell factors, including members of the pi3k signalling pathway that are essential to viral replication. simulation results intersected with the findings of three sirna gene knockout studies and identified potential drug targets. our results demonstrate how viral infection causes the cell to lose control of its signalling system. logical boolean modelling therefore provides a useful approach for analysing the dynamics of hostviral interactions with potential applications for drug discovery.human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (hiv-1) is the pathogenic agent responsible for acquired immune deficiency syndrome. hiv-1 cannot replicate on its own, requiring host cellular machinery to reproduce. the virus accomplishes this by interacting with its host via thousands of highly specific molecular interactions . these interactions constitute a complex network that drives cellular functions to viral-favourable conditions and cause a host response to infection, altering the normal cellular functioning of the host system. the hiv-1, host cell factor interaction network is complicated with numerous direct and indirect interactions involving viralviral factors, viralhost cell factors and hosthost cell factor interactions in the exploited host cellular systems . a primary goal of hiv-1 research is to obtain a detailed and coherent understanding of infection and viral replication. critical to this goal is an understanding of viralhost interactions, the hosts immune response and anti-viral mechanisms that play key roles in combating infection. this network of interactions may provide valuable insights into the development of treatment regimes and the identification of novel drug targets . extensive hiv-1, human protein interaction data have been collated in the hiv-1). computational modelling techniques have been employed to create static hiv-1 interaction networks, but these have not usually considered spatial and temporal aspects. static models provide useful information on basic topological properties of hiv1-host interactions . for instance, vanconstructed an hiv-1-human protein interaction network using hiv-1 host proteinprotein interactions contained in hhid and reported that, depending on the cellular process being perturbed, viral proteins interact both directly and indirectly with hiv dependency factors (hdfs). therefore, studying the hdf network has the potential to improve our understanding of hivhost interactions. however, the cell is in a dynamic state. external and internal signals influence protein interactions and hence cellular functions. as a consequence of these signals, different cellular processes are halted or activated. processes may become active only under certain conditions or in a particular cell type. static networks alone do not account for such complexities. in a dynamic system, the effect of specific signals on its function can be determined. construction of dynamic models of virushost interactions will therefore improve our understanding of the viral hijack of the host cells signal transduction network. signalling pathway networks can explain the dynamic flow of signals between molecules in a cell. these networks not only represent the proteins and interactions involved, but they also show the direction of signal flow. an application of computer modelling techniques to understanding cellular interaction dynamics is the logical boolean model formalism . logical boolean models are qualitative signal flow networks that provide a means to dynamically represent complex networks lacking in kinetic details and quantitative data. they reveal functional dependencies and non-linear relationships between components of the system, represent its dynamic response following from input signals and perturbations and predict end states which the system is likely to reach either as steady states or attractor cycles . the logical model can also be used to determine properties such as dependencies, feedback loops, robustness and sensitivity. logical boolean models find applications in many biological phenomena. for example, they have been used to reproduce knockout and overexpression profiles of mutant mice and to predict that the overexpression of src results in increased endocytosis of egfr in the absence/low amount of the epidermal growth factor in human mammary epithelial cells . of all immune cells, cd4 t lymphocytes are the most important cell type involved in hiv-1 infection. hiv-1 enters into these cells via the interaction of its envelope proteins with the cd4 receptor and cxcr4 or ccr5 co-receptors. besides viral entry, hiv-1s interaction with these receptors can trigger signals that activate multiple signalling pathways stimulating cellular processes within the host cell. in this study, we have computationally analysed signalling pathways essential for t-cell activation through the t-cell receptor complex (tcr), its co-stimulators and its co-inhibitors. since chemokines, apart from inducing chemotaxis, also amplify t-cell activation signals, we have included chemokine signalling pathways. we thus present the first integrated logical model of hiv-1 interactions with t-cell activation pathways. by plotting the interdependencies between host and viral proteins, we identify host proteins that inhibit or activate hiv-1 proteins in these pathways. by simulating loss of functions, i.e. in silico knockouts, we determine putative points for potential drug intervention. we demonstrate that insights into hiv-1 human protein interactions can be obtained by integrating hhid and other biological data into a modelling framework. this approach will be transferable to other pathways.we have used logical models as a novel approach to construct hiv-1 network dynamics, because this technique is efficient in the absence of detailed quantitative information. pathogenic viral infections and cancer have been traced to malfunctioning signalling pathways that induce disrupted cellular responses to signals and produce a diseased state . using logical models, the effect of viral protein interactions on downstream cellular components can be monitored. our dependency results have predicted that hiv-1 interactions with proteins in these signalling pathways reduce the dependence of the host proteins on upstream hcfs in the signalling pathway for their activation or deactivation while ensuring that the pathways remain activated. we suggest that hiv-1 has evolved to disrupt the normal checks and balances that regulate each pathway, thereby favouring processes that enable its replication. the possibility of bypassing a stage in the pathway involving host cells interacting with hiv-1 has also been observed in our model, with pka as an example. the dependency matrix provides a way to analyse the effect of viral interactions on the host system. our model has reproduced experimental viral-host protein interaction effects, and gives an added advantage of permitting comparison of the effect of viral proteins on all host proteins in the pathway with their consequences for other host-host protein interactions. our approach has also predicted global interactions not reported in the hhid (e.g. pak and nck activating vpr). hiv-1 host dependency results have suggested that positive feedback loops exist between interacting pairs: tat-gsk3 and tat-map3k14 (nik) . the feedback loop tat-gsk3 is recorded in hhid and verifies the interaction in the database. not only do dependency matrices predict dependencies, they also predict the influence of viral proteins on host molecules. supplementaryshows the influence of viral proteins on host molecules. one of the host molecules in the influence table, adrbk1, was also identified by sirna gene knockout study by. in the combined dependency and influence table (supplementary), the hiv-1 t-cell dependency made 33 global predictions; two of these 33 are found in hhid. this highlights the predictive power of logical models. dependency matrices also allow us to exclude or include interactions in analysis based on differences due to cell type or stage of infection. with given cell type or infection stage information, dependency matrix results could be used to correct false positives and negatives that are recorded in the hhid. logical steady-state analysis provides a way to simulate the changes in signal transduction cascades due to mutations or external stimuli like drug actions. in our model, under controlled conditions, we discover that viralhost interactions activate proteins in the model that are normally switched off in signal transduction pathways. in addition to the known behaviour that viral invasion of the host cell triggers in the immune system, our results indicate that as a consequence of infection the normal checks and balances in signal transduction are bypassed, facilitating viral infection. the identification of these proteins is important as they represent fixed or immutable targets for antiviral therapeutics. known drug targets among our lss results are mapk1/3 (erk), pka, pdpk1, pi3k and pkcb&d . lss analysis therefore provides an avenue to identify potential drug targets for experimental validation and would be very useful in further in silico pathogenic studies. our results suggest that viralhost interactions do contribute to the activation of more host proteins and hence aid activation of processes downstream of these proteins. it also suggests that the virus does not in any way impede these signals but instead amplifies them. in conclusion, we have demonstrated that insights into hiv-1 human protein interactions can be obtained by integrating direct hhid interactions and other biological data into a logical modelling framework. it is yet unclear how infection dynamics will change in cd4+ t-cell signalling when other pathways are included. therefore, hiv-1 host infection models need to be constructed on a larger scale to encompass all pathways and cell types involved in hiv-1 infection. this modelling framework could also be used to elucidate other signalling pathways to better understand signal flow information and rationally identify potential drug intervention points.  
