data and text mining icma: an integrated cardiac modeling and analysis platform icma, a software framework to create 3d finite element models of the left ventricle from cardiac ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging (mri) data, has been made available as an open-source code. the framework is hardware vendor independent and uses speckle tracking (endocardial border detection) on ultrasound (mri) imaging data in the form of dicom. standard american heart association segment-based strain analysis can be performed using a browser-based interface. the speckle tracking, border detection and model fitting methods are implemented in c using open-source tools. they are wrapped as web services and orchestrated via a jboss-based application server. availability and implementation: the source code for icma is freely available under mpl 1.1 or gpl 2.0 or lgpl 2.1 license at https://github.com/abi-software-laboratory/icma and a standalone virtual machine at http://goo.gl/m4ljkh for download.cardiac echocardiography is a widely used modality to assess wall motion due to its non-invasiveness and comparatively lower setup costs. most ultrasound vendors provide proprietary software to analyze the echocardiogram, for instance, ges echopac and phillipss qlab. the software enables cardiologists to determine clinically relevant parameters such as ejection-fraction, regional wall strain etc. however, these software components are expensive, tied to the vendor hardware and not open-source. clinical reports generated by the software vary across vendors for the same patient data and therefore there is a lack of standardization across the vendors. this makes it difficult to perform multisite, population-based studies where data are collected from hardware developed by a multitude of vendors.we developed a model guided speckle tracking method that tracks left ventricular wall motion in cardiac ultrasound images. the motion data are then used to fit a finite element model (fem) to reconstruct the ventricular geometry. motion information from one or more ultrasound views can be combined to improve the reconstructed geometry. these modules are independent of each other and wall motion data gathered from other modalities like mri can also be used. diagnostic parameters such as regional strain, ejectionfraction, etc. are determined from the model that represents the ventricular geometry. using a browser-based graphical user interface, with a workflow similar to existing software, the user can guide the geometry reconstruction process by choosing the images to be used, providing landmarks at the beginning and end r-wave frames (the framework v c the author 2014. published by oxford university press.  
