identification and removal of ribosomal rna sequences from metatranscriptomes here, we present ribopicker, a robust framework for the rapid, automated identification and removal of ribosomal rna sequences from metatranscriptomic datasets. the results can be exported for subsequent analysis, and the databases used for the web-based version are updated on a regular basis. ribopicker categorizes rrna-like sequences and provides graphical visualizations and tabular outputs of ribosomal coverage, alignment results and taxonomic classifications. availability and implementation: this open-source application was implemented in perl and can be used as stand-alone version or accessed online through a user-friendly web interface. the source code, user help and additional information is available atmetatranscriptomic approaches are drastically improving our understanding of metabolism and gene expression in microbial communities. by investigating all functional mrna transcripts isolated from an environmental sample, metatranscriptomic analyses provide insights into the metabolic pathways important for a community at the time of sampling. although metatranscriptomes are used to investigate metabolic activities, the majority of rna recovered in metatranscriptomic studies is ribosomal rna (rrna), often exceeding 90 of the total reads . even after various treatments prior to sequencing, the observed rrna content decreases only slightly and metatranscriptomes still contain significant amounts of rrna. although rrna-like sequences are occasionally removed from metatranscriptomes, the removal is performed only with a subset of the publicly available rrna sequences. failure to remove all rrna sequences can lead to misclassifications and erroneous conclusions during the downstream analysis. it is estimated that misannotations of rrna as proteins may cause up to 90 false positive matches of rrna-like sequences in metatranscriptomic studies . the potential for false positives arrises to whom correspondence should be addressed. from a failure to completely remove all rrna prior to translating the putative rrna and querying a protein database. the rrna operons in bacteria and archaea are not known to contain expressed protein coding regions that at the same time code for rrna and therefore, annotations of proteins in rrna coding regions should be presumed to be misannotations . metagenomic sequence data generated to asses the metabolic potential of a community will also be affected by false positive matches of rrna sequences when querying a protein database. therefore, transcript analysis should only proceed after it has been verified that all rrna-like sequences have been found and removed from the dataset to allow accurate identification of the transcribed functional content. the high-throughput nature of community sequencing efforts necessitates better tools for the automated preprocessing of sequence datasets. here, we describe an application able to provide graphical guidance and to perform identification, classification and removal of rrna-like sequences on metatranscriptomic data. the application incorporates a modified version of the bwasw program (http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/citmgr?gca =bioinfo;26/5/589), and is publicly available through a user-friendly web interface and as stand-alone version. the web interface allows online analysis using rrna sequences from public databases and provides data export for subsequent analysis.  
