gene expression identification of active transcription factor and mirna regulatory pathways in alzheimer's disease motivation: alzheimers disease (ad) is a severe neurodegenerative disease of the central nervous system that may be caused by perturbation of regulatory pathways rather than the dysfunction of a single gene. however, the pathology of ad has yet to be fully elucidated. results: in this study, we systematically analyzed ad-related mrna and mirna expression profiles as well as curated transcription factor (tf) and mirna regulation to identify active tf and mirna regulatory pathways in ad. by mapping differentially expressed genes and mirnas to the curated tf and mirna regulatory network as active seed nodes, we obtained a potential active subnetwork in ad. next, by using the breadth-first-search technique, potential active regulatory pathways, which are the regulatory cascade of tfs, mirnas and their target genes, were identified. finally, based on the known ad-related genes and mirnas, the hypergeometric test was used to identify active pathways in ad. as a result, nine pathways were found to be significantly activated in ad. a comprehensive literature review revealed that eight out of nine genes and mirnas in these active pathways were associated with ad. in addition, we inferred that the pathway hsa-mir-146a!stat1!myc, which is the source of all nine significantly active pathways, may play an important role in ad progression, which should be further validated by biological experiments. thus, this study provides an effective approach to finding active tf and mirna regulatory pathways in ad and can be easily applied to other complex diseases.in the developed countries, alzheimers disease (ad) is the sixth leading cause of all deaths. deaths attributable to ad have been increasing dramatically, whereas other major causes of death have been decreasing . in addition, ad is one of the most costly diseases for society . however, the molecular mechanism of ad is not fully clear. it is thought that many factors and their interactions contribute to the pathogenesis of ad . thus, advanced research regarding the mechanism of ad is of great importance. with the emergence of molecular networks, such as protein protein interaction networks (ppins) and transcription regulatory networks, many studies initially focus on topological properties when analyzing network organization, architecture or evolution. however, most existing studies are based on ppins and transcription regulatory networks and do not integrate important post-transcriptional regulation. mirna is a type of short non-coding rna that participates in post-transcriptional gene regulation. by binding to target mrnas with partially complementary sequences, it causes translational repression or target degradation . studies have increasingly shown that mirna is closely associated with the onset and development of complex human diseases , such as cancer , diabetes and neurodegenerative disease . with increasing research on ad, many studies have shown that mirnas are important players in the development of ad. for example, wang et al. found that mir107 expression levels decreased significantly, even in patients who were in the earliest stages of pathology.further indicated that mir-107 may cause ad through the regulation of bace1. a recent study byfound that the underexpression of mir-29a affected neurodegenerative processes by enhancing neuronal nav3 expression in ad brains. in addition,characterized a mirna cluster mir-29a/b-1 that was significantly and specifically downregulated in ad patients, and found that the loss of mirna increases bace1 and a expression levels in ad. these findings suggest that aberrant mirna expression is strongly related to ad. in addition, mirna and transcription factor (tf) do not function in isolation.found that the coordinated regulation of tf and mirna may be involved in various biological processes, and the disruption of this coordination may lead to cancer. thus, integrated analysis of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation could provide a comprehensive regulatory map for the etiological study of complex diseases. in recent years, gene expression profiles have been taken into account during network analysis to identify the underlying mechanisms of complex diseases. ruan et al. developed a general to whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. coexpression network-based approach to discovering network modular structures that was effectively applied to the study of the pathological mechanisms underlying lymphoma (presented a method for predicting the activities of curated pathways from the pathway interaction database in glioblastoma multiform and breast cancer by considering gene coordinate expression and the correlation between copy number and gene expression in the same pathway. in addition, much effort has been devoted to identifying the active subnetworks or modules in diseases from large molecular networks. for example,proposed a method for screening a molecular interaction network that contained proteinprotein and proteindna interactions to find active subnetworks. a scoring system was implemented to capture the degree of change in gene expression. a search algorithm based on simulated annealing was used to identify the subnetwork with the highest score. gene expression differences between normal and disease samples were interpreted as the degree of gene activation.exploited the same active concept to find the deregulated subnetwork in the regulatory network of kegg using an integer linear programming approach.extracted the active subnetwork in the network that consists of protein interaction network and gene regulatory network by applying a mixed integer programming model. however, finding the subnetwork or module that is significantly related to a disease state is still challenging. compared with coexpression networks, curated pathways and complex subnetworks, the regulatory pathway, which presents a cascade of regulators and target genes, is easily elucidated and validated by biologists. from disease-related pathways, we may find key factors that are located upstream of the pathway and that participate in multiple pathways. the activation of key factors may be the cause of disease onset. thus, identifying active regulatory pathways is crucial for dissecting the pathology of complex diseases.presented an algorithm for detecting differentially regulated paths (pathways) from a given biological network based on gene set enrichment analysis. however, they did not consider genes whose expression level were not detected by microarray technology and restricted the length of paths (pathways). in this study, we identified active transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulatory pathways in ad based on ad-related mrna and mirna expression profiles as well as mirna and tf regulation. to obtain stable ad signatures [differentially expressed (de) genes], we used a meta-analysis to analyze multiple ad-related gene expression profiles. in addition, a breadthfirst-search (bfs) approach was applied to find potential active tf-mirna regulatory pathways that may contain non-de genes. finally, the significance of all of the potential pathways was evaluated by a hypergeometric test based on known adrelated genes and mirnas. the identified pathway had a simple network structure and an easy interpretation that could feasibly be validated by biological experiments. our study thus provides a novel insight into the causes and mechanisms of ad.the dysregulation of mirnas, a type of key post-transcriptional regulators, has been found in many diseases, such as cancers and ad. in this study, we proposed a novel approach to identify active tf-mirna regulatory pathways by integrating adrelated mrna and mirna expression profiles and transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation. the pathways we identified could help to provide biological insights in ad and could feasibly be validated by biological experiments. we defined the de genes and mirnas as active seed nodes in the curated tf-mirna regulatory network. to incorporate regulators without aberrant expression or expression values, we constructed a potential active subnetwork by connecting the active seed nodes with their immediate neighbors. next, the bfs method was used to find the potential active regulatory pathways. finally, based on the known ad-related genes and mirnas, we used the hypergeometric test to evaluate the significance of the associations between potential active pathways and ad. as a result, we identified nine active tf-mirna regulatory pathways that were significantly related to ad. all of the regulators and target genes in these active pathways had direct literature support, except for prkca. we also found two active pathways that may contribute to the accumulation of a peptides and the formation of amyloid plaques in the brain parenchyma, which are key steps in the pathogenesis of ad. in addition, the pathway hsa-mir-146a!stat1!myc appeared in all nine active pathways and was the source of the cascade regulation. thus, we inferred that the pathway hsa-mir-146a!stat1!myc may have a crucial role in ad progression, which should be further validated by biological experiments. our study provides an effective approach to identifying active tf-mirna regulatory pathways and a novel insight into the pathogenesis and development of ad. however, the regulation between mirna and mrna is complex, as suggested by the mirna sponge model, which is a new type of mirna-mediated post-transcriptional regulation . many studies have suggested that mirna sponges play important roles in the occurrence and development of diseases, such as autoimmune inflammation , innate and adaptive immune responses and spinal motor neuron development . integrating mirna-mediated rnarna interactions is helpful for constructing more comprehensive regulatory networks. our approach is flexible to analyze the integrated networks. with the increase in available mirna expression profiles for ad and the accumulation of validated mirna regulations, our results will become more precise. in addition, the approach was general and could be applied to other complex diseases.  
