identification of c2h2-zf binding preferences from chip-seq data using rcade current methods for motif discovery from chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (chip-seq) data often identify non-targeted transcription factor (tf) motifs, and are even further limited when peak sequences are similar due to common ancestry rather than common binding factors. the latter aspect particularly affects a large number of proteins from the cys 2 his 2 zinc finger (c2h2-zf) class of tfs, as their binding sites are often dominated by endogen-ous retroelements that have highly similar sequences. here, we present recognition code-assisted discovery of regulatory elements (rcade) for motif discovery from c2h2-zf chip-seq data. rcade combines predictions from a dna recognition code of c2h2-zfs with chip-seq data to identify models that represent the genuine dna binding preferences of c2h2-zf proteins. we show that rcade is able to identify generalizable binding models even from peaks that are exclusively located within the repeat regions of the genome, where state-of-the-art motif finding approaches largely fail. availability and implementation: rcade is available as a webserver and also for download atchromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (chip-seq) is the most widely used method for mapping the genomic regions that are associated with transcription factors (tfs) . identification of direct tf binding sites from chip-seq data is an essential step for decoding the molecular mechanisms that underlie the regulatory programs dictated by tfs, and understanding how genetic changes can affect these programs. in the absence of orthogonal information on dna binding preferences of tfs, such as in vitro binding data, achieving this goal primarily depends on inference of a binding model (such as a dna motif) from the chip-seq data. current approaches for motif finding from chip-seq data almost exclusively rely on the assumption that the genomic regions associated with a particular tf have diverse sequences except at the sites that are directly bound by the tf, where the sequences are converged to match the tf binding preference. however, this assumption is violated in many cases, such as when the chip-seq peaks are dominated by binding sites of the interacting partners of the tf of interest, represent targets of multiple cooperative regulatory factors, and/or are enriched for repetitive dna sequences such as endogenous retroelements (eres). binding to eres with similar sequences particularly affects the ability of motif finding approaches for identification of dna binding preferences of the cys 2 his 2 zinc finger (c2h2-zf) class of tfs, which is by far the largest class of tfs in most vertebrates. the c2h2-zf proteins constitute almost half of all human tfs, and almost half of them bind primarily to eres . as a result, the motifs identified from the genomic regions that they v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.  
