alp & falp: c11 libraries for pairwise local alignment e-values motivation: pairwise local alignment is an indispensable tool for molecular biologists. in real time (i.e. in about 1 s), alp (ascending ladder program) calculates the e-values for proteinprotein or dnadna local alignments of random sequences, for arbitrary substitution score matrix, gap costs and letter abundances; and falp (frameshift ascending ladder program) performs a similar task, although more slowly, for frameshifting dna-protein alignments. availability and implementation: to permit other c programmers to implement the computational efficiencies in alp and falp directly within their own programs, c source codes are available in the public domain at http://go.usa.gov/3gtsw under alp and falp, along with the standalone programs alp and falp.finding and aligning similar sequences is arguably the most fundamental task in bioinformatics. the main method for analysing biosequences (novel proteins, ancient dna, environmental metagenomics dna, single-molecule sequencing data, whole genomes, etc.) is to compare them to sequence databases or to each other. it is important to know whether a similarity is significant, i.e. unlikely to occur by chance alone. for gapless alignments, e-value estimation is rapid because of analytic formulas , but for gapped alignment it has traditionally required hours to days to pre-calculate the statistical parameters for arbitrary scoring schemes and letter abundances . many alignment programs therefore limit users to the specific substitution score matrices, gap costs and letter abundances corresponding to the pre-calculations, with adverse consequence to the sensitivity of sequence searches , particularly in applications [e.g. (where the limitations are inappropriate. supplementary table s1 compares blast and other alignment programs (;). blast does not allow scoring schemes usefully tailored to searching for remote protein homology , remote dna homology , at-rich genomes , or bisulphite-converted dna . in particular, because of skewed compositions , blast can yield misleading p-values relevant to the genomes of clinically important pathogens like at-rich malaria or gc-rich tuberculosis. several other alignment programs also allow only a limited set of scoring schemes.  
