identification of cell types from single-cell transcriptomes using a novel clustering method motivation: the recent advance of single-cell technologies has brought new insights into complex biological phenomena. in particular, genome-wide single-cell measurements such as transcrip-tome sequencing enable the characterization of cellular composition as well as functional variation in homogenic cell populations. an important step in the single-cell transcriptome analysis is to group cells that belong to the same cell types based on gene expression patterns. the corresponding computational problem is to cluster a noisy high dimensional dataset with substantially fewer objects (cells) than the number of variables (genes). results: in this article, we describe a novel algorithm named shared nearest neighbor (snn)-cliq that clusters single-cell transcriptomes. snn-cliq utilizes the concept of shared nearest neighbor that shows advantages in handling high-dimensional data. when evaluated on a variety of synthetic and real experimental datasets, snn-cliq outperformed the state-of-the-art methods tested. more importantly , the clustering results of snn-cliq reflect the cell types or origins with high accuracy. availability and implementation: the algorithm is implemented in matlab and python. the source code can be downloaded at http://bioinfo.uncc.edu/snncliq.the recent advance of single-cell measurements has deepened our understanding of the cellular heterogeneity in homogenic populations and the underlying mechanisms (; raser and o). with the rapid adaption of single-cell rna-seq techniques , enormous transcriptome datasets have been generated at single-cell resolution. these datasets present a tremendous opportunity and challenge to the computational biology community for their analysis to reveal new insights into many biological problems, for example, to elucidate cell types in complex tissues. a straightforward approach to this problem would be to partition the cells into well-separated groups via clustering techniques, so that cells (data points) in the same group exhibit similar gene expression levels (attributes). however, the high variability in gene expression levels even between cells of the same type can confound this seemly straightforward clustering approach. in addition, single-cell rna-seq data is generally in tens of thousands dimensions, which can substantially further complicate the clustering problem. in particular, usually only a few out of 1000 genes are significantly differentially expressed in distinct cell types. consequently, when clustering on the whole transcriptome, many genes would be regarded as irrelevant attributes and may even impede the identification of cell types. it has been claimed that for a broad range of data distributions, the conventional similarities (such as euclidean norm or cosine measure) become less reliable as the dimensionality increases . the reason is that all data become sparse in highdimensional space and therefore the similarities measured by these metrics are generally low between objects . accordingly, many clustering methods based on these measures are v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 1974doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv088  
