identification of chemogenomic features from drug–target interaction networks using interpretable classifiers motivation: drug effects are mainly caused by the interactions between drug molecules and their target proteins including primary targets and off-targets. identification of the molecular mechanisms behind overall drugtarget interactions is crucial in the drug design process. results: we develop a classifier-based approach to identify chemogenomic features (the underlying associations between drug chemical substructures and protein domains) that are involved in drugtarget interaction networks. we propose a novel algorithm for extracting informative chemogenomic features by using l 1 regularized classifiers over the tensor product space of possible drugtarget pairs. it is shown that the proposed method can extract a very limited number of chemogenomic features without loosing the performance of predicting drugtarget interactions and the extracted features are biologically meaningful. the extracted substructuredomain association network enables us to suggest ligand chemical fragments specific for each protein domain and ligand core substructures important for a wide range of protein families. availability: softwares are available at the supplemental website. contact: yamanishi@bioreg.kyushu-u.ac.jp supplementary information: datasets and all results are available at http://cbio.ensmp.fr/yyamanishi/l1binary/.drug phenotypic effects are caused by the interactions between drug molecules and their target proteins including their primary targets and off-targets . polypharmacology, the idea that drug phenotypic effects are not due only to its primary target, but rather to its whole spectrum of interactions, tends to become a new paradigm in drug design. it is important to identify the molecular mechanisms behind overall drugtarget interactions or more generally compound protein interactions, leading to many applications at different levels of the drug design process. there is a hypothesis that polypharmacology is strongly involved in both drug chemical substructures and protein functional sites, so there is a strong to whom correspondence should be addressed. incentive to develop new methods to explore the association between drug chemical substructures and protein functional sites in terms of drugtarget interactions. docking or ligandbased approach (e.g. qsar) have been proposed to analyze and predict interactions with respect to a single protein, so these methods cannot be applied to mine ligandprotein pairs across many different proteins. chemogenomics is an emerging research area that attempts to associate the chemical space of possible ligands with the genomic space of possible proteins . following this principle, several statistical methods have been proposed to predict drugtarget or ligand protein interactions on a large scale. . these methods are purely predictive and do not provide any further understanding of molecular mechanisms behind ligandprotein interactions. drugtarget interactions are due to drug chemical substructures and protein functional sites. beyond the ligandprotein interaction prediction problem, a variety of methods have been proposed to investigate the correlation between chemical substructures, biological activities and phenotypic effects . several methods based on binding pockets comparison have been proposed , but they require the knowledge of protein 3d structures, which is not genome-wide available. however, most previous works have been performed from the viewpoint of either chemical substructures or protein functional sites. one of the most challenging issues in recent chemogenomic research is to identify the underlying associations between drug chemical substructures and protein functional sites which are involved in drugtarget interaction networks. recently, a variant of sparse canonical correspondence analysis (scca) has been proposed to extract sets of chemical substructures and protein domains governing drugtarget interactions , but the variation of detectable protein domains is very limited. the use of both graph mining and sequence mining has been proposed to extract drug substructures and protein subsequences which tend to appear in known drugtarget interactions . however, the size of extracted subsequences is very small (e.g. two or three amino acids), which makes biological interpretation difficult, and any prediction framework for new interactions based on the extracted features was not provided. in this article, we develop a classifier-based approach to identify chemogenomic features (the underlying associations between drug chemical substructures and protein domains) which are strongly involved in drugtarget interaction networks. we propose a novel algorithm for extracting informative chemogenomic features by using l 1 regularized classifiers over the tensor product space of possible drugtarget pairs. in the results, we show that the proposed method can extract a very limited number of chemogenomic features without loosing the performance of predicting drugtarget interactions. we underline that the extracted chemogenomic features are biologically meaningful and discuss how the method can help the drug development process. the extracted substructuredomain association network enables us to suggest ligand chemical fragments specific for each protein domain and ligand core substructures important for a wide range of protein families.  
