identification of coupling dna motif pairs on long-range chromatin interactions in human k562 cells motivation: the proteindna interactions between transcription factors (tfs) and transcription factor binding sites (tfbss, also known as dna motifs) are critical activities in gene transcription. the identification of the dna motifs is a vital task for downstream analysis. unfortunately, the long-range coupling information between different dna motifs is still lacking. to fill the void, as the first-of-its-kind study, we have identified the coupling dna motif pairs on long-range chromatin interactions in human. results: the coupling dna motif pairs exhibit substantially higher dnase accessibility than the background sequences. half of the dna motifs involved are matched to the existing motif databases , although nearly all of them are enriched with at least one gene ontology term. their motif instances are also found statistically enriched on the promoter and enhancer regions. especially, we introduce a novel measurement called motif pairing multiplicity which is defined as the number of motifs that are paired with a given motif on chromatin interactions. interestingly, we observe that motif pairing multiplicity is linked to several characteristics such as regulatory region type, motif sequence degeneracy, dnase accessibility and pairing genomic distance. taken into account together, we believe the coupling dna motif pairs identified in this study can shed lights on the gene transcription mechanism under long-range chromatin interactions.as one of the major gene regulation mechanisms, transcription factors (tf) can bind onto regulatory dna elements in human and other eukaryotes. different binding combinations of tfs may result in a gene being expressed in different tissues or at different developmental stages. to fully understand gene regulation, it is essential to identify the transcription factor binding sites (tfbss) . tfbs are relatively short (515 bp) and highly degenerate sequence motifs, which makes their effective identification a computationally challenging task. a number of high-throughput experimental and computational technologies were developed to determine tfbss. databases have been developed to store the tfbs (also known as dna motif) data. additional introduction can be found in supplementary materials. in recent years, thanks to its relatively low costs, next generation sequencing technology is applied to thousands of genomes (abecasis). it creates unprecedented opportunities for understanding dna motifs; for instance, the chip-seq data from the encode consortium has enabled a systematic discovery and characterization of dna motifs in human cell lines . combining chip-seq and selex data, jolma et al. have also characterized the dna-binding specificity landscape of human tfs . on the other hand, the hi-c technology has been developed and applied to reveal the three dimensional shapes of different cell lines by the chromosome conformation capture method . in particular, there is increasing evidence that long-range chromatin interactions are related to gene co-expression as well as proteindna interactions . therefore, it is essential to comprehensively identify the coupling dna motif pairs on those long-range chromatin interactions for understanding gene transcription.the dna motifs on gene regulatory regions are believed to play central roles in gene transcription. in particular, their spatial organization can determine their functional roles in gene transcription. therefore, we have identified thousands of coupling dna motif pairs on the human gene regulatory regions under long-range chromatin interactions. those motif pairs have been characterized at different levels: region type enrichment, existing motif annotation matching, gene ontology enrichment and consistency, motif pairing multiplicity and transitivity, sequence pattern degeneracy, dnase accessibility and pairing genomic distance. different relationships have been found between those attributes. in particular, we observe that motif pairing multiplicity is an important attribute which is correlated to some of the aforementioned attributes. in summary, this study provides a valuable resource for coupling dna motif pairing information in human.in the future, similar coupling dna motif pairs in other cell lines from different species can be identified for comparative studies if the genome segmentation and hi-c data availability issues can be alleviated. the data integration with chia-pet data is another promising direction , although each chia-pet run is limited to the dna motifs of a single dna-binding protein. the dna motif pairing information in this study could be adopted for integrative analysis with the existing chip-seq studies, improving our understandings on proteindna binding. finding the coupling sets of 3 or more dna motifs is another interesting future direction.  
