identification of drug–target interaction from interactome network with 'guilt-by-association' principle and topology features motivation: identifying drugtarget protein interaction is a crucial step in the process of drug research and development. wet-lab experiment are laborious, time-consuming and expensive. hence, there is a strong demand for the development of a novel theoretical method to identify potential interaction between drug and target protein. results: we use all known proteins and drugs to construct a nodes-and edges-weighted biological relevant interactome network. on the basis of the guilt-by-association principle, novel network topology features are proposed to characterize interaction pairs and random forest algorithm is employed to identify potential drugprotein interaction. accuracy of 92.53 derived from the 10-fold cross-validation is about 10 higher than that of the existing method. we identify 2272 potential drugtarget interactions, some of which are associated with diseases, such as torg-winchester syndrome and rhabdomyosarcoma. the proposed method can not only accurately predict the interaction between drug molecule and target protein, but also help disease treatment and drug discovery. contacts:most drugs are a class of small molecule compounds which act by activating or inhibiting the biological activity or function of the specific target proteins. identifying interaction between drug and target can help to not only reduce the time, cost and failure rates for new developing drug , but also decipher the mechanism of drug action and pathomechanism of disease . experimental methods containing affinity chromatography and protein microarray have been widely adopted to identify drugtarget interaction . however, these methods are ineffective in the face of massive biomolecules data. with the completion of the human genome project and development of combinatorial chemistry, abundant biological and chemical data have been generated and deposited in the various database. as of january 2015, the uniprotkb and chembl contain 142 140 human protein entities and 1 638 394 compound entities, respectively. undoubtedly, it is impossible to carry out an exhaustive experiment for detecting all possible interactions between these proteins and compounds, because the pairwise combinations are astronomical. it motivates researchers to develop a theoretical method to not only quickly and accuratelydiscriminate the potential drugtarget interactions, but also guide experimentalists and provide supporting evidence for their experimental results . currently, many studies show that relationship between disease and drug is far more complex than the one gene, one drug, one disease paradigm . since proteins often interact with each other and with other molecules in cells to form an interaction network, network-based researches have emerged as a promising alternative to accelerate the identification of drugtarget interaction . these works generally model the drugtarget interactions as a bipartite graph, in which vertex corresponds to either drug molecule or target protein, edge corresponds to drugtarget interaction. then, various strategies are utilized to mine the bipartite graph and predict potential drugtarget interaction based on the known interaction. in spite of the advances in bipartite graph-based methods, it is a challenge to accurately identify drugtarget interaction. the first reason is that most existing approaches only consider the interaction of drugtarget, and neglect the interaction of proteinprotein and relationship of drugdrug. indeed, target protein usually exerts their function by interacting with other protein rather than working alone at the cellular level . structurally different drugs can bind to the multiple targets and express similar or identical bioactivities. additionally, more than one drug can be synergistically used in the treatment of diseases. the second one is that bipartite graph-based methods do not consider the false positive of proteinprotein interaction. currently, protein protein interaction data mainly comes from the yeast two-hybrid and affinity purification with mass spectrometry. but, the two methods usually suffer from high false positive rate due to the technical limitation. the third one is that drug and protein are only considered as nodes in mathematics, and ignore their biological or chemical properties. in fact, the interaction between drug and target is influenced by many factors, such as volume, shape and charge of drug compound as well as hydrophobicity, polarity and tertiary structure of target protein. the fourth one is that only known targets are utilized to construct the bipartite graph. therefore, they are usually unable to discover the new interaction of drugtarget excluded in the constructed network. the last one is that the information of network topology is not adopted to recognize drugtarget interaction. research of proteinprotein interaction network have shown that target proteins usually have higher degree and betweenness centrality than non-target proteins , implying that network topology information can be utilized to differentiate target proteins from nontarget proteins. in view of these reasons, we develop a novel theoretical computation method to infer drugtarget interaction based on the guiltby-association principle and network topology features. instead of using only the bipartite network of drugtarget interaction, we construct a drugtarget interactome network containing three subnetworks of proteinprotein interaction, drugtarget interaction and drugdrug relationship to grasp the complex interaction relationship between drug and target. each node in the interactome network is weighted by using either protein primary sequence descriptors or drug molecular structure features to characterize their attributes. in the subnetwork of proteinprotein interaction and drugdrug relationship, edge is weighted based on the protein interaction probability score and the number of common target protein, respectively. with the use of the network topology information, we develop a novel network topology feature vector to characterize drugtarget interaction. the underlying assumption is guilt-by-association, in which a target protein is likely to interact with a drug if the majority of proteins neighbors (i.e. they can directly interact with the protein in the subnetwork of proteinprotein interaction) can interact with the drug, vice versa. finally, we employ random forest (rf) algorithm to construct model for identifying potential drug target interaction.effectiveness and performance of the current method is evaluated against various datasets through the 10-fold cross-validation and confirmed by comparing with the existing methods, and the results indicate that our method can accurately predict the interaction between drug molecule and target protein. robustness on the false positive proteinprotein interaction is also confirmed based on a series of constructed protein interaction network and the corresponding drugtarget interaction datasets. success of the developed method can be attributed to three aspects. firstly, using interactome network supplies a comprehensive and system viewpoint to identifyof ligand db06971 and receptor p08253 as well as their interactions (b). the complex model (c) of ligand db00773 and receptor q15788 as well as their interactions (d)potential drugtarget interaction and understand the interaction mechanisms. secondly, integrating drug molecular structure information with target protein sequence information into a unified framework provides further insight for the nature of the interaction between drug and protein. thirdly, resorting the guild-by-association principle opens up a new avenue to develop topology features for characterizing drugtarget interaction pairs in the context of network. the main advantages of the current approach are summarized as follows: (i) compared with the structure-based theoretical methods, our method is not constrained by the 3d structure data of targets; (ii) in contrast to experimental methods, the developed approach only takes a few seconds to identify whether a drug targets a protein at the proteome scale; (iii) the proposed approach is able to identify those drugtarget interaction pairs with low protein sequence similarity and drug structure similarity; (iv) the developed method can aid in the research of drug repositioning and drug promiscuity by recognizing an interaction between a new target protein and a known drug. of course, our approach also has some limitations. for example, it can predict only the binding between proteins and all known drugs because the constructed drugdrug relationship subnetwork only contains the drug molecules from the drugbank. currently, we are trying to expand the subnetwork by adding a variety of small molecule compounds with bioactivity based on the database of bindingdb, chebi and chembldb. this strategy can help to discovery novel lead compounds and drug molecules. besides, the negative drugtarget interaction pair with the same size for positive pairs is used to construct dataset in order to overcome prediction biases for samples with larger size. we carry out 10 test, and the statistical results indicate that the current method is robustness for random sampling of negative samples. in fact, the amount of negative samples is much higher than that of positive ones in nature. it is significance to develop novel machine learning algorithm for overcoming the problem, but it is out of the scope of the current study. in addition, we do not take into account the mode of action of the drug molecule due to the little database now devoted to the collection of data. in future research, we will solve this problem with the accumulation of relevant data. despite possible limitations, we believe that our approach provides a novel avenue to determine drugtarget interaction, helps to fill the existing gap between chemical proteomics and network pharmacology, and has an important impact on the mechanism of action of drugs and targets.  
