systems biology identification of feedback loops in neural networks based on multi-step granger causality motivation: feedback circuits are crucial network motifs, ubiquitously found in many intra-and inter-cellular regulatory networks, and also act as basic building blocks for inducing synchronized bursting behaviors in neural network dynamics. therefore, the system-level identification of feedback circuits using time-series measurements is critical to understand the underlying regulatory mechanism of synchronized bursting behaviors. results: multi-step granger causality method (msgcm) was developed to identify feedback loops embedded in biological networks using time-series experimental measurements. based on multivariate time-series analysis, msgcm used a modified wald test to infer the existence of multi-step granger causality between a pair of network nodes. a significant bi-directional multi-step granger causality between two nodes indicated the existence of a feedback loop. this new identification method resolved the drawback of the previous non-causal impulse response component method which was only applicable to networks containing no co-regulatory forward path. msgcm also significantly improved the ratio of correct identification of feedback loops. in this study, the msgcm was testified using synthetic pulsed neural network models and also in vitro cultured rat neural networks using multi-electrode array. as a result, we found a large number of feedback loops in the in vitro cultured neural networks with apparent synchronized oscillation, indicating a close relationship between synchronized oscillatory bursting behavior and underlying feedback loops. the msgcm is an efficient method to investigate feedback loops embedded in in vitro cultured neural networks. the identified feedback loop motifs are considered as an important design principle responsible for the synchronized bursting behavior in neural networks.feedback circuits are key regulatory motifs in many biological systems. previous studies show that positive feedback loops to whom correspondence should be addressed. determine a variety of cellular processes such as development, cell proliferation, apoptosis and responses to stress , and negative feedback loops contribute to maintaining the homeostasis of biological systems under internal and external interferences . moreover, many functional modules in biological systems are composed of multiple feedback loops. various nonlinear dynamic behaviors of biological systems are generated by combination of positive and negative feedback loops . interlinked fast and slow positive feedback loops can form a dual-time switch which is rapidly inducible and also resistant to noises propagated from the upstream signaling system. coupled direct and indirect positive feedback loops induce robust synchronized bursting behaviors . identifying the existence of an intra-or inter-cellular feedback circuit in biological networks is an important systems biological issue. a variety of network motif search tools such as mfinder , fanmod and mavisto were proposed to find small vertex-induced subgraphs (occurring more frequently than those in random networks) from a network with known topology, but such methods cannot be used to identify hidden feedback loops in a network with unknown topology from timeseries measurements on the other hand, time-series measurements of dynamical responses are now increasingly available [e.g. real-time polymerase chain reaction (pcr) , microarray , immunofluorescence and multi-electrode array (and various types of biological networks can be investigated using such data. so, there is a pressing need to develop an efficient method to identify feedback loops from multi-channel dynamical response data. based on timeseries analysis and system identification theory, several methods have been proposed to tackle this problem. for instance,proposed the likelihood ratio test method (lrtm) based on the minimum phase spectral factor (mpsf) which is a canonical representation of the power spectral density matrix of the joint stochastic process of input and output data. in lrtm, the feedback effect between two-partitioned node sets was investigated with a priori knowledge on the system order and structure. although lrtm can identify a feedback loop between two-partitioned node sets, it cannot identify a feedback loop between two individual nodes in the network.developed a direct coherence method in the frequency domain to detect feedbacks in the centralin this study, we investigated the problem of identifying feedback loops embedded in intra-or inter-cellular biological networks using time-series measurements. based on multivariate time-series analysis, our proposed msgcm can simultaneously analyze all network variates in the process of identifying the feedback loops from complicated biological networks. msgcm can completely decouple the correlations between a pair of examined variates and the remaining variates in the network. this makes msgcm overcome the shortcoming of nircm since co-regulatory forward paths always cause an inputoutput noise correlation. in this regard, msgcm is more advanced than nircm and suitable for complex multivariate systems like biological networks. the application of msgcm and nircm to the same synthetic pulsed neural networks showed that the correct identification ratios of msgcm are always significantly higher than those of nircm. although msgcm can identify feedback loops of multivariate networks more accurately, its computational complexity is higher than nircm. however,the nodes and their corresponding micro-electrodes were numbered according to their locations on the mea. the feedback loops were denoted by bi-directional arrows. for culture 1, 11 feedback loops were found, corresponding to a synchronized oscillatory behavior, while for culture 3, only 4 feedback loops were found, related to a nearly random behavior such complexity issues can be alleviated as high-performance computation devices become more available. in this study, we showed that msgcm can successfully identify feedback loops in synthetic neural network models and in vitro cultured neural networks. we also found that synchronized oscillatory bursting behaviors were closely related to the existence of feedback loops. from this finding, we infer that a feedback loop might be an important network motif for the synchronized oscillatory behavior in pulsed neural networks. in fact, the experiments using in vitro cultured neural networks showed that the adjustment of synaptic connections was highly correlated with the development of neuronal network behaviors characterized by the evolvement of spontaneous electrical activities of the network . an interesting phenomenon was that the visibility of synchronized bursting behaviors was dependent on the developing phase of the tested in vitro neuron cultures. in vitro cultured neural networks showed spontaneous and uncorrelated bursting activities in the beginning, but, after about six divs, they exhibited abruptly a synchronized bursting activity . then a question arises as to what triggered such an emergent property in the cultured neural networks? the feedback identification method proposed in this study provides a very useful tool to infer a network motif responsible for this emergent property. previous studies indicated that developing neurons showed their maximum synchronized activities at the 2nd or 3rd week of the brain development and after that neuronal circuits reached an optimal connectivity by pruning their connections , i.e. undergoing an overall decline in the number of synapses. we can also find such a development trend by tracing the variation of feedback loop abundance in(the number of feedback loops: 11 22 4 for div: 14 18 21). as the networks are considered to be randomly connected, it would be reasonable to presume that the abundance of feedback loops is positively correlated with the whole network connectivity. thus, identifying feedback loops using msgcm can also be validated from this comparison. although we showed in this article the identification of feedback loops in cultured neural networks and investigations into the relationship between the structure of a network and its dynamical behavior, the presented approach can also be applied to studying other biological networks based on time-series measurements using, for example, real-time pcr , immunofluorescence and microarray . if the dynamical response of a biological network can be measured and obtained in the form of multivariate time-series data, msgcm can be used to investigate the underlying causal feedback connections in the network. for instance, recent advances in neural imaging devices have provided enormous time-course data from the brain. examples include macroscopic electroencephalography and magnetoencephalography signals recorded from the scalp, invasive electrocorticography from the cortical surface and mesoscopic local field potential with electrodes inserted deep inside the brain. these data have opened a new era for experimental studies on the detailed wiring structure of a functional neural network . most of the studies to date, however, have dealt with the functional connectivity of a brain using simple correlation or effective connectivity of a local brain region. msgcm enables us to construct a functional feedback network covering the whole brain regions and to further project a brain network to a more precise interaction map compared with previous studies. our method can also be used as a useful tool for examining the functional connectivity anomalies occurring in patients with psychiatric disorders.  
