systems biology identification of functional cnv region networks using a cnv-gene mapping algorithm in a genome-wide scale motivation: identifying functional relation of copy number variation regions (cnvrs) and gene is an essential process in understanding the impact of genotypic variations on phenotype. there have been many related works, but only a few attempts were made to normal populations. results: to analyze the functions of genome-wide cnvrs, we applied a novel correlation measure called correlation based on sample set (css) to paired whole genome tilepath array and messenger rna (mrna) microarray data from 210 hapmap individuals with normal phenotypes and calculated the confident cnvrgene relationships. two cnvr nodes form an edge if they regulate a common set of genes, allowing the construction of a global cnvr network. we performed functional enrichment on the common genes that were trans-regulated from cnvrs clustered together in our cnvr network. as a result, we observed that most of cnvr clusters in our cnvr network were reported to be involved in some biological processes or cellular functions, while most cnvr clusters from randomly constructed cnvr networks showed no evidence of functional enrichment. those results imply that css is capable of finding related cnvrgene pairs and cnvr networks that have functional significance.copy number variation (cnv) is one type of human genomic structural variation and is recognized as a major source of human genetic variability, occupying a larger proportion of the genome than single nucleotide polymorphisms . specially, there have been several studies to find the impact of cnv on gene expression phenotypes. much of the variation in messenger rna (mrna) transcript levels may be compensated for by regulatory networks, but understanding how genetic variants affect gene expression has provided an essential framework and model for elucidating the causes of various types of phenotypic variation including diseases. research investigations on the impact of cnv on phenotypes are generally association studies using various types of gene expression and genotyped data from specific disease samples versus samples with normal phenotypes.proposed an approach to detect variation patterns by integrating gene expression and copy number data from breast cancer samples.found that copy number of cnvr that harbors salivary amylase gene (amy1) is correlated positively with salivary amylase protein level.found cnvgene relationships through analysis on cnv and a set of genes which have similar patterns in breast cancer samples.analyzed the role of cnv in the development of breast cancer in conjunction with genes in the whole genomic area.profiled gastric cancer cell lines and found that 256 differentially expressed genes are located in the recurrent region of gains and losses. these results imply that those genes are important gastric cancer genes. generally, these studies focus on the abnormal copy number variation regions (cnvrs) in specific disease samples. also, many of these focus on cnvs that harbor genes . the global impact of dna copy numbers on the transcriptome has not been studied, especially for people with normal phenotypes . a representative investigation of the impact of cnvs on the phenotypes of normal people in terms of gene expression was made by, who inferred relationships between dna copy numbers and gene expression levels of normal phenotyped 210 hapmap samples, using a linear regression model. however, they focused on the genes that lie in or close to cnvrs (distance to a cnvr 2 mbp). considering that there are many more cnvrs that do not harbor genes,detected only a small portion of the relationships between genotype and phenotype. recent work byaimed to identify the collaborating cnvs that are responsible for hematopoietic tumorigenesis. they first found gains and losses that are commonly detected in the majority of hematopoietic tumor samples. then, they constructed gain or loss networks by functional analysis of the genes that were harbored in gain or loss pairs. cnvrs in the central part of the gain or loss networks harbored the well-studied cancerrelated genes. likeand many other studies, they also focused on cnvrs that harbor genes or gene regulatory regions. however, it is notable that they observed several cnvrs that contributed to the same phenotypic traits by using the concept of a cnvr network.  
