genome analysis identification of human-specific transcript variants induced by dna insertions in the human genome motivation: many genes in the human genome produce a wide variety of transcript variants resulting from alternative exon splicing, differential promoter usage, or altered polyadenylation site utilization that may function differently in human cells. here, we present a bioinformatics method for the systematic identification of human-specific novel transcript variants that might have arisen after the humanchimpanzee divergence. results: the procedure involved collecting genomic insertions that are unique to the human genome when compared with orthologous chimpanzee and rhesus macaque genomic regions, and that are expressed in the transcriptome as exons evidenced by mrnas and/or expressed sequence tags (ests). using this procedure, we identified 112 transcript variants that are specific to humans; 74 were associated with known genes and the remaining transcripts were located in unannotated genomic loci. the original source of inserts was mostly transposable elements including l1, alu, sva, and human endogenous retroviruses (hervs). interestingly, some non-repetitive genomic segments were also involved in the generation of novel transcript variants. insert contributions to the transcripts included promoters, terminal exons and insertions in exons, splice donors and acceptors and complete exon cassettes. comparison of personal genomes revealed that at least seven loci were polymorphic in humans. the exaptation of human-specific genomic inserts as novel transcript variants may have increased human gene versatility or affected gene regulation.the human genome acquired many genetic modifications after the humanchimpanzee divergence, some of which may have played a significant role in the evolution of human traits. the transcription factor foxp2, a gene involved in human speech and language, shows accelerated evolution in humans, and alterations within this gene may have been responsible for changes in the transcription of central nervous system development genes . the har1f non-coding gene, expressed to whom correspondence should be addressed. during cortical development, was shown to have increased the rate of nucleotide sequence substitution in humans . in addition, at least three human protein-coding genes have been shown to originate from ancestrally non-coding dna . interestingly, loss of gene function has also been suggested to play a role in the acquisition of human-specific phenotypes . for example, myh16 and base were inactivated by a frameshift mutation ; krthap1 and serpina13 by a nonsense mutation ; and cmah, moxd2 and s100a15a by an exon deletion . human-specific sequence modifications in cis-regulatory elements that alter gene expression patterns and hence may have driven the developmental evolution of humans have also been identified . insertion of dna fragments into a genome plays an important role in the shaping of the genome, including the insertion of mobile elements such as sines and lines , retroviruses , retrogenes and mitochondrial dnas (hazkani). most inserted dnas accumulate sequence substitutions and are eventually inactivated. however, some integrated genetic elements develop interactions with proximal genes, altering the structure or regulation of the adjacent genes. in many cases the insertion of alu sequences is deleterious due to strong activation of splice sites, which disrupts host gene transcript integrity and leads to many genetic diseases . this type of destructive insertion, a mechanism known as exonor gene-trapping, is eventually removed from the gene pool by strong negative selection. therefore, most alu exons that survive are involved in alternative splicing, allowing a substantial portion of the transcript to encode the original functional proteins . exonized alu elements can evolve to acquire protein-coding potential, increasing protein versatility . the line-1 (l1) retrotransposon intrinsically possesses a polyadenylation signal and promoter activity. l1 elements inserted into introns often break the host gene into two separate transcripts by a mechanism called gene breaking . alu and l1 transposable elements have been found in many human proteincoding genes, implying that they have played important roles in gene evolution . in this study, we developed a bioinformatics method to systematically identify human-specific transcript variants that might  
