systems biology identification of important regressor groups, subgroups and individuals via regularization methods: application to gut microbiome data motivation: gut microbiota can be classified at multiple taxonomy levels. strategies to use changes in microbiota composition to effect health improvements require knowing at which taxonomy level interventions should be aimed. identifying these important levels is difficult, however, because most statistical methods only consider when the microbiota are classified at one taxonomy level, not multiple. results: using l 1 and l 2 regularizations, we developed a new variable selection method that identifies important features at multiple taxonomy levels. the regularization parameters are chosen by a new, data-adaptive, repeated cross-validation approach, which performed well. in simulation studies, our method outperformed competing methods: it more often selected significant variables, and had small false discovery rates and acceptable false-positive rates. applying our method to gut microbiota data, we found which taxonomic levels were most altered by specific interventions or physiological status.with improved culture-independent techniques, a typical study of gut microbiota now involves data from numerous microbes. the microbes are classified at multiple taxonomy levels, namely, phylum, class, order, family, genus and species. each taxonomy level has many subdivisions, and the number of subdivisions increase on progression from phylum to species level. strategies to use changes in microbiota composition to effect health improvements require knowing at which taxonomy level interventions should be aimed. levels to target are those with subdivisions identified as having an impact on the target health outcome. from a biological perspective, only a few subdivisions at each level are believed to play a role in certain health outcomes. identifying the few important subdivisions at each level is difficult, however, because of the increasing number of subdivisions on progression from phylum to species level and because the microbial data are typically based on small sample sizes. thus, a method that overcomes these difficulties and identifies important subdivisions at multiple taxonomy levels is needed. this biological problem corresponds to a variable selection problem where the variables are grouped at multiple levels, and the number of variables (p) far exceeds the sample size (n). we suppose that each level has sparse effects. in the microbiota data, sparse effects mean that only a few subdivisions within a particular taxonomy level actually impact the health phenotypes of interest. for our purposes, we consider the case where variables are divided into groups and subgroups within the groups. our interest, thus, is developing a method that selects important groups (e.g. phyla), subgroups (e.g. families) and individual predictors (e.g. genera). selecting variables clustered into groups and subgroups is challenging. when the variables are divided only into groups (without subgroups), a popular technique is the group lasso , which selects an entire group of variables to be included or excluded from the model. the group lasso, however, has substantial drawbacks. first, the method assumes that the model submatrices for each group are orthonormal. when orthonormality is not satisfied, the group lasso may select an incorrect model . second, the group lasso does not achieve sparsity within each group, which can be useful. for the microbial data, we could design more specific strategies for changing microbiota composition if we knew which particular families (i.e. subgroups) in phyla (i.e. group) impacted health phenotypes of interest. to overcome the deficiencies of the group lasso,recently proposed the sparse-group lasso (sgl). the method imposes no orthonormality requirements on the group model submatrices and achieves sparsity between and within groups through a clever use of themethod for generalized gradient descent. the sgl works well when variables are clustered into groups, but not when they are clustered at more than one levela feature inherent to gut microbiota data. to whom correspondence should be addressed.to accommodate selecting important groups, subgroups and individual predictors, we propose three new algorithms. the first algorithm, the sparse group-subgroup lasso (sgsl), generalizes the work of. it is based on using l 1 and l 2 regularizations in a linear regression model; convex non-linear regression models are discussed in the supplementary material. our two other proposed algorithms use appropriate combinations of already existing variable selection procedures. first, we propose applying the group lasso to the groups followed by sgl applied to the subgroups. second, we propose applying the group lasso to both the groups and subgroups followed by applying the lasso to select among the individual predictors. we demonstrate in a simulation study that our first algorithm outperforms the other two. sgsl is a special case of the tree-structured group lasso , where nodes on the tree represent groups or subgroups of features and leaf nodes represent individual features. the tree-structured group lasso, however, uses a smoothing proximal gradient method to prune the entire tree collectively, whereas our method uses an accelerated generalized gradient descent approach to determine sparsity among groups, then subgroups and then individual features. moreover, we consider a tree without cycles, meaning there is no overlap between groups/subgroups of features; i.e. each individual feature only belongs to one subgroup, and each subgroup only belongs to one group. hence, our problem differs from the overlapping group lasso as in the analysis of breast cancer gene expression data where the interest is finding important pathways among overlapping genes. our problem also differs from a hierarchical variable selection where a feature is subject to selection only after another feature is selected first. we do not impose this requirement. like other lasso-based procedures, sgsl also requires selecting tuning parameters, for which we propose a data-adaptive approach. our approach involves multiple applications of 10-fold cross-validation that we show performs well in selecting the tuning parameters through various simulation studies. therefore, the main contributions from our work include (i) a new variable selection procedure (sgsl), which identifies important groups, subgroups and individual predictors through combined l 1 and l 2 regularizations. (ii) we show that achieving sparsity at multiple levels cannot be achieved through simple combinations of existing lasso approaches. we show that such combinations will select relevant features less often than sgsl or never (section 3). (iii) we provide a data-adaptive cross-validation approach that improves over the traditional cross-validation to select the tuning parameters. (iv) in microbiome data, our method identifies which taxonomic levels were most altered by specific interventions or physiological status. the rest of the article is as follows. section 2 describes sgsl and section 3 evaluates its performance compared with competing methods. in section 4, we describe the microbiota data that motivated this methodology and analyze the data. section 5 concludes the article.we applied the same seven variable selection techniques from the simulation study to the microbial data. we found that our proposed procedure selected the entire family streptococcaceae in the firmicutes phyla to have an effect on expression of mrna for cd68. the family consisted of lactococcus and streptococcus genera. in comparison, sgl and lasso were only able to pick one member from this family (streptococcus), which indicates the inflexibility of these latter two methods in selecting important families (i.e. subgroups). having our method select the streptococcaceae family makes sense, as members of streptococcaceae flourish in nutrient-rich environments, such as an overfed subjects gut (e.g. obese mice). moreover, mice in this study experienced chronic inflammation secondary to obesity and hyperglycemia as evidenced by elevated adipose cd68 arising from macrophage infiltration of adipose tissue . at present, it seems unlikely that simple chronic caloric excess promoted streptococcaceae abundance in the obese mice, as this relationship was not seen in newly obese miceand supplementary. secondary effects appear to play a role as changes in host inflammatory state were previously associated with streptococcaceae family members in hosts with either strongly positive or negative energy balance. intestinal infusion of fecal microbiota from lean donors improved glucose metabolism in obese humans with metabolic syndrome in conjunction with a 30 reduction in the streptococcaceae family member streptococcus bovis in the small intestine . obesity driven type ii diabetes and metabolic syndrome are considered chronic inflammatory states . in recent studies, the streptococcaceae family has been shown to be associated with inflammation of various origins and in an energy independent fashion. first, host physiology can influence the composition of the microbiota. for example, poor glucose control in a cohort of european women was associated with streptococcus sp. c150 . second, microbiota composition can modulate host physiology in a variable way. for example, formula feeding is associated with increased frequency of pediatric intestinal inflammation including necrotizing enterocolitis; in a mouse model formula feeding increased lactococcus at the expense of lactobacillus and altered host gene expression to indicate increased oxidative stress, inflammation and impaired defense capacity . third,showed that microbiota composition determines host health outcome in response to identical dietary shifts; in this case, microbiota from twin pairs discordant for the disease kwashiorkor variably provoke disease depending on the complexity and adequacy of the diet. stability and resilience of intestinal microbial diversity is an active area of research, and it is now recognized that chronic alterations in host environmental exposure (e.g. diet) and physiological state (e.g. obese) can influence intestinal microbiota and likewise microbiota can respond to diet to increase/decrease susceptibility of the host to disease . our results further highlight the need to understand temporal dimension of interventions to improve efficacy. were linked to cd68 expression in adipose tissue of mice with chronic obesity. all other methods could not detect this relationship. in the supplementary material, we analyze a second microbiome dataset, in which only our method and lasso detects an important individual bacterial genus. the data we analyzed were classified into different taxonomies following pyrosequencing, which can result in some genera being more diverse. if consistently sized operational taxa are needed, one could use operational taxonomic unit clustering (the human microbiome project consortium, 2012). still, regardless of the classification, our method is applicable. thus, one could apply our method using the different classifications to gain insight into how microbes impact health-related features. of course, which classification to use depends on the projects overall goal and available resources.  
