identification of metabolic network models from incomplete high-throughput datasets motivation: high-throughput measurement techniques for metabolism and gene expression provide a wealth of information for the identification of metabolic network models. yet, missing observations scattered over the dataset restrict the number of effectively available datapoints and make classical regression techniques inaccurate or inapplicable. thorough exploitation of the data by identification techniques that explicitly cope with missing observations is therefore of major importance. results: we develop a maximum-likelihood approach for the estimation of unknown parameters of metabolic network models that relies on the integration of statistical priors to compensate for the missing data. in the context of the linlog metabolic modeling framework, we implement the identification method by an expectation-maximization (em) algorithm and by a simpler direct numerical optimization method. we evaluate performance of our methods by comparison to existing approaches, and show that our em method provides the best results over a variety of simulated scenarios. we then apply the em algorithm to a real problem, the identification of a model for the escherichia coli central carbon metabolism, based on challenging experimental data from the literature. this leads to promising results and allows us to highlight critical identification issues.to further our understanding of the cellular processes shaping the response of microbial cells to changes in their environment requires the study of the interactions between gene expression and metabolism. in recent years high-throughput datasets comprising simultaneous measurements of metabolism (fluxes, metabolite concentrations) and gene expression (protein and mrna concentrations) have become available . these datasets provide a rich store of information for modeling the dynamics of the biochemical reaction systems underlying cellular processes. in particular, they promise to relieve what is currently a bottleneck for modeling in systems biology, obtaining reliable estimates of parameter values in kinetic models . to whom correspondence should be addressed.notwithstanding these experimental advances, parameter estimation remains a particularly challenging problem, among other things due to incomplete knowledge of the molecular mechanisms, noisy and partial observations, heterogeneous experimental methods and conditions, and the large size of networks . as a consequence, the models may not be identifiable, may not generalize to new situations due to overfitting, and nonlinear rate functions may make them cumbersome to analyze. this has led to the proposal of simplified kinetic modeling frameworks, including linlog kinetics , loglin kinetics , power-law kinetics , and more recently, convenience kinetics . linlog models are a particularly interesting choice for modeling metabolism . simulation studies on the level of both individual enzymatic reactions and metabolic networks have shown that they provide reasonable approximations of classical enzymatic rate laws. moreover, with the help of a recent genome-scale linlog model of yeast metabolism, parametrized using previously-published kinetic models, it has been possible to identify key steps in the network, that is, reactions exerting most control over glucose transport and biomass production . a major advantage of linlog models is that, when measurements of fluxes, enzyme concentrations and metabolite concentrations are available, the parameter estimation problem reduces to multiple linear regression . power-law models, up to a logarithmic transformation, and loglin models also have this convenient property. however, the performance of regression approaches quickly degrades in the presence of missing data, as is often the case in high-throughput datasets due to experimental limitations or instrument failures. in order to deal with this problem, we propose in this article a maximum-likelihood method for the identification of linlog models of metabolism from incomplete datasets. the specific contributions of the paper are 2-fold. on the theoretical side, we develop a method for the optimization of the likelihood based on expectation maximization (em) . the method is constructed for linlog models, but is more generally applicable to other approximate kinetic models whose identification can be formulated as a regression problem. in particular, we derive analytical expressions for the expectation step that are well-suited for numerical maximization. this guarantees the applicability of the approach even when modeling large networks. we show by means of simulation experiments on synthetic data that our approach  
