genetics and population analysis alphampsim: flexible simulation of multi-parent crosses multi-parent crosses of recombinant inbred lines exist in many species for fine-scale analysis of genome structure and marker trait association. these populations encompass a wide range of crossing designs with varying potential. alphampsim is a flexible simulation program that is efficiently designed for comparison of alternative designs for traits with varying genetic architectures and biallelic markers with densities up to full sequence. a large pool of founder haplotypes can be supplied by the user, or generated via integration with external coalescent simulation programs such as macs. from these, diverse founders for multi-parent designs can be generated automatically, and users can compare designs generated from diverse pedigrees. full tracking of identity by descent status of alleles within the pedigree is undertaken, and output files are compatible with commonly available analysis packages in r. availability and implementation: executable versions of alphampsim for mac and linux and a user manual are available atmulti-parent recombinant inbred line (ril) crosses offer the ability to capture a wide range of genetic and phenotypic diversity in a controlled, balanced family structure with increased mapping resolution. their advantages have led to their implementation in several species, including mice , maize , arabidopsis , wheat , rice , barley and oats. developing these populations takes time and is expensive. as differences in design will affect not only the resources required for creation but also the eventual power and resolution, optimization of the design is an important consideration in planning a multi-parent study. simulation is a powerful approach for comparing alternative designs. software packages in r for simulating multi-parent ril crossesqtl and mpmap are available, but have not been designed for simulation of sequence data and application to polygenic traits controlled by large numbers of quantitative trait loci (qtl). in contrast, we have developed alphampsim as a flexible simulation software package for generating dense genotypes in large populations. generated data can be easily linked to standard analysis software to answer questions about design and power of future studies. this versatile software helps meet the urgent need for computationally efficient, flexible and easy-touse tools capable of handling the complexities associated with multi-parent inbred line crosses.we have described a new computer package for the simulation of marker, sequence and trait data from complex multi-parent ril crosses. the program is computationally efficient, flexible and easy to use. it makes the simulation of large datasets feasible for such populations. genomic sequence data, and in particular lowcoverage sequencing data, will be increasingly used in multiparent crosses. the computational efficiency of alphampsim will enable researchers to evaluate the power of alternative low-coverage sequencing strategies in advance of investing in such data.  
