identification of protein complexes from co-immunoprecipitation data motivation: advanced technologies are producing large-scale proteinprotein interaction data at an ever increasing pace. a fundamental challenge in analyzing these data is the inference of protein machineries. previous methods for detecting protein complexes have been mainly based on analyzing binary protein protein interaction data, ignoring the more involved co-complex relations obtained from co-immunoprecipitation experiments. results: here, we devise a novel framework for protein complex detection from co-immunoprecipitation data. the framework aims at identifying sets of preys that significantly co-associate with the same set of baits. in application to an array of datasets from yeast, our method identifies thousands of protein complexes. comparing these complexes to manually curated ones, we show that our method attains very high specificity and sensitivity levels ( 80), outperforming current approaches for protein complex inference. availability: supplementary information and the program are available atprocedures such as yeast two hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation (coip) are routinely employed nowadays to detect new proteinprotein interactions, producing large-scale protein interaction networks for various species. the networks provide a step stone for finding protein complexesthe fundamental units of macromolecular organization . the discovery of protein complexes based on yeast two hybrid data is a challenging task, since a protein complex may share common members with other complexes, and not all members of a certain protein complex directly interact with one another. coip data, however, can be used for finding complexes by itself since co-immunoprecipitation experiments directly test complex co-membership: a bait protein is tagged and a purification of its complex co-members (prey proteins) is made followed by mass spectrometry. to whom correspondence should be addressed.surprisingly, most methods for detecting protein complexes are based on treating protein interaction data as binary, i.e. interactions are between pairs of proteins only. this is commonly done by translating non-binary coip associations, of a bait to the set of preys obtained by tagging it, into binary interactions using the spoke model , where a purification is translated into a set of pairwise interactions between the bait and each of the precipitated preys. one of the most commonly used algorithms for this task is the molecular complex detection (mcode) algorithm by bader and hogue (2003). mcode detects densely connected components of the protein network. it is based on weighing vertices by the density of their local neighborhoods. starting from a high weight vertex, a local expansion is done in a greedy fashion. another common clustering algorithm is the markov clustering algorithm (mcl) . mcl simulates random walks on the protein interactions network. random walks are performed iteratively; after sufficiently many iterations, the probability that a walk that starts in a dense area of the graph will end in the same dense area is high. in order to magnify this effect, mcl applies, after each walk, an inflation step that separates high probability connections from low probability ones. eventually, the process converges and a cluster structure of the graph is formed. mcl was shown to outperform other clustering algorithms for protein complex detection . recently,presented a new clustering method based on markov random fields (mrf). mrf applies a statistical model that assumes that the membership of each protein in a given cluster is only dependent on the membership status of its neighbors. finally,presented an unsupervised approach to find protein complexes that uses a bootstrapping mechanism to derive reliability scores for interactions between proteins. the resulting weighted network is then clustered using mcl. the only unsupervised approach we are aware of that uses coip data directly is that of. this approach is called local modeling and is probabilistic in nature. it relies on building a directed network of baitprey relationships and searching for subnetworks in which all protein pairs that were tested for a bait prey relation are connected. such fully connected subnetworks are shown to correspond well to protein complexes. supervised methods for identifying protein complexes have also been developed.defined a socio-affinity scoring system that measures the log ratio of the number of times two proteins are seen together in coip purifications, relative to what would be expected from their frequency in the dataset. these scores are used for clustering the proteins employing various clustering algorithms and parameters. result sets that exhibit poor correspondence to manually curated complexes are discarded. complex cores are identified as those stable parts of complexes that are not affected by the clustering algorithms/parameters.devised another scoring system for protein pairs, which combines the evidence in each purification for baitprey and preyprey relationships. they applied hierarchical clustering to these scores to produce putative complexes.used the scoring system together with the mcl algorithm to produce complex predictions. another scoring system was used byin combination with the mcl algorithm to derive protein complexes. another scoring scheme was developed by, who used a maximum clique finding algorithm to derive complex predictions. in this article, we propose a novel method for inferring protein complexes from coip data, which we call codec (complex detection from coimmunoprecipitation data). we represent the data using a bipartite graph, where one set of vertices corresponds to the prey proteins, and the other one corresponds to the bait proteins. edges connect a bait to its associated preys. ideally, protein complexes should be manifested as fully connected bipartite subgraphs of this graph, as also argued in. in practice, experimental noise results in false positive and false negative associations in the coip data. in addition, for proteins that occur both as baits and preys in the data, we expect that if the bait (prey) instance is included in a complex, also its corresponding prey (bait) instance will be part of the complex. thus, a complex is expected to appear as a dense bipartite subgraph such that every participating protein has both its bait and prey instances present. to identify those dense balanced bipartite subgraphs of the bait prey graph, we adapted the samba biclustering algorithm . we applied codec to three datasets from three large-scale experiments in yeast , identifying thousands of protein complexes. we evaluated codec and compared it to extant approaches by using a collection of manually curated complexes from the mips and go databases. first, we compared codec to the three clustering approaches: mcode, mcl and mrf. we show that codec outperforms these approaches on two large-scale datasets, attaining higher values of specificity and sensitivity. we did not include a comparison to the bootstrap method ofas the software was not readily available. second, we show that codec can be useful even when supervised approaches are applicable, comparing it to two representative supervised approaches: those of. remarkably, codec outperforms these approaches as well, even though they use curated information in the protein complex identification process. finally, we show that codec compares favorably to the local modeling approach , and at the same time it is much more scalable, allowing the analysis of much larger datasets.we have provided a novel algorithm for identifying protein complexes from co-immunoprecipitation data, which is based on reformulating the problem as that of finding heavy subgraphs in a bipartite graph. we have shown that our approach, which uses non-binary co-complex information, is superior to clustering methods that dissect binary proteinprotein interaction data. our algorithm was also shown to outperform existing approaches for inferring protein complexes from coip data. all complex predictions made by codec can be found at http://www.cs.tau.ac.il/roded/codec/main.html. an interesting open challenge is to combine yeast two-hybrid data into the inference process. such a combined approach is expected to become increasingly important as proteinprotein interaction databases continue to grow in size and species coverage.  
