identification of structural features in chemicals associated with cancer drug response: a systematic data-driven analysis motivation: analysis of relationships of drug structure to biological response is key to understanding off-target and unexpected drug effects , and for developing hypotheses on how to tailor drug therapies. new methods are required for integrated analyses of a large number of chemical features of drugs against the corresponding genome-wide responses of multiple cell models. results: in this article, we present the first comprehensive multi-set analysis on how the chemical structure of drugs impacts on genome-wide gene expression across several cancer cell lines [connectivity map (cmap) database]. the task is formulated as searching for drug response components across multiple cancers to reveal shared effects of drugs and the chemical features that may be responsible. the components can be computed with an extension of a recent approach called group factor analysis. we identify 11 components that link the structural descriptors of drugs with specific gene expression responses observed in the three cell lines and identify structural groups that may be responsible for the responses. our method quantitatively outperforms the limited earlier methods on cmap and identifies both the previously reported associations and several interesting novel findings, by taking into account multiple cell lines and advanced 3d structural descriptors. the novel observations include: previously unknown similarities in the effects induced by 15-delta prostaglandin j2 and hsp90 inhibitors, which are linked to the 3d descriptors of the drugs; and the induction by simvastatin of leukemia-specific response, resembling the effects of corticosteroids. availability and implementation: source code implementing the method is available at:modeling and understanding the diverse spectrum of cellular responses to drugs is one of the biggest challenges in chemical systems biology. some of the responses can be predicted for targeted drugs, which have been designed to bind to a specific protein that triggers the biological response. the binding of a drug to a target largely depends on the structural correspondence of the drug molecule and the binding cavity of the target molecule, which can be modeled in principle, given ample computational resources. off-target effects are harder to predict. they are dependent on the cell types, individual genetic characteristics and cellular states making the spectrum of responses overwhelmingly diverse. the less well-known the drugs mechanism of action and the characteristics of the disease, the harder the prediction from first principles becomes. the most feasible way to approach this challenge in an unbiased way, which does not require prior knowledge of all on-and off-target interactions of drugs, is to collect systematic measurements across different drugs, cell types and diseases and search for response patterns correlating with the characteristics of the drugs. the patterns found can be used as evidence for hypotheses on underlying action mechanisms or directly in predicting the responses. the connectivity map (cmap;) described the basis for a data-driven study of drugeffect relationships at a genome-wide level. cmap hosts the largest collection of highdimensional gene expression profiles derived from treatment of three different human cancer cell lines with over one thousand drugs. the cmap data have been used in a multitude of studies revealing new biological links between drugs and between drugs and diseases. genome-wide gene expression responses from the cmap have been used to discover clusters of drugs having similar mechanisms of action, resulting in novel findings, such as effects of heat shock protein (hsp) inhibitors and identification of modulators of autophagy . the cmap data have also been successfully used in large-scale integrative studies including the analysis of regulation of drug targets , herg annotations to predict novel inhibitors and drugs interactions with protein networks . quantitative structureactivity relationship analysis (qsar;) is a widely adopted approach to studying drug responses. traditionally, univariate biological activities are predicted using a range of methods, including classical regression, support vector machines and random forests. the key challenge when moving from traditional qsar to system-wide analysis of chemical effects is how to relate structural features to genome-wide cellular responses. integration of chemical structures with genome-wide responses has become a major research direction in chemical systems biology (, which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com other datasets. atias and sharan (2011) modeled linkage between structural descriptors of drugs and their side effects using canonical correlation analysis (cca;). structures have also been used with genomic datasets to predict toxicity and complex adverse drug reactions (combined structures of drugs and mutation information of cell lines to predict drug cytotoxicity in a series of cell lines. relationships between structural descriptors of drugs and their gene expression profiles have also been studied.examined similarities between chemical structures and molecular targets of 37 drugs that were clustered based on their bioactivity profiles.classified 127 rat liver samples to toxic versus non-toxic responses, based on combined drug-induced expression profiles and chemical descriptors, and identified chemical substructures and genes that were responsible for liver toxicity. in a broader setting, when the goal is to find dependencies between two data sources (chemical structures and genomic responses), correlation-type approaches match the goal directly, and have the additional advantage that a predefined classification is not required.generalized structure response analysis to multivariate correlations with cca on the cmap. because of the limitations of classical cca, their study was restricted to a limited set of descriptors (76) and genomic summaries (1321 genesets), and did not attempt to take into account the data from the three separate cell lines. in this article, we present the first probabilistic approach to the problem of integrated analysis of effects of chemical structures across genome-wide responses in multiple model systems. we extend the earlier work in three major ways: (i) instead of using only two data sources (as in classical cca), we used the recent bayesian group factor analysis (gfa) method that generalizes the analysis to multiple sources, here three cell lines and two sets of chemical descriptors. (ii) our bayesian treatment with feature-level priors enabled us to cope better with the uncertainties in the high-dimensional data. (iii) we included a more informative set of 3d chemical descriptors to complement the widely used 2d fingerprints, which are recognized to only explain limited aspects of drugs (schneider, 2010). our goal was to uncover the big picture of relationships between chemical structure parameters and genome-wide responses, in a data-driven fashion . the data came from cmap, 11 327 gene expression responses in three cell lines (hl60-blood cancer/leukemia, mcf7-breast cancer and pc3-prostate cancer;) and from two sets of chemical descriptors: 780 3d pentacle descriptors of drugs and 2769 functionally relevant structural fragments (fcfp4;) as 2d fingerprints of the drugs. these five datasets consist of samples from the 682 drug treatments, coupled by the detailed drug identity. we analyzed the statistical relationships between the datasets by decomposing them into a set of interpretable components. our method quantitatively outperformed previous studies, thereby validating the approach. we rediscovered findings reported earlier as well as identified novel drug associations and detailed structure response relationships.  
