genome analysis identification of trans-acting sirnas and their regulatory cascades in grapevine motivation: transacting small interfering rnas (ta-sirnas) play an essential role in the regulation of plant gene expression, but relevant reports are still limited. bioinformatic analyses indicate that many ta-sirna-producing loci (tass) are present in plants, implying the existence of as yet undiscovered ta-sirnas and related regulatory pathways. to expand our knowledge of these plant gene regulators, we applied high-throughput computational and experimental methods to grapevine (vitis vinifera l.). results: based on bioinformatic predictions, we identified 49 tass from 49 055 small rna clusters. using rna degradome analysis, we experimentally validated 5 tass, 22 ta-sirnas and 37 ta-sirna targets. the cis-activities of ta-sirnas were also confirmed, which suggested an inactive mechanism of tas transcription, and a produced mechanism of multiple forms of small rna from same tas. we examined the conservation of newly identified ta-sirna regulatory cascades and found that while the cascade related to vvitas3 was conserved, cascades related to vvitas7, vvitas8, vvitas9 and vvitas10 were grape-specific. these results broaden the known scope of ta-sirna regulation.endogenous small rnas (srnas) are key post-transcriptional and transcriptional regulators of plant gene expression . they include micrornas (mirnas), heterochromatic small interfering rnas (sirnas), natural antisense sirnas (nat-sirnas) and trans-acting sirnas (ta-sirnas). mirnas, which are generated by cleavage of single-stranded rna stemloop structures by dicer-like 1, play pivotal roles in development and stress responses by targeting the transcripts of transcription factors that mediate the transition between various developmental stages or regulate responses to biotic or abiotic stimulation . heterochromatic sirnas trigger dna methylation and histone modification and are involved in heterochromatin formation of repeated genomic regions and the silencing of other genomic regions, including the control of transposon movement (katiyar). natsirnas consist of two types of sirnas, i.e. 24-nt nat-sirnas and 21-nt nat-sirnas . they are processed from pairs of natural cis-antisense transcripts by cleavage with dicer-like 2 and dicer-like 1, respectively. the 24-nt natsirnas play a key role in environmental stress response and in reproduction by targeting unlinked transcripts and guiding cleavage to produce 21-nt nat-sirnas whose function is still not clear. ta-sirnas play an essential role in regulating plant development, metabolism and responses to biotic and abiotic stresses . they are produced from ta-sirna-producing locus (tas) genes . a single-stranded rna is first transcribed from a ta-sirna locus and then cleaved by a phase initiator (a mirna or, in some cases, a ta-sirna). rdr6-dependent conversion of the resulting fragments into double-stranded rna, and subsequent cleavage by dicer-like 4, generates 21-nt phased ta-sirnas. these ta-sirnas then combine with argonaute proteins to form risc complexes and cleave targeted mrnas. to date, several mirna ! ta-sirna ! target gene cleavage cascades have been identified as important elements of gene regulatory networks. tas1a, tas1b, tas1c and tas2 are four ta-sirna loci targeted by mir173, and their 3 0-cleavage products produce six ta-sirnas that target at least two transcripts with unknown function and two transcripts of pentatricopeptide repeat genes . tas3, another ta-sirna locus, is targeted by mirna390. its 5 0-cleavage product produces two ta-sirnas that target transcripts of auxin response factors arf2, arf3 and arf4. a fourth ta-sirna locus, tas4, is targeted by mirna828 . its 3 0-cleavage product produces one ta-sirna that targets three myb gene transcripts. another tas gene, also named tas4, has been identified in moss. it produces ta-sirnas targeting a putative transcription factor similar to ap2/erebp, suggesting a function in plant development . it has been reported that ta-sirnas from tas3 regulate leaf morphology and juvenile-to-adult vegetative-stage transitions; ta-sirnas from tas4 regulate anthocyanin, flavonoid and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and may also be involved in regulating leaf senescence . computational analysis indicates that many tass to whom correspondence should be addressed. exist in plants , suggesting they may play a more fundamental role than currently understood. identification and functional characterization of new ta-sirnas is therefore needed. grapevine (vitis vinifera l.) is a model system for studying fruit-bearing agricultural crop plants and, based on fruit consumption and wine yield, is also of great economic importance . many biological processes, including those involving ta-sirnas generated from tas3 and tas4, greatly affect grape yield and quality. the identification of grapevine ta-sirnas and their regulatory cascades is thus important in efforts to improve grape cultivation and breeding. recent publication of deep sequencing srna libraries, especially a degradome library generated from cleaved mrna fragments, opens the door to the identification of grapevine ta-sirnas and their cascades .because ta-sirnas are produced from tas, tas is rich in srnas. we can thus detect tass by initially searching for regions containing large numbers of srnas. using this approach, a total of 49 055 regions were found. when we counted the number of clusters overlapped to annotated gene loci and exons, we found 21-nt clusters were much more likely than 24-nt clusters to overlap with exon regions. in previous studies, 24-nt clusters have been implicated in transcriptional silencing of transposon regions . the grapevine 24-nt clusters are seldom associated with gene regions, consistent with their roles in directing silencing of transposable elements. to further identify tas loci from regions highly enriched in srna, we used an improved computational method that allows for a variable tas length to predict 49 tass. compared with current strategies, the greatest advantage of this improved method is that it is not constrained by a 231-bp length requirement. this leads to a more accurate tas prediction, especially for the tass with lengths longer or shorter than 231 bp, and has great potential for future use. however, because the cleavage position cannot be offset, it still requires further refinement. to further validate the cleavage sites of tass targeted by phase initiators, an rna degradome was used. because the rna degradome was obtained from high-throughput sequencing of products generated from 5 0-race, the degradome can be used to analyze rna degradation patterns, which is helpful for identifying sirna cleavage sites on mrna or other cdnas. here, we used it to determine phase initiator and ta-sirna cleavage sites. we identified 22 ta-sirnas, produced from vvitass and 37 trans-cleaved targeted transcripts. the 37 targeted transcripts are involved in a wide range of biological processes, including basic biochemical responses, such as those related to ribosomal protein s1, dna damage checkpoint protein rad24, calciumtransporting atpase, fatty acid desaturase, cellulose synthase catalytic subunit, and chloroplast ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase, and development-related processes, such as those related to senescence-associated protein din1, auxin response factor and pathogenic defense-related protein lrpk. this wide range of biological processes suggests that ta-sirnas play a basic regulatory role in plant growth and development. ta-sirnas have been suggested as key factors conferring regulatory diversity in members of multi-gene families involved in auxin signaling . because leucine-rich receptor-like kinases make up one of the largest protein families, with at least 223 members in arabidopsis thaliana, and are targeted by ta-sirnas, they may also be diversely regulated. any regulatory control by mirnas and other endogenous srnas is still speculative, however. the function of ta-sirna trans-activity has been the focus of many studies, but its cis-activity has rarely been investigated. in a previous study , a function was suggested but the phase initiator was not found. the cis-cleavage position was validated and a secondary sirna product was detected, but that was not enough information to establish the cis-acting role of ta-sirna. in this study, we have confirmed the cis-activity of ta-sirnas by identifying the phase initiator, as well as detecting degradation products and determining the site of cis-cleavage. the biological role of ta-sirna regulatory cascades is also interesting. in this article, we have reported five cascades and evaluated their expressions in various species and tissues. the results indicate that the vvitas3-related cascade is conserved across species; in contrast, the cascades related to vvitas7, vvitas8, vvitas9 and vvitas10 are found only in grape. there is a previously known cascade in which ath-mir828 targets ath-tas4 and triggers production of ta-sirnas, which in turn regulate a group of myb genes. the cascade related to vvitas7 is similar to the ath-mir28-associated cascade in that the phase initiators for both cascades belong to the mir828 family; however, the tass, ta-sirnas produced and ta-sirnas targets, are all different, indicating the discovery of a new mir828 regulation pathway. previous studies have posited that viral sirnas are abundant in plants, which implies that ta-sirna cascades may be involved in antiviral defense. our findings further suggest that different ta-sirna cascades might be specific to different species or tissues, opening the possibility that some might have specialized developmental regulatory roles. surprisingly, vvimirna390 has lower copy numbers in certain arabidopsis mutant libraries than in wild-type libraries (supplementary). we believe that this situation stems primarily from the different experimental conditions used to produce the various libraries. for example, srna libraries with lower numbers of vvimirna390 copies, including gsm154336, gsm154361,gsm154362,gsm154363,gsm154364,gsm154365,gsm154367, gsm154368, gsm154370, gsm154372, gsm154374, gsm154375 and gsm154376, were all published by the james lab at oregon state university, while the wild-type library, gsm149079, was published by the hannon lab at cold spring harbor laboratory. for those arabidopsis libraries created under identical experimental conditions, the reason that few or no vvimir390 reads were detected is simply due to sequencing depth. libraries from the james lab were generated using 454 sequencing in 2007; the total number of reads in several of those libraries is below 20 000, which may be too low to detect vvimir390. when we compared the number of sequenced ta-sirnas from vvitas3, vvitas7, vvitas8, vvitas9 and vvitas10, we found very different numbers in each library from grapevine. this is very surprising as they are all produced from the same tas transcript simultaneously. this suggests a potentially different degradation rate. in addition, among ta-sirnas from the same position, such as vvitas7-tasirp1a, vvitas7-tasirp1b, vvitas7-tasirp1c and vvitas7-tasirp1d that all originate from vvitas7 3d1, the 21-nt ta-sirna is always the most abundant. this suggests that the degradation rate of 21-nt ta-sirna is very slow, and that its function might be more long lasting than its other analogs. further studies are required to obtain better insights into the mechanism of ta-sirna degradation.  
