bioinformatics discovery note systems biology identification of transcription factors for drug-associated gene modules and biomedical implications motivation: one of the major findings in systems biomedicine is that both pathogenesis of diseases and drug mode of action have a module basis. however, the transcription factors (tfs) regulating the modules remain largely unknown. results: in this study, by using biclustering approach fabia (factor analysis for bicluster acquisition), we generate 49 modules for gene expression profiles on 1309 agent treatments. these modules are of biological relevance in terms of functional enrichment, drugdrug interactions and 3d proximity in chromatins. by using the information of drug targets (some of which are tfs) and biological regulation, the links between 28 modules and 12 specific tfs, such as estrogen receptors (ers), nuclear factor-like 2 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, can be established. some of the links are supported by 3d transcriptional regulation data [derived from chia-pet (chromatin interaction analysis using paired-end tags) experiments] and drug mode of action as well. the relationships between modules and tfs provide new clues to interpreting biological regulation mechanisms, in particular, the lipid metabolism regulation by er. in addition, the links between natural products (e.g. polyphe-nols) and their associated modules and tfs are helpful to elucidate their polypharmacological effects in terms of activating specific tfs, such as ers, nuclear factor-like 2 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma. contact:roughly speaking, the basis of drug actions is to rectify the gene expression disorders in diseases through modulating transcription factors (tfs). therefore, the gene expression-based analysis has played a critical role in drug repurposing, lead discovery and elucidating drug mode of action (moa) . the pathogenesis of diseases has been revealed to be tightly connected to gene modules, which are sets of functionally related genes . intriguingly, by using biclustering approach iterative signature algorithm, iskar et al. revealed that drug moa also has a module basis, which provided new insights into drug actions and perturbed cellular systems as well . however, the tfs regulating the drugassociated transcriptional modules remain unknown, which prevents us to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the drug-induced transcriptional variations. considering the fact that some drug targets are tfs, such as estrogen receptors (ers), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (ppars) and glucocorticoid receptor (gr), we attempt to use the target information of the module-coupled drugs to identify the tfs. because biclustering approach fabia (factor analysis for bicluster acquisition) has shown good performance in recognizing biclusters and has been successfully used in identifying gene expression modules and associated tfs , we used fabia to generate drug-induced transcriptional modules. in this study, a module is not only a set of genes but also connected with a set of agents. so, a module is exactly a bicluster. then, we demonstrate that the modules are of biological relevance in terms of functional enrichment, drug drug interactions (ddis) and 3d proximity in chromatins. finally, we identify the tfs for some modules, by which we reveal some new mechanisms for metabolic regulation, and elucidate the polypharmacological mechanisms for some natural products.  
