identifying cancer-related micrornas based on gene expression data downloaded from motivation: micrornas (mirnas) are short non-coding rnas that play important roles in post-transcriptional regulations as well as other important biological processes. recently, accumulating evidences indicate that mirnas are extensively involved in cancer. however, it is a big challenge to identify which mirnas are related to which cancer considering the complex processes involved in tumors, where one mirna may target hundreds or even thousands of genes and one gene may regulate multiple mirnas. despite integrative analysis of matched gene and mirna expression data can help identify cancer-associated mirnas, such kind of data is not commonly available. on the other hand, there are huge amount of gene expression data that are publicly accessible. it will significantly improve the efficiency of characterizing mirnas function in cancer if we can identify cancer mirnas directly from gene expression data. results: we present a novel computational framework to identify the cancer-related mirnas based solely on gene expression profiles without requiring either mirna expression data or the matched gene and mirna expression data. the results on multiple cancer datasets show that our proposed method can effectively identify cancer-related mirnas with higher precision compared with other popular approaches. furthermore, some of our novel predictions are validated by both differentially expressed mirnas and evidences from literature, implying the predictive power of our proposed method. in addition, we construct a cancer-mirna-pathway network, which can help explain how mirnas are involved in cancer. availability and implementation: the r code and data files for the proposed method are available at http://comp-sysbio.org/mir_path/ contact:micrornas (mirnas), as a large family of gene regulators, are involved in various biological processes, such as cell development, proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. specifically, they play essential roles in regulating gene expression after the genes are transcribed , where one mirna may regulate multiple genes. it was found that more than 60 of the protein-coding genes in the human genome are regulated by mirnas . recently, accumulating evidences indicate that mirnas are extensively involved in tumors . for example, mir-21 induces invasion and metastatic capacity in colon cancer cells , while mir-155 up-regulation and let7a down-regulation can be used to predict the poor survival of lung cancer patients . in past years, the impact of mirnas on various cancers has been determined with biological experiments . unfortunately, it is not feasible to detect all cancer associated mirnas in laboratory due to the wide range of biological processes in which the mirnas are involved. recently, some computational approaches have been proposed to predict cancer-related mirnas. for example, some statistical approaches have been developed to detect mirnas that are differentially expressed between normal and cancer samples, and these mirnas are considered related to cancer . however, few of such mirna expression data are available compared with the huge amount of mrna expression data. furthermore, the noise inherited in the expression data makes it difficult to detect the differentially expressed mirnas. considering mirnas are regulators of gene expression and the aberrant gene expression might lead to certain diseases, some methods have been proposed to predict disease associated mirnas based on the mirna-gene regulation circuit . nevertheless, it is not an easy task to identify cancer-related mirnas based only on their target genes as one mirna may target hundreds or even thousands of genes while one gene may be regulated by multiple mirnas . furthermore, the lack of context information about the regulation also degrades the performance of such approaches. under the circumstances, some approaches have been developed to predict cancer-related mirnas by investigating matched gene and mirna expression data as well as mirna-gene regulations . unfortunately, the scarceness of matched mirna and gene expression datasets limits the application of this promising approach. compared with the rare matched mirna and gene expression profiles, there are huge amounts of gene expression datasets that are publicly available, which can help provide insights into the functions of their mirna regulators. in this work, we propose a novel computational framework to identify cancer associated mirnas based on their target genes expression profiles as well as the mirna-gene regulation network. assuming that mirnas are related to cancers by regulating the pathways in which their target genes are located, we respectively identify sets of mirnas related to lung cancer, colon cancer, breast cancer and gastric cancer. the benchmarking results demonstrate the higher accuracy of our proposed method compared with other popular approaches. the high consistency between results on independent distinct datasets for the same cancer type implies the robustness of our proposed method. furthermore, part of our novel predictions are validated by both differentially expressed mirnas and evidences from literature, indicating the predictive power of our approach. in addition, the pathways regulated by cancer associated mirnas can help explain how mirnas are involved in the initiation and progression of cancers.the mirnas are important regulators of gene expression, the aberrant function of which may drive the initiation and development of cancer. however, the global cancer-mirna association landscape is far from complete and only a limited number of mirnas are knownrelated to cancer, which hinders the development of mirna based therapeutic strategies. in literature, some computational approaches have been developed to detect which mirnas are associated with which cancer types, among which the integrative analysis of matched gene and mirna expression profiles is one of the most promising approaches. unfortunately, the matched gene and mirna expression profiles are not commonly available. on the other hand, the large amount of public accessible gene expression data provides an alternative way to investigate the associations between mirnas and cancers. in general, the existing approaches utilize the predicted mirna-gene regulations to identify the cancer associated mirnas, whereas the noise in the regulation relationship as well as the lack of the context information about these regulations may degrade the performance of those promising approaches. in this work, we developed a novel framework to identify cancer mirnas based on gene expression data and mirna-gene regulations. unlike existing approaches, we proposed a new technique to filter out those noisy and false regulations based on gene expression data, and detected cancer mirnas. the benchmark results on four distinct cancer datasets demonstrate the predictive power of our proposed method, and the good performance on multiple independent datasets for the same cancer type indicates the robustness of the proposed approach. furthermore, among our predicted cancer mirnas, some of them have been reported in literature and some are found to be differentially expressed based on independent mirna expression datasets, which validate our predictions to some extent. with a cancer-mirna association network constructed here, we also detected some pancancer mirnas and cancer type-specific mirnas, thereby providing insights into the mechanism of cancers. in particular, we identified the pathways regulated by cancer mirnas, which can help explain how mirnas are involved in cancers. the good performance of our proposed approach attributes to the removal of noisy interactions between mirnas and genes. in this work, we detected the context specific target genes of mirnas with the assumption that they will fluctuate together if they were regulated by the same mirna(s). however, that is not the case if two genes are, respectively, regulated by two sets of mirnas while share few mirnas, where we can only detect the major regulators of these genes. the integrative analysis of matched mirna and gene expressions has shown to be promising approach in determining the mirna-gene regulations. we believe the performance of our proposed approach will be significantly improved if such kind of data could be integrated in our framework in the future. in addition, we only considered around 500 mirnas here, but there are more than 2000 human mature mirnas recorded in mirbase now. our approach can be easily extended to the new mirnas as long as their target genes are available. with more information about mirnas as well as their target genes emerging, more cancer mirnas are believed to be discovered in the future.  
