gene expression identifying differentially expressed transcripts from rna-seq data with biological variation motivation: high-throughput sequencing enables expression analysis at the level of individual transcripts. the analysis of transcriptome expression levels and differential expression (de) estimation requires a probabilistic approach to properly account for ambiguity caused by shared exons and finite read sampling as well as the intrinsic biological variance of transcript expression. results: we present bayesian inference of transcripts from sequencing data (bitseq), a bayesian approach for estimation of transcript expression level from rna-seq experiments. inferred relative expression is represented by markov chain monte carlo samples from the posterior probability distribution of a generative model of the read data. we propose a novel method for de analysis across replicates which propagates uncertainty from the sample-level model while modelling biological variance using an expression-level-dependent prior. we demonstrate the advantages of our method using simulated data as well as an rna-seq dataset with technical and biological replication for both studied conditions. availability: the implementation of the transcriptome expression estimation and differential expression analysis, bitseq, has been written in c++ and python. the software is available online fromhigh-throughput sequencing is an effective approach for transcriptome analysis. this methodology, also called rna-seq, has been used to analyze unknown transcript sequences, estimate gene expression levels and study single nucleotide polymorphisms . as shown by other researchers , rnaseq provides many advantages over microarray technology, although effective analysis of rna-seq data remains a challenge. to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as joint last authors.a fundamental task in the analysis of rna-seq data is the identification of a set of differentially expressed genes or transcripts. results from a differential expression (de) analysis of individual transcripts are essential in a diverse range of problems such as identifying differences between tissues , understanding developmental changes and microrna target prediction . to perform an effective de analysis, it is important to obtain accurate estimates of expression for each sample, but it is equally important to properly account for all sources of variation, technical and biological, to avoid spurious de calls . in this contribution, we address both of these problems by developing integrated probabilistic models of the read generation process and the biological replication process in an rna-seq experiment. during the rna-seq experimental procedure, a studied specimen of transcriptome is synthesized into cdna, amplified, fragmented and then sequenced by a high-throughput sequencing device. this process results in a dataset consisting of up to hundreds of millions of short sequences, or reads, encoding observed nucleotide sequences. the length of the reads depends on the sequencing platform and currently typically ranges from 25 to 300 basepairs. reads have to be either assembled into transcript sequences or aligned to a reference genome by an aligning tool, to determine the sequence they originate from. with proper sample preparation, the number of reads aligning to a certain gene is approximately proportional to the abundance of fragments of transcripts for that gene within the sample allowing researchers to study gene expression . however, during the process of transcription, most eukaryotic genes can be spliced into different transcripts which share parts of their sequence. as it is the transcripts of genes that are being sequenced during rna-seq, it is possible to distinguish between individual transcripts of a gene. several methods have been proposed to estimate transcript expression levels . furthermore,showed that estimating gene expression as a sum of transcript expression levels yields more precise results than inferring the gene expression by summing reads over all exons. as the transcript of origin is uncertain for reads aligning to shared subsequence, estimation of transcript expression levels has to be completed in a probabilistic manner. initial studies of transcript expression used the expectationmaximization (em)we have presented methods for transcript expression level analysis and de analysis that aim to model the uncertainty present in rna-seq datasets. we used a bayesian approach to provide a probabilistic model of transcriptome sequencing and to sample from the posterior distribution of the transcript expression levels. the model incorporates read and alignment quality, adjusts for non-uniform read distributions and accounts for an experimentspecific fragment length distribution in case of paired-end reads. the accuracy of inferred expression is comparable and in some cases, outperforms other competing methods. however, the major benefit of using bitseq for transcript expression inference is the availability of the full posterior distribution which is useful for further analysis. the inferred distributions of transcript expression levels can be further analyzed by the second stage of bitseq for de analysis. given biological replicates, bitseq accounts for both intrinsic technical noise and biological variation to compute the posterior distribution of expression differences between conditions. it produces more reliable estimates of expression levels within each condition and associates these expression levels with a degree of credibility, thus providing fewer false de calls. we want to highlight that to make accurate de assessment, experimental designs must include biological replication and bitseq is a method capable of combining information from biological replicates when comparing multiple conditions using rna-seq data. in our current work, we aim to reduce the computational complexity of bitseq by replacing mcmc with a faster deterministic approximate inference algorithm and we are generalizing the model to include more complex experimental designs in the de analysis stage.. this publication only reflects the authors views.conflict of interest: none declared.  
