alternative preprocessing of rna-sequencing data in the cancer genome atlas leads to improved analysis results motivation: the cancer genome atlas (tcga) rna-sequencing data are used widely for research. tcga provides level 3 data, which have been processed using a pipeline specific to that resource. however, we have found using experimentally derived data that this pipeline produces gene-expression values that vary considerably across biological replicates. in addition, some rna-sequencing analysis tools require integer-based read counts, which are not provided with the level 3 data. as an alternative, we have reprocessed the data for 9264 tumor and 741 normal samples across 24 cancer types using the rsubread package. we have also collated corresponding clinical data for these samples. we provide these data as a community resource. results: we compared tcga samples processed using either pipeline and found that the rsubread pipeline produced fewer zero-expression genes and more consistent expression levels across replicate samples than the tcga pipeline. additionally, we used a genomic-signature approach to estimate her2 (erbb2) activation status for 662 breast-tumor samples and found that the rsubread data resulted in stronger predictions of her2 pathway activity. finally, we used data from both pipelines to classify 575 lung cancer samples based on histological type. this analysis identified various non-coding rna that may influence lung-cancer histology. availability and implementation: the rna-sequencing and clinical data can be downloaded from gene expression omnibus (accession number gse62944). scripts and code that were used to process and analyze the data are available from https://github.com/srp33/tcga_rnaseq_clinical.the cancer genome atlas research network has profiled thousands of human tumors to discover various types of molecular-level aberrations that occur within tumors. researchers have used these data to derive new insights about tumorigenesis and to validate and inform experimental findings (the cancer genome atlas research(rna-seq) data, which have been aligned to the reference genome using mapsplice , quantified at the gene and transcript levels using rsem and standardized using upper-quartile normalization . however, the use of these data comes with some caveats. first, some analytic tools designed specifically for rna-seq datafor example, deseq2 require the user to input integer-based read counts, yet level 3 read counts are represented as non-integer numbers. second, the upper-quartile normalization method scales gene counts by the upper-quartile value of the non-zero distribution; however, when a sample has a relatively high number of zero counts or genes with extremely high read counts, the value distributions may vary considerably across samples . third, when researchers seek to compare the tcga level 3 data against clinical covariates and outcomes, additional processing steps are necessary to match rna-seq identifiers to the clinical data. users without computational training may face difficulty performing these steps, and scientists may duplicate each others efforts. the tcga consortium also provides the rna-seq data in raw form. thus it is possible for researchers to reprocess the data using alternative computational pipelines. we obtained raw sequencing data for 9264 tumor samples and 741 normal samples across 24 cancer types and reprocessed the data using the subread algorithm , which shows high concordance with other existing methods regarding assignment of reads to genes but takes a relatively short time for processing (seqc/maqc-iii). rna transcripts often span multiple exon-exon junctions, making it challenging for aligners to map reads that are smaller than the transcript length. rsubreads vote-and-seed readmapping technique addresses this problem by breaking the reads into relatively small segments, mapping the segments to the reference genome and identifying locations where adjacent segments map to different exons. this approach has been shown to be more accurate in mapping junction reads than other aligners, including mapsplice . the rsubread package, which implements the subread algorithm, is convenient for this task because: (i) it can be applied to both single-and paired-end reads; (ii) it is considerably faster and requires less computer memory than many other methods and (iii) it requires no external software packages for processing, whereas many other packages require a series of steps that span multiple packages. we used the featurecounts function within the rsubread package to summarize the data to integer-based, gene-level read counts, and we calculated two types of normalized value: fragments per kilobase of exon per million reads mapped (fpkm) and transcripts per million (tpm) . in this pipeline, the fpkm and tpm values are calculated using the total number of mapped reads and the total number of non-overlapping exonic basepairs. both fpkm and tpm methods account for the length of genomic features. fpkm corrects for the number of reads that have been sequenced, and tpm accounts for the average number of mapped bases per read. fpkm values are used widely, whereas tpm values have been shown to meet the invariant average criterion and thus may be more comparable across samples . importantly, fpkm and tpm are calculated using only data from an individual rna-seq sample; thus adding new samples to the dataset will not require changes to the existing expression values; such an approach is crucial for precision-medicine applications and for integrating data across technology platforms . furthermore, because we have provided raw counts, it is possible for others to normalize the data using other methods with relative ease. we have made these data publicly available along with all clinical variables provided by tcga for these samples. we have also aligned the rna-seq sample identifiers with the clinical identifiers.a total of 9264 tumor samples across 24 cancer types are included in the database.to our knowledge, this compendium of rna-seq tumor data is the largest compiled to date. it includes 9264 tumor samples and 741 normal samples across 24 cancer types. these data offer an alternative to the lone pipeline used by the tcga consortium. in contrast to the tcga data portal, which provides the rna-seq data in individual files for each sample, we have compiled the rsubread tumor data into aggregate data files; thus it will be easier for researchers to analyze the data and compare across cancer types. we have matched these data to clinical variables to ease the process of examining relationships between these variables and gene-expression levels. different rna-seq processing pipelines differ considerably in accuracy for quantifying gene-level expression values . however, our goal was not to perform an exhaustive benchmark comparison across the many tools available for processing rna-seq data, although others have shown that rsubread performs quite well in such benchmarks at quantifying gene-expression levels (seqc/maqc-iii). rather our goals were to provide a new community resource and to provide evidence that this alternative dataset is of high quality and performs better in various downstream analyses than the standard tcga data. we have demonstrated that rsubread produces more consistent values across biological replicates, and we have provided evidence that our data lead to more biologically relevant conclusions. tens of thousands of hours of computational processing time were necessary to compile this dataset. thus we also hope to prevent the need for other scientists to invest similar resources. our dataset will be most useful to researchers who wish to compare gene-level expression values across samples. researchers who wish to work with transcript-or exon-level values or who wish to identify splice junctions may find the tcga level 3 data useful for this purpose. various web-based portals exist for visualizing and analyzing tcga data. these include cbioportal for cancer genomics and the ucsc cancer genomics browser . our data could be incorporated into these portals as an additional option for users who wish to analyze raw gene counts or to use the fpkm and tpm values that we provide. we plan to update the data as more cancer types and tumor samples become available. we used open-source software to align and normalize the data and have made our processing code publicly available. in addition, we used single-sample normalization techniques to process the data. thus, one can add new samples as they become available without affecting the existing data. however, we emphasize that it may still be necessary for researchers to correct for intersample variation when comparing data across batches and cancer types.conflict of interest: none declared.  
