identifying disease sensitive and quantitative trait-relevant biomarkers from multidimensional heterogeneous imaging genetics data via sparse multimodal multitask learning motivation: recent advances in brain imaging and high-throughput genotyping techniques enable new approaches to study the influence of genetic and anatomical variations on brain functions and disorders. traditional association studies typically perform independent and pairwise analysis among neuroimaging measures, cognitive scores and disease status, and ignore the important underlying interacting relationships between these units. results: to overcome this limitation, in this article, we propose a new sparse multimodal multitask learning method to reveal complex relationships from gene to brain to symptom. our main contributions are threefold: (i) introducing combined structured sparsity regularizations into multimodal multitask learning to integrate multidimensional heterogeneous imaging genetics data and identify multimodal biomarkers; (ii) utilizing a joint classification and regression learning model to identify disease-sensitive and cognition-relevant biomarkers; (iii) deriving a new efficient optimization algorithm to solve our non-smooth objective function and providing rigorous theoretical analysis on the global optimum convergency. using the imaging genetics data from the alzheimers disease neuroimaging initiative database, the effectiveness of the proposed method is demonstrated by clearly improved performance on predicting both cognitive scores and disease status. the identified multimodal biomarkers could predict not only disease status but also cognitive function to help elucidate the biological pathway from gene to brain structure and function, and to cognition and disease.recent advances in acquiring multimodal brain imaging and genome-wide array data provide exciting new opportunities to study the influence of genetic variation on brain structure and function. research in this emerging field, known as imaging genetics, holds great promise for a system biology of the brain to better understand complex neurobiological systems, from genetic determinants to cellular processes to the complex interplay of brain structure, function, behavior and cognition. analysis of these multimodal datasets will facilitate early diagnosis, deepen mechanistic understanding and improved treatment of brain disorders. machine learning methods have been widely employed to predict alzheimers disease (ad) status using imaging genetics measures . since ad is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive impairment of memory and other cognitive functions, regression models have also been investigated to predict clinical scores from structural, such as magnetic resonance imaging (mri), and/or molecular, such as fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (fdg-pet), neuroimaging data . for example,performed stepwise regression in a pairwise fashion to relate each of mri and fdg-pet measures of eight candidate regions to each of four reys auditory verbal learning test (ravlt) memory scores. this univariate approach, however, did not consider either interrelated structures within imaging data or those within cognitive data. using relevance vector regression,jointly analyzed the voxelbased morphometry (vbm) features extracted from the entire brain to predict each selected clinical score, while the investigations of different clinical scores are independent from each other. one goal of imaging genetics is to identify genetic risk factors and/or imaging biomarkers via intermediate quantitative traits (qts, e.g. cognitive memory scores used in this article) on the chain from gene to brain to symptom. thus, both disease classification and qt prediction are important machine learning tasks. prior imaging genetics research typically employs a two-step procedure for identifying risk factors and biomarkers: one first determines disease-relevant qts, and then detects the biomarkers associated with these qts. since a qt could be related to many genetic or imaging markers on different pathways that are not all disease specific (e.g. qt 2 and gene 3 in), an ideal scenario would be to discover only those markers associated with both qt and disease status for a better understanding of the underlying biological pathway specific to the disease. on the other hand, identifying genetic and phenotypic biomarkers from large-scale multidimensional heterogeneous data is an important biomedical and biological research topic. unlike simple feature selection working on a single data source, multimodal learning describes the setting of learning from data where observations are represented by multiple types of feature sets. many multimodal methods have been developed for classification and clustering purposes, such as co-training (. a simplified schematic example of two pathways from gene to qts to phenotypic endpoints: the red one is disease relevant while the blue one yields only normal variation. traditional two-stage imaging genetic strategy identifies qt 1 and qt 2 first and then genes 1, 2, 3. our new method will identify only disease relevant genes (i.e. gene 1 and gene 2); and gene 3 would not be identified because it cannot be used to classify disease) and multiview clustering . however, they typically assume that the multimodal feature sets are conditionally independent, which does not hold in many real-world applications such as imaging genetics. considering different representations give rise to different kernel functions, several multiple kernel learning (mkl) approaches have been recently studied and employed to integrate heterogeneous data and select multitype features. however, such models train a single weight for all features from the same modality, i.e. all features from the same data source are weighted equally, when they are combined with the features from other sources. this limitation often yields inadequate performance. to address the above challenges, we propose a new sparse multimodal multitask learning algorithm that integrates heterogeneous genetic and phenotypic data effectively and efficiently to identify disease-sensitive and cognition-relevant biomarkers from multiple data sources. different to lasso , group lasso and other related methods that mainly find the biomarkers correlated to each individual qt (memory score), we consider predicting each memory score as a regression task and select biomarkers that tend to play an important role in influencing multiple tasks. a joint classification and regression multitask learning model is utilized to select the biomarkers correlated to memory scores and disease categories simultaneously. sparsity regularizations have recently been widely investigated and applied to multitask learning models . sparse representations are typically achieved by imposing non-smooth norms as regularizers in the optimization problems. from the view of sparsity organization, we have two types: (i) the flat sparsity is often achieved by 0-norm or 1-norm regularizer or trace norm in matrix/tensor completion. optimization techniques include lars , linear gradient search , proximal methods . (ii) the structured sparsity is usually obtained through different sparse regularizers such as 2,1-norm , 2,0-norm , ,1-norm (also denoted as 1,2-norm, 1,norm in different papers) and group 1-norm which can be solved by methods in. we propose a new combined structured sparse. the proposed sparse multimodal multitask feature selection method will identify biomarkers from multimodal heterogeneous data resources. the identified biomarkers could predict not only disease status, but also cognitive functions to help researchers better understand the underlying mechanism from gene to brain structure and function, and to cognition and disease regularization to integrate features from different modalities and to learn a weight for each feature leading to a more flexible scheme for feature selection in data integration, which is illustrated in. in our combined structured sparse regularization, the group 1norm regularization (blue circles in) learns the feature global importance, i.e. the modal-wise feature importance of every data modality on each class (task), and the 2,1-norm regularization (red circles in) explores the feature local importance, i.e. the importance of each feature for multiple classes/tasks. the proposed method is applied to identify ad-sensitive biomarkers associated with the cognitive scores by integrating heterogeneous genetic and phenotypic data (as shown in). our empirical results yield clearly improved performance on predicting both cognitive scores and disease status.  
