gene expression identifying dispersed epigenomic domains from chip-seq data motivation: post-translational modifications to histones have several well known associations with regulation of gene expression. while some modifications appear concentrated narrowly, covering promoters or enhancers, others are dispersed as epigenomic domains. these domains mark contiguous regions sharing an epigenomic property, such as actively transcribed or poised genes, or heterochromatically silenced regions. while high-throughput methods like chip-seq have led to a flood of high-quality data about these epigenomic domains, there remain important analysis problems that are not adequately solved by current analysis tools. results: we present the rseg method for identifying epigenomic domains from chip-seq data for histone modifications. in contrast with other methods emphasizing the locations of peaks in read density profiles, our method identifies the boundaries of domains. rseg is also able to incorporate a control sample and find genomic regions with differential histone modifications between two samples. availability: rseg, including source code and documentation, is freely available atpost-translational modifications to histone tails, including methylation and acetylaytion, have been associated with important regulatory roles in cell differentiation and disease development . the application of chip-seq to histone modification study has proved very useful for understanding the genomic landscape of histone modifications . certain histone modifications are tightly concentrated, covering a few hundred base pairs. for example, h3k4me3 is usually associated with active promoters, and occurs only at nucleosomes close to transcription start sites (tsss). on the other hand, many histone modifications are diffuse and occupy large regions, ranging from thousands to several millions of base pairs. a well known example h3k36me3 is associated with active gene expression and often spans the whole gene body . reflected in chip-seq data, the signals of these histone modifications are enriched over large regions, but lack well-defined peaks. it is worth pointing out that the property of being diffuse is matter of degrees. besides the modification frequency, the modification profile over a region is also affected by nucleosome to whom correspondence should be addressed. densities and the strength of nucleosome positioning. by visual inspection of read-density profiles, we found that h2bk5me1, h3k79me1, h3k79me2, h3k79me3, h3k9me1, h3k9me3 and h3r2me1 show similar diffuse profiles. there are several general questions about dispersed epigenomic domains that remain unanswered. many of these questions center around how these domains are established and maintained. one critical step in answering these questions is to accurately locate the boundaries of these domains. however, most of existing methods for chip-seq data analysis were originally designed for identifying transcription factor binding sites. these focus on locating highly concentrated peaks, and are inappropriate for identifying domains of dispersed histone modification marks . moreover, the quality of peak analysis is measured in terms of sensitivity and specificity of peak calling (accuracy), along with how narrow the peaks are (precision; often determined by the underlying platform). but for diffuse histone modifications, significant peaks are usually lacking and often the utility of identifying domains depends on how clearly the boundaries are located.  
