databases and ontologies identifying informative subsets of the gene ontology with information bottleneck methods motivation: the gene ontology (go) is a controlled vocabulary designed to represent the biological concepts pertaining to gene products. this study investigates the methods for identifying informative subsets of go terms in an automatic and objective fashion. this task in turn requires addressing the following issues: how to represent the semantic context of go terms, what metrics are suitable for measuring the semantic differences between terms, how to identify an informative subset that retains as much as possible of the original semantic information of go. results: we represented the semantic context of a go term using the word-usage-profile associated with the term, which enables one to measure the semantic differences between terms based on the differences in their semantic contexts. we further employed the information bottleneck methods to automatically identify subsets of go terms that retain as much as possible of the semantic information in an annotation database. the automatically retrieved informative subsets align well with an expert-picked go slim subset, cover important concepts and proteins, and enhance literature-based go annotation.many controlled vocabularies have been developed to define and represent biomedical knowledge in the form of ontology, among which the unified medical language system (umls;), the gene ontology (go;) and the open biological ontology (obo;) are three well-established biomedical ontologies covering different aspects of biomedical knowledge domains. for example, umls is a collection of controlled vocabularies representing broad biomedical knowledge; obo consists of a collection of ontologies representing a variety of biology concepts; and go is a controlled vocabulary representing molecular biology aspects of genes and proteins. designed to provide comprehensive representations of to whom correspondence should be addressed. the knowledge in their corresponding domains, the sizes of these controlled vocabularies are often overwhelmingly large, and many terms (concepts) defined in the vocabularies are seldom used in the real world of annotation or indexing. therefore, there are needs to identify subsets of the controlled vocabularies to represent knowledge in a concise manner. recognizing such needs, the go consortium provides several subsets of go terms, referred to as go slims (http://www.geneontology.org/go.slims.shtml). these terms are manually picked by domain experts to cover the major concepts of specific domains, with a trade-off between specificity of the concepts and the size of the ontology that is deemed acceptable to the experts. however, it is of both theoretical and practical interests to develop methods that can automatically identify informative subsets of go terms to represent the major semantic concepts in an objective manner and to meet different needs of different domains. as a concrete example, we have developed a method for assessing the functional coherence of a gene set by constructing a graph with go terms and genes as nodes, and a part of evaluation is to visualize such graphs enabling users to capture the major theme of the functions and their relations to the genes. however, such a graph usually has a large number of specific terms making it difficult for users to identify the main concepts associated with the genes. recently, the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (david) tool box provides tools to identify representative go terms based on the genes associated with them. similarly,reported clustering disease ontology (do) concepts using genedo associations as features. in this study, instead of using gene-centered approaches, we address the task of automatically identifying subsets of go within the framework of semantic representation and information theoryidentifying subsets of go terms that retain as much as possible of the original semantic information contained in an annotation database. in order to achieve the goal, some fundamental issues related to the semantic information of go terms need to be addressed: (i) how to represent the semantic context of a go term; (ii) how to measure the difference in semantic context (a.k.a. semantic distance) between a pair of go terms; and (iii) how to identify an informative subset of go that retains as much as possible of the semantic information within an annotation database. measuring semantic distances between go terms has attracted much attention in the bioinformatics field. in particular, a quantity referred to as information content (ic) has been widely used as a measure to assess the amount of information that a go term contains, and the difference in the ic between a pair of terms is used to measure their semantic distance. from the information theory point of view, ic measures the amount of uncertainty associated with observing a term. as such, it does not represent the semantic context, and therefore a difference in ics does not necessarily reflect the semantic difference between two terms per se. on the other hand, the definitions of go terms are usually parsimonious and render insufficient information for assessing the relationships and semantic distances among the terms, as illustrated by the following examples. in the go, the semantic meaning of a go term is reflected by its synonym (a human understandable name) and its definition. for example, the synonym and definition for the term go:0050794 are, respectively, , they share very few biological words in their synonyms and definitions, and the organization of the terms in the go hierarchy is guided by additional information/knowledge that is not explicitly reflected in the definitions. as a result, unless a reader is equipped with sufficient biological knowledge, it would be difficult to discern and quantify the relationship of the two terms solely based on their definitions. in this study, we propose to represent the semantic context of go terms using the word-usage profiles derived from the biomedical literature associated with the go terms. this representation enables us to measure differences in the semantic context between terms through quantifying the differences in their word-usage profile. this framework further allows us to use information bottleneck (ib) methods to identify subsets of go terms, striving to retain the information with respect to the word-usage profiles of go terms. here, we demonstrate that:(i) our approach to representing semantic context and semantic distances is intuitive and consistent; (ii) automatically identified informative go subsets align well with the expert-picked go slim set and cover broad concepts and proteins; and (iii) automatic annotation with the informative subsets achieves better accuracy.combining word-usage-profiles with ib methods provides a means to identify within the complexity of go informative subsets for specific purposes. funding: national institutes of health (grants r01lm009153, r01lm010144 and p20rr017677 to x.l., partially).  
