genetics and population analysis identifying quantitative trait loci via group-sparse multitask regression and feature selection: an imaging genetics study of the adni cohort motivation: recent advances in high-throughput genotyping and brain imaging techniques enable new approaches to study the influence of genetic variation on brain structures and functions. traditional association studies typically employ independent and pairwise univariate analysis, which treats single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) and quantitative traits (qts) as isolated units and ignores important underlying interacting relationships between the units. new methods are proposed here to overcome this limitation. results: taking into account the interlinked structure within and between snps and imaging qts, we propose a novel group-sparse multi-task regression and feature selection (g-smurfs) method to identify quantitative trait loci for multiple disease-relevant qts and apply it to a study in mild cognitive impairment and alzheimers disease. built upon regression analysis, our model uses a new form of regularization, group 2,1-norm (g 2,1-norm), to incorporate the biological group structures among snps induced from their genetic arrangement. the new g 2,1-norm considers the regression coefficients of all the snps in each group with respect to all the qts together and enforces sparsity at the group level. in addition, an 2,1-norm regularization is utilized to couple feature selection across multiple tasks to make use of the shared underlying mechanism among different brain regions. the effectiveness of the proposed method is demonstrated by both clearly improved prediction performance in empirical evaluations and a compact set of selected snp predictors relevant to the imaging qts.imaging genetics is an emergent transdisciplinary research field, where the associations between genetic variations and imaging measures as quantitative traits (qts) or continuous phenotypes are evaluated. compared to casecontrol status, the qts have increased statistical power and are closer to the underlying biological etiology of the disease making it easier to identify underlying genes . genome-wide association studies (gwas) have been increasingly performed to correlate high-throughput single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) data to large-scale image data. while many studies employed a hypothesis-driven approach by making significant reduction in one or both data types , some recent studies examined these associations at the whole genome entire brain level . pairwise univariate analysis was typically used in traditional association studies to quickly provide important association information between snps and qts. however, it treated the snps and the qts as independent and isolated units, and therefore the underlying interacting relationships between the units might be lost. multivariate methods to examine joint effect of multilocus genotype on a single phenotype were studied in general genetic association studies as well as several recent imaging genetic studies . this paradigm did not consider the relationship between interlinked brain phenotypes and thus still had limited power in revealing complex imaging genetic associations. in this work, taking into account the interrelated structure within and between snps and qts, we propose a new framework for effectively identifying quantitative trait loci, which addresses the following challenges in imaging genetics association study. first, traditional association studies consider all the snps evenly distributed and assess each snp individually. however, certain snps are naturally connected via different pathways. multiple snps from one gene often jointly carry out genetic functionalities. moreover,page: 230 229237  
