idhs-el: identifying dnase i hypersensitive sites by fusing three different modes of pseudo nucleotide composition into an ensemble learning framework motivation: regulatory dna elements are associated with dnase i hypersensitive sites (dhss). accordingly, identification of dhss will provide useful insights for in-depth investigation into the function of noncoding genomic regions. results: in this study, using the strategy of ensemble learning framework, we proposed a new pre-dictor called idhs-el for identifying the location of dhs in human genome. it was formed by fusing three individual random forest (rf) classifiers into an ensemble predictor. the three rf operators were respectively based on the three special modes of the general pseudo nucleotide composition (pseknc): (i) kmer, (ii) reverse complement kmer and (iii) pseudo dinucleotide composition. it has been demonstrated that the new predictor remarkably outperforms the relevant state-of-the-art methods in both accuracy and stability. availability and implementation: for the convenience of most experimental scientists, a web ser-ver for idhs-el is established at http://bioinformatics.hitsz.edu.cn/idhs-el, which is the first web-server predictor ever established for identifying dhss, and by which users can easily get their desired results without the need to go through the mathematical details. we anticipate that idhs-el will become a very useful high throughput tool for genome analysis.in genetics, dnase i hypersensitive sites (dhss) are the regions of chromatin that are sensitive to cleavage by the dnase i enzyme. in these specific regions of the genome, chromatin has lost its condensed structure. as a consequence, the corresponding dna region will become more exposing and easier to be accessible by enzymes, such as dnase i, and hence enhance its degradation. these accessible chromatin zones are functionally related to transcriptional activity because of the necessity to bind with proteins, such as transcription factors. since its discovery about 30 years ago , dhss have been used as the markers for detecting the regulatory dna regions. in general, these specific regions are usually nucleosome-free and associated with a wide variety of genomic regulatory elements, such;). accordingly, one effective approach for discovering functional dna elements from the noncoding sequences is to identify dhss. the gold-standard approach for identifying dhs is the southern blot technique, but it is a tricky, time-consuming and inaccurate to acquire the dhs information by using the southern blot approach . in 2010, by combining the dnase i digestion and high throughput sequencing technology, the dnase-seq technique was proposed , leading to a remarkable enhance in resolution. unfortunately, there is no effective methodology for analysing the dnase-seq data . therefore, one has to resort to the computational approaches for identifying dhss. in fact some efforts have been made in this regard. for example,proposed a predictor based on the support vector machine (svm) in which the nucleotide composition was used to formulate the feature vector for predicting dhss in k562 cell line. recently, by using the pseudo nucleotide composition (pseknc) , which was developed based on the idea of pseudo amino acid composition for proteins , feng et al. (2014) proposed a more powerful predictor to identify dhss by incorporating both the local and global sequence-order effects of dna. although the aforementioned computational approaches yielded quite encouraging results, and they did stimulate the development of this area, some further work is needed due to the following reasons.(i) these existing methods were based on different features extracted from a dna sequence, and hence lacking the elegance and efficiency of uniform treatment; in other words, a new framework is needed to combine them into one framework. (ii) none of these methods has ever provided a web-server or stand-alone tool, and hence their practical usage value is quite limited, particularly for the majority of experimental biologists . this study was initiated in an attempt to address these shortcomings by developing a more powerful and also more uniform predictor for identifying dhss. as manifested in a series of recent publications , to develop a really useful sequence-based statistical predictor for a biological system and also to make the developing process logically clearer and easier to follow, according to chous five-step guidelines we should make the following five procedures crystal clear: (i) benchmark dataset; (ii) sample representation; (iii) operation engine; (iv) cross validation; (v) web-server. below, let us describe how to deal with these steps one-by one.  
