databases and ontologies aluhunter: a database of potentially polymorphic alu insertions for use in primate phylogeny and population genetics aluhunter is a database of taxon-specific primate alu elements for use in phylogeny and population genetics. the software automatically isolates potentially polymorphic alu insertions in sequences submitted to genbank by screening the elements against reference genomes. the resultant database of variable markers is a valuable resource for researchers interested in characterizing alu elements in their primate taxon of interest. availability and implementation: the aluhunter database can be accessed at http://www.aluhunter.com.alu elements are a class of primate-specific short interspersed elements (sines) that replicate through the genome via a copy and paste mechanism. inserted alu elements are rarely precisely excised and always ancestrally absent, making them nearly free of homoplasy, of known polarity, and thus ideal markers for inferring phylogeny . if two taxa share a retrotransposon insertion at a certain genomic location, it is most likely due to shared descent. as a result, one can easily infer the phylogeny of a group of primates using presence or absence data for a sufficient quantity of alu elements by grouping via dollo parsimony those that share a particular alu insertion to the exclusion of the taxa that do not. their use has allowed the resolution of certain phylogenetic problems within primates that traditional dna sequence-based or morphology-based methods had failed to decisively resolve, such as the placement of tarsiers within haplorhines . determining whether an alu known to be present in one taxon is present in another can be easily accomplished with the standard laboratory techniques. given amplification primers flanking a known alu element, a researcher need only to amplify the region with pcr and use gel electrophoresis to determine the amplicons size. sequencing can then confirm whether the alu is present in an organisms genome, since relying on size estimates alone is prone to misinterpretation of rare shifted parallel insertions of alu elements . unfortunately, the process of finding novel, phylogenetically informative alu elementsones already known to be absent in other taxacan take weeks of lab work, a process that can benefit from an efficient in silico solution. because of their prevalence in primate genomes, alu elements are often unintentionally sequenced, meaning sequence repositories such as genbank are sources of millions of non-human primate alu elements. however, most of these insertions are useless for purposes of phylogenetic or population genetic analysis, because they are not variable at the generic or subgeneric levels. the human genome, for example, contains over 1 million alu elements, but 0.5 are polymorphic within the species . isolating useful alu elements for researchers of primate phylogeny or population genetics requires the determination of whether an alu was inserted before the diversification of a taxon of interest and is therefore fixed, or was inserted recently and is therefore potentially polymorphic. one simple bioinformatic solution is to search a sister taxons genome for the alu elements flanks. if the flanks are found in a sister taxons genome with no alu element in between, one can assume that the alu was inserted since the split with the sister taxon and is therefore potentially polymorphic within the taxon of interest. this method has only recently become possible with the availability of a large amount of source dna sequences in which to find alu elements and the advent of multiple, publicly available primate genome sequences against which to screen them. aluhunter uses this screening process to bioinformatically isolate polymorphic insertions on a large scale. the project is an attempt to broadly characterize all alu elements in genbank sequences and isolate those that may be informative at the generic or subgeneric level.  
