ienhancer-2l: a two-layer predictor for identifying enhancers and their strength by pseudo k-tuple nucleotide composition motivation: enhancers are of short regulatory dna elements. they can be bound with proteins (activators) to activate transcription of a gene, and hence play a critical role in promoting gene transcription in eukaryotes. with the avalanche of dna sequences generated in the post-genomic age, it is a challenging task to develop computational methods for timely identifying enhancers from extremely complicated dna sequences. although some efforts have been made in this regard, they were limited at only identifying whether a query dna element being of an enhancer or not. according to the distinct levels of biological activities and regulatory effects on target genes, however , enhancers should be further classified into strong and weak ones in strength. results: in view of this, a two-layer predictor called ienhancer-2l was proposed by formulating dna elements with the pseudo k-tuple nucleotide composition, into which the six dna local parameters were incorporated. to the best of our knowledge, it is the first computational predictor ever established for identifying not only enhancers, but also their strength. rigorous cross-validation tests have indicated that ienhancer-2l holds very high potential to become a useful tool for genome analysis. availability and implementation: for the convenience of most experimental scientists, a web server for the two-layer predictor was established at http://bioinformatics.hitsz.edu.cn/ienhancer-2l/, by which users can easily get their desired results without the need to go through the mathematical details.enhancers are distinct genomic regions that can upregulate transcription of target genes through interaction with transcription factors (tfs) . in contrast to gene proximal elements, such as promoters, enhancers are distal elements that can be 20 kb or further away from a gene, or even located on a different chromosome. this feature makes the prediction of enhancer a challenging task.experimental methods, such as chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing , can successfully detect many regulatory enhancers by targeting enhancer binding tf, such as p300 . but tf only binds to enhancers in a cell-specific manner. not all of the functional enhancers are occupied by a certain tf. besides, active enhancers are nucleosome-depleted open regions, which display deoxyribonuclease or dnase i hypersensitivity . but, many other dna elements, such as promoters, are also accessible by dnase i. the histones in the flanking nucleosomes of enhancer often carry characteristic post-translational modifications. accordingly, genome-wide mapping of histone modifications allows accurate determination and classification of enhancers and promoters. for instance, the open chromatin regions flanked by histone modifications, such as h3k4me3 and h3k27ac, have been classified as strong enhancers, while the regions flanked by h3k4me1 classified as weak enhancers . these kinds of techniques have now been widely used and the results thus obtained are quite consistent with the enhancer activity assays. unfortunately, the experimental methods by the aforementioned authors are expensive and time consuming. therefore, several computational methods were developed in an attempt to timely predict enhancers in genomes. these methods differ in operation algorithms and input features. for instance,developed a predictor called csi-ann by using an artificial neural network (ann) approach combined with efficient data transformation and feature extraction. fernandez and miranda-saavedra (2012) proposed a support vector machine (svm) classifier called chromegensvm by employing a genetic algorithm to optimize specific histone epigenetic marks in feature selection process. using the random forest algorithm,proposed a predictor called rfecs to identify enhancers. by combining a multiple kernel learning method and evolutionary conservation,developed a different enhancer predictor called enhancerfinder. considering the inherent limitation of the conventional k-mers approach due to the high-dimension and overfitting problems,utilized the gapped k-mers to develop a classifier named gkmsvm for identifying enhancers. very recently, using an ensemble prediction framework,developed a novel predictor called deep and they claimed that it performed better than the four state-of-theart methods in identifying enhancers. although the aforementioned computational methods can yield quite encouraging results and each of them has its own advantage, further work is needed due to the following reasons. most of those studies were focused on discriminating enhancers from other regulatory elements. but it was shown that enhancers are a large group of functional elements with many different subgroups, such as, strong enhancers, weak enhancers and poised or inactive enhancers , implying that enhancers of distinct subgroups will have different biological activities and regulatory effects on target genes. therefore, in order to really understand the mechanism underlying the gene regulation through enhancers, it is indispensable to classify them according to their attributes to these subgroups. this study was initiated in an attempt to address this problem. according to the chous 5-step rule and performed in a series of recent publications , to establish a really useful sequence-based statistical predictor for a biological system, we should consider the following five procedures: (1) construct or select a valid benchmark dataset to train and test the predictor; (2) formulate the biological sequence samples with an effective mathematical expression that can truly reflect their intrinsic correlation with the target to be predicted; (3) introduce or develop a powerful algorithm (or engine) to operate the prediction; (4) properly perform cross-validation tests to objectively evaluate the anticipated accuracy of the predictor and (5) establish a user-friendly web-server for the predictor that is accessible to the public. below, we are to describe how to deal with these steps one-by-one.it is a big challenge to identify the enhancers from enormous amount of dna sequences generated in the postgenomic era. one of the keys to develop a sequence-based predictor is how to effectively formulate the sequence samples concerned. inspired by the successes of introducing the pseudo amino acid composition or pseaac to formulate protein/peptide samples , in the currently proposed ienhancer-2l predictor, we have used the pseudo k-tuple nucleotide composition or pseknc to formulate dna samples, in which the local sequence patterns of dna samples are reflected by the k-mer composition, while their global sequence patterns reflected by the pseudo components . ienhancer-2l is a two-layer predictor. its first layer is to identify whether a query dna element is of enhancer or not. if the outcome is yes, then the second layer will automatically continue to identify its strength: strong or weak. to the best of our knowledge, it is the first predictor ever developed that can be also used to classify enhancers according to their strength. a user-friendly web server for ienhancer-2l has been established at http://bioinformatics.hitsz.edu.cn/ienhancer-2l/, by which users can easily obtain their desired results without the need to go through the complicated mathematics involved, which were presented here just for its integrity. it is also the first web-server ever established for identification/classification of enhancers. it is anticipated that ienhancer-2l may become a very useful high throughput tool for studying enhancers or, at the very least, play an important complementary role to the existing methods in this area.ienhancer-2l: a two-layer predictor  
