igsimulator: a versatile immunosequencing simulator motivation: the recent introduction of next-generation sequencing technologies to antibody studies have resulted in a growing number of immunoinformatics tools for antibody repertoire analysis. however, benchmarking these newly emerging tools remains problematic since the gold standard datasets that are needed to validate these tools are typically not available. results: since simulating antibody repertoires is often the only feasible way to benchmark new immunoinformatics tools, we developed the igsimulator tool that addresses various complications in generating realistic antibody repertoires. igsimulators code has modular structure and can be easily adapted to new requirements to simulation. availability and implementation: igsimulator is open source and freely available as a c and python program running on all unix-compatible platforms. the source code is available fromthe recent introduction of next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies to antibody studies have resulted in a growing number of immunoinformatics tools for antibody repertoire analysis . however, benchmarking these newly emerging tools remains problematic since the gold standard datasets that are needed to validate these tools are typically not available. since simulating antibody repertoires is often the only feasible way to benchmark new immunoinformatics tools, many immunoinformatics groups have developed their own antibody repertoire simulators of various complexity . lack of a publicly available immunoinformatics simulator makes it difficult to benchmark multiple antibody analysis tools and forces every new immunoinformatics researcher to invest efforts into development of a yet another simulator. we argue that the time has come to develop a comprehensive publicly available immunoinformatics simulator, similar to the widely used art read simulator for ngs studies. developing an immunoinformatics simulator is a more complex task than developing art since it should reflect a complex process of forming antibody repertoires in a realistic statistical setting. these complications are further amplified by the fact that similar but distinct antibodies within a repertoire often differ from each other by only a small number of mutations, thus, making it difficult to distinguish them from sequencing errors. moreover, antibody repertoires often feature a few large clusters (occurring as a result of in vivo clonal selection) accompanied by a large number of smaller clusters, presenting a challenge for the repertoire analysis algorithms that attempt to separate small clusters from often similar large clusters. below we describe the igsimulator tool that addresses various complications in generating realistic antibody repertoires. igsimulator simulates repertoires and uses art to simulate reads resulting from this repertoire.  
