ikap: a heuristic framework for inference of kinase activities from phosphoproteomics data motivation: phosphoproteomics measurements are widely applied in cellular biology to detect changes in signalling dynamics. however, due to the inherent complexity of phosphorylation patterns and the lack of knowledge on how phosphorylations are related to functions, it is often not possible to directly deduce protein activities from those measurements. here, we present a heuris-tic machine learning algorithm that infers the activities of kinases from phosphoproteomics data using kinasetarget information from the phosphositeplus database. by comparing the estimated kinase activity profiles to the measured phosphosite profiles, it is furthermore possible to derive the kinases that are most likely to phosphorylate the respective phosphosite. results: we apply our approach to published datasets of the human cell cycle generated from helas3 cells, and insulin signalling dynamics in mouse hepatocytes. in the first case, we estimate the activities of 118 at six cell cycle stages and derive 94 new kinasephosphosite links that can be validated through either database or motif information. in the second case, the activities of 143 kin-ases at eight time points are estimated and 49 new kinasetarget links are derived. availability and implementation: the algorithm is implemented in matlab and be downloaded from github. it makes use of the optimization and statistics toolboxes. https://phosphoproteomics is a branch of proteomics that identifies, catalogues and characterizes proteins containing a phosphate group as a post-translational modification. since intracellular signal transduction is primarily mediated by the reversible phosphorylation of various signalling molecules, data generated by phosphoproteomics approaches is commonly used to study the dynamics of signalling networks . a major challenge in the analysis of such data lies in the high combinatorial complexity of the observed signalling networks. the human genome encodes roughly 540 kinases that phosphorylate 20 000 proteins at probably more than 350 000 phosphosites . hence, the number of possible targets per kinase tends to be high, and the majority of proteins acting as kinasetargets can be phosphorylated at multiple sites, where each site can potentially be targeted by several kinases, resulting in an intricate network of kinases, target proteins and phosphatases, which remove the attached phosphorylations again. both kinases and phosphatases can thereby themselves be phosphorylated. the situation gets further complicated by the fact that mostknown phosphosites can so far not be related to a distinct protein function. thus, most research up to the present focuses on individual phosphoproteins and kinases or is restricted to clustering and enrichment methods which group the detected sites according to their behaviour and relate the proteins they are localized on to cellular processes like canonical pathways, transcriptional networks or disease mechanisms via statistical testing against databases . modelling of phosphoproteomics networks is usually limited to few components (50) and rather includes single phosphosites than whole proteins due to the lack of functional information . to address these challenges, we developed the machine algorithm ikap (inference of kinase activities from phosphoproteomics) that estimates the activities of all kinases that are known to phosphorylate at least one phosphosite in a phosphoproteomics dataset. ikap takes information from the phosphositeplus (psp) database as input and uses a non-linear optimization routine to minimize a cost function that relates kinase activities and affinities to phosphosite measurements. the predicted activities directly display the engagement of signal transduction pathways such as camp/pka, ca 2/ pkc, mtor or akt kinase pathways. if data for multiple time points or conditions are available, each kinase receives a unique activity profile which depicts the change of cellular function over all conditions. furthermore, these profiles can be used as an input for mathematical modelling which enables the usage of protein nodes instead of phosphosite nodes, making the model more meaningful and predictive. another application lies in the inference of possible new kinasetarget links. by correlating the calculated kinase activity profiles to the measured phosphosite profiles the kinases that are most likely to phosphorylate a respective phosphosite can be derived. to demonstrate the capabilities of ikap, we applied it to two previously published phosphoproteomics datasets. the first comprises a study of the human cell cycle in helas3 cells . eukaryotic cells replicate by a complex series of evolutionarily conserved events that tightly regulate defined stages of the cell division cycle. progression through this cycle involves a large number of dedicated protein complexes and signalling pathways, and deregulation of this process is implicated in tumourigenesis. global analyses of transcriptome dynamics during the cell cycle have been performed in microarray studies. however, in addition to changes in messenger rna (mrna) abundance, protein phosphorylation and targeted protein degradation are also important regulators of cell cycle progression. to examine the influence of protein phosphorylations on the progression of the cell cycle, the phosphoproteome was measured through a combination of immobilized metal affinity chromatography and stable isotope labelling of amino acids at the six phases g1, g1-s, early-s, late-s, g2 and m. further details can be found in. the second dataset is a study of insulin signalling dynamics in the mouse liver . here, the phosphoproteome was measured after 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 10 min after stimulation with insulin.phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine plays significant roles in cellular signal transduction and in modifying multiple protein functions. phosphoproteins are coordinated and regulated by a network of kinases, phosphatases and phospho-binding proteins, which modify the phosphorylation states, recognize unique phosphopeptides or target proteins for degradation. detailed and complete information on the structure and dynamics of these networks is required to better understand fundamental mechanisms of cellular processes and diseases. high-throughput technologies have been developed to investigate phosphoproteomes in model organisms and human diseases. among them, mass spectrometry-based technologies are the major platforms and have been widely applied, which has led to explosive growth of phosphoproteomic data in recent years. new bioinformatics tools are needed to analyse and make sense of these data. moreover, most research has focused on individual phosphoproteins and kinases. to gain a more complete knowledge of cellular processes, systems biology approaches, including pathways and networks modelling, have to be applied to integrate all components of the phosphorylation machinery, including kinases, phosphatases, their substrates and phospho-binding proteins. we developed here a machine-learning algorithm that estimates the activities of all kinases which are known to phosphorylate sequences occurring in a phosphoproteomics dataset. the algorithm thus reduces the dimensions of the parameter space to the number of kinases, and renders the data easier to display and analyse. the estimated activities can then be used for modelling or inference of new kinasetarget links. previous approaches to infer kinase activities from phosphoproteomic data only rely on the number of targets in the sample, without taking the detected amounts of phosphorylation into account , or solely deliver relative activities from one condition to another and do not include affinity parameters for kinasetarget interactions. ikap however calculates the absolute activities for each condition separately and thus provides a more precise picture of pathway engagement in biological samples. furthermore, in opposition to previous approaches, an arbitrary number of kinases can be assigned to each phosphosite, which makes the approach more realistic compared with sorting phosphosites into distinct kinase groups and considers uncertainties in kinase specificities for certain targets. especially in the case of time-resolved data the computed kinase activities are directly applicable as an input to subsequent dynamical modelling. the calculated affinities can thereby be used as starting points for parameter calibration, and through the use of identifiability analysis it is possible to determine how reliable the computed activities are. the derivation of novel kinasetarget pairs as it is described in is an in vitro method that has to be performed for each kinase individually. thus, it is much more time consuming. furthermore, ikap provides a ready-to-use framework, whereas previous approaches need to be implemented by the user from scratch. although the approach does not include phosphatases, both the estimated kinase activities and the newly derived links proved to be reliable in literature-and motif-based validation. our conclusion is that, at least in helas3 cells and murine hepatocytes, phosphatase activity could rather be considered as a factor which removes phosphorylations at a constant rate than a mechanism which is under sophisticated regulation. since this can be different in other cell types, the findings that are generated through the application of our method should always be critically appraised and validated. the algorithm represents a step towards a system-wide understanding of signal transduction processes within a cell. in the near future, we will further test it on other phosphoproteomics datasets and implement versions in other programming languages like python and r to make it available to a larger community of scientists.  
