structural bioinformatics iloops: a protein–protein interaction prediction server based on structural features proteinprotein interactions play a critical role in many biological processes. despite that, the number of servers that provide an easy and comprehensive method to predict them is still limited. here, we present iloops, a web server that predicts whether a pair of proteins can interact using local structural features. the inputs of the server are as follows: (i) the sequences of the query proteins and (ii) the pairs to be tested. structural features are assigned to the query proteins by sequence similarity. pairs of structural features (formed by loops or domains) are classified according to their likelihood to favor or disfavor a proteinprotein interaction, depending on their observation in known interacting and non-interacting pairs. the server evaluates the putative interaction using a random forest classifier. availability: iloops is available atproteinprotein interactions (ppis) mediate almost all processes in living cells. thus, the discovery of new ppis is the key to understanding the complexity of biological systems. several experimental methods have been developed to identify new ppis; among them, yeast two-hybrid and tandem affinity purification are the most used high-throughput methods . however, these methods are still economically and time-costly, and are hindered by the high amount of false-negative interactions . mirroring the experimental techniques, computational methods have also been developed to identify new ppis. these computational methods can be divided into three main approaches, depending on the contextual properties they exploit: structural, genomic or biological . structural context methods, such as interprets , pipe or struct2net , extrapolate structural information of a protein directly from its sequence and predict or score ppis based on the molecular composition and structural conformation of the partners. otherwise, genomic context methods like string or predictome provide predictions of ppis based on gene fusion, gene co-localization and phylogenetic profiles. finally, biological context methods [e.g. genecensus (use bayesian networks to produce reliable predictions. to properly assess the success of any ppi prediction method, a reference set of non-interacting protein pairs (nips) is required (ben). the negatome database is a set of protein pairs that are unlikely to engage in physical direct interactions compiled through manually curated literature and crystallographic data. here, we present the iloops web server, a web implementation of our recently published structural context method that exploits archdb classification of loops to predict ppis. our method explores the balance of structural features (sfs) observed in ppis and/or nips. the server provides ppi predictions with an associated precision using a random forest (rf) classifier and considering different ratios between ppis and nips.  
