ima: an r package for high-throughput analysis of illumina's 450k infinium methylation data the illumina infinium humanmethylation450 beadchip is a newly designed high-density microarray for quantifying the methylation level of over 450 000 cpg sites within human genome. illumina methylation analyzer (ima) is a computational package designed to automate the pipeline for exploratory analysis and summarization of site-level and region-level methylation changes in epigenetic studies utilizing the 450k dna methylation microarray. the pipeline loads the data from illumina platform and provides user-customized functions commonly required to perform exploratory methylation analysis for individual sites as well as annotated regions.as a major epigenetic modification, dna methylation plays a vital role in transcriptional regulation and chromatin remodeling. the aberration of dna methylation profile has been found to be associated with many human diseases including cancer . use of dna methylation microarray is a popular approach in studies to characterize the epigenetic landscape of human cells . two widely used commercial platforms to perform methylation profiling are the goldengate methylation beadarray and infinium humanmethylation27 beadchip provided by illumina inc. these two arrays quantitatively target 1505 cpg loci covering 800 genes and 27 578 cpg sites targeting 14 000 genes, respectively. since their release, many analytic methods have been developed to process and analyze the illumina dna methylation array data [for a recent summary, see. compared with previously released illumina dna methylation platforms, the recently launched infinium humanmethylation450 beadchip represents a significant increase in the cpg site density for quantifying methylation events. at the gene level, the 450k microarray covers 99 of refseq genes with multiple sites in the annotated promoter (1500 bp or 200 bp upstream of transcription to whom correspondence should be addressed. start site), 5-utr, first exon, gene body and 3-utr. from the cpg context, it covers 96 of cpg islands with multiple sites in the annotated cpg islands, shores (regions flanking island) and shelves (regions flanking shores) . while the role of dna methylation in promoter and/or cpg island regions is long been appreciated, the importance of dna methylation in gene body or shore regions for transcription regulation and tumor initialization has recently come to attention . the significantly increased coverage makes 450k microarray a powerful platform for exploring methylation profile in these annotated regions. as each targeted region contains at least one cpg site, treating the region as a unit in the differential methylation analysis might help identify regions with consistently coordinate methylation changes. from a statistical point of view, regionbased differential methylation analysis will reduce the burden of multiple comparisons and increase the power to catch differentially methylated regions associated with the phenotypes of interest. to this end, we have developed a pipeline, ima, for automatic site-level and region-level methylation analysis using the 450k microarray. while the pipeline is primarily designed as an automatic tool for exploratory analysis and summarization, it is flexible for users to tailor within r statistical computing and graphics environment for their specific needs.the major differences between ima and existing r packages for infinium methylation analysis (e.g.) are that ima provides a pipeline, which automates the tasks commonly required for the exploratory analysis and summarization of 450k dna methylation data at both site-level and region-level. the package makes use of illumina methylation annotation for region definition, as well as several bioconductor packages for various preprocessing and differential testing steps . instead of providing recommendations about which specific analysis method should be used, the main purpose of developing the ima package is to provide a range of commonly used dna methylation microarray analysis options for users to choose for their exploratory analysis and summarization in an automatic way. written in open-source r environment, it provides the flexibility for users to adopt, extend and customize the functionality for their specific needs. it can be used as an automatic pipeline of methylation level index and differential analysis for downstream functional exploration and hypothesis generation. for example, the matrix of methylation index for shore regions produced by ima can be used as the input for model-based clustering to identify clustered shores associated with the phenotype of interest. analytic methods for dna methylation microarray analysis are still under rapid developments . future development of ima package will include the extension of its functionality by incorporating the latest preprocessing and differential analysis methods. for example, options will be added to filter out defective bead types (e.g. mismatched or non-uniquely aligned probes) detected from systematic re-annotation efforts .  
