structural bioinformatics a machine learning approach to predicting protein–ligand binding affinity with applications to molecular docking motivation: accurately predicting the binding affinities of large sets of diverse proteinligand complexes is an extremely challenging task. the scoring functions that attempt such computational prediction are essential for analysing the outputs of molecular docking, which in turn is an important technique for drug discovery, chemical biology and structural biology. each scoring function assumes a predetermined theory-inspired functional form for the relationship between the variables that characterize the complex, which also include parameters fitted to experimental or simulation data and its predicted binding affinity. the inherent problem of this rigid approach is that it leads to poor predictivity for those complexes that do not conform to the modelling assumptions. moreover, resampling strategies, such as cross-validation or bootstrapping, are still not systematically used to guard against the overfitting of calibration data in parameter estimation for scoring functions. results: we propose a novel scoring function (rf-score) that circumvents the need for problematic modelling assumptions via non-parametric machine learning. in particular, random forest was used to implicitly capture binding effects that are hard to model explicitly. rf-score is compared with the state of the art on the demanding pdbbind benchmark. results show that rf-score is a very competitive scoring function. importantly, rf-scores performance was shown to improve dramatically with training set size and hence the future availability of more high-quality structural and interaction data is expected to lead to improved versions of rf-score.molecular docking is a computational technique that aims to predict whether and how a particular small molecule will stably bind to a target protein. it is an important component of many drug discovery projects when the structure of the protein is available. although it is primarily used as a virtual screening tool, and subsequently for lead optimization purposes, there are also applications in target identification . beyond drug discovery, these bioactive molecules can be used as chemical probes to study the biochemical role of a particular target . furthermore, this technique can also be applied to a range of structural bioinformatics problems, such as protein function prediction . molecular docking has two stages: docking molecules into the targets binding site (pose identification), and predicting how strongly the docked conformation binds to the target (scoring). whereas there are many relatively robust and accurate algorithms for pose identification, the imperfections of current scoring functions continue to be a major limiting factor for the reliability of docking . indeed, accurately predicting the binding affinities of large sets of diverse proteinligand complexes remains one of the most important and difficult unsolved problems in computational biomolecular science. scoring functions are typically classified into three groups: force field, knowledge-based and empirical. force field scoring functions parameterize the potential energy of a complex as a sum of energy terms arising from bonded and non-bonded interactions . the functional form of each of these terms is characteristic of the particular force field, which in turn contains a number of parameters that are estimated from experimental data and computer simulations. these force fields were designed to model intermolecular potential energies, and thus do not account for entropy . knowledge-based scoring functions use the 3d co-ordinates of a large set of proteinligand complexes as a knowledge base. in this way, a putative proteinligand complex can be assessed on the basis of how similar its features are to those in the knowledge base. the features used are often the distributions of atomatom distances between protein and ligand in the complex. features commonly observed in the knowledge base score favourably, whereas less frequently observed features score unfavourably. when these contributions are summed over all pairs of atoms in the complex, the resulting score is converted into a pseudo-energy function, typically through a reverse boltzmann procedure, in order to provide an estimate of the binding affinity (e.g.). some knowledgebased scoring functions now include parameters that are fitted to experimental binding affinities (e.g.) or introduce information theory-driven improvements as well as  
