imaging, quantification and visualization of spatio-temporal patterning in mesc colonies under different culture conditions motivation: mouse embryonic stem cells (mescs) have developed into a prime system to study the regulation of pluripotency in stable cell lines. it is well recognized that different, established protocols for the maintenance of mesc pluripotency support morphologically and functionally different cell cultures. however, it is unclear how characteristic properties of cell colonies develop over time and how they are re-established after cell passage depending on the culture conditions. furthermore, it appears that cell colonies have an internal structure with respect to cell size, marker expression or biomechanical properties, which is not sufficiently understood. the analysis of these phenotypic properties is essential for a comprehensive understanding of mesc development and ultimately requires a bioinformatics approach to guarantee reproducibility and high-throughput data analysis. results: we developed an automated image analysis and colony tracking framework to obtain an objective and reproducible quantification of structural properties of cell colonies as they evolve in space and time. in particular, we established a method that quantifies changes in colony shape and (internal) motion using fluid image registration and image segmentation. the methodology also allows to robustly track motion, splitting and merging of colonies over a sequence of images. our results provide a first quantitative assessment of temporal mesc colony formation and estimates of structural differences between colony growth under different culture conditions. furthermore, we provide a stream-based visualization of structural features of individual colonies over time for the whole experiment, facilitating visual comprehension of differences between experimental conditions. thus, the presented method establishes the basis for the model-based analysis of mesc colony development. it can be easily extended to integrate further functional information using fluorescence signals and differentiation markers.mouse embryonic stem cells (mescs) are derived from the inner cell mass of a blastocyst-stage embryo. under appropriate conditions these cells can be maintained in a proliferative and undifferentiated to whom correspondence should be addressed. state over many passages (self-renewal) while retaining the ability to differentiate into a multitude of different cell types and repopulate an embryo (pluripotency) . depending on the culture conditions, mescs reveal different types and levels of heterogeneity. conventional culture conditions that promote self-renewal contain the cytokine leukemia inhibitory factor (lif) and serum factors. however, it has been demonstrated that mescs in these conditions show substantial variations in the expression levels of the transcription factors (tfs) nanog and rex1 associated with the differentiation propensity of the cells . replacing lif/serum conditions by 2i media, a novel serum-free medium containing two small inhibitor molecules, mescs are captured in a pluripotent ground state without any spontaneous differentiation . tf variations are greatly reduced and a rather stable and homogenous population of mescs is achieved. interestingly, it appears that differences in the state of a cell are not only detectable on a molecular level, but are also reflected in the morphology and the spatial arrangement of single mescs and the resulting cell colonies. although mescs cultured in 2i media form homogenous, dense clusters of cells, the same cells spread out under lif/serum forming rather flat and spatially extended cell colonies. in order to study the spatio-temporal behavior of mescs, it is ultimately necessary to establish a framework allowing for the quantification of time-dependent properties of cells and cell colonies. to systematically analyze these morphological differences with respect to colony growth, shape, motion, dynamic pattern formation and structural homogeneity, we established a livecell imaging system to continuously monitor mesc colonies under defined conditions. in the present work, we introduce a novel bioinformatics approach to automatically quantify the spatio-temporal structure of such cell cultures based on timelapse image sequences. herein, we focus on the description of the image-analytical methodology and show a set of potential measures and visualizations for the quantification of temporal colony development. we use a preliminary dataset of mesc cultures to demonstrate the feasibility of our approach and to discuss further applications. in particular, we argue that such quantitative measures are a fundamental prerequisite for the establishment of computational models of tissue organization.we have established a sophisticated framework for the automated image analysis, quantification and visualization of spatio-temporal patterning in mesc colonies. apart from standard image analysis methods, our approach uses a fluid-like image registration to assess the temporal development of cell colonies and to extract the developmental history of individual cell colonies. this approach is applicable at different levels of granularity (individual cells and clusters of cells), depending on the underlying image data. applying this methodology to a preliminary dataset, we demonstrate in a proof-of-principle that mescs show a distinctly different growth pattern under 2i and lif/serum conditions, which are both used to maintain stem cell pluripotency. although our analysis was initially focused only on a rather short sequence of phase contrast images, we can deduce that mescs under lif/serum conditions are more volatile and more heterogeneous as compared to culturing these cells under 2i conditions. these initial results demonstrate the feasibility of our approach and call for analysis of further image sequences to improve statistical power. it also appears very interesting to compare the results to growth patterns under other different seeding densities (e.g. starting from clonal density) and higher image frequencies. as the next step, we will establish a thorough benchmark for our system by analyzing a larger number of experiments under different conditions and create manually validated reference data. we will further explore more complex measures of colony shape and structures, e.g. zernike-or fourier decompositions and pca or ica as discussed in pincus and theriot (2007). our approach establishes the general framework to analyze colony development of mescs under various conditions. the approach can be extended to incorporate further available information as it is contained in fluorescence images or under differentiation inducing conditions. this will reveal possible correlations between internal cell states and spatio-temporal structure of colonies. in the long run, we aim to use this data to develop a mathematical model of mesc organization representing both intra-cellular and inter-cellular regulations. in particular, we will extend a previous established tf network model by a spatial dimension, thus including the concept of spatial heterogeneity among mescs. the presented methods for tracking, analyzing and visualizing the structural features of cell colonies over time will be indispensable to bridge the gap between phenomenological measurements and mechanistic principles in the context of mathematical modeling approaches.  
