data and text mining imdev: a graphical user interface to r multivariate analysis tools in microsoft excel interactive modules for data exploration and visualization (imdev) is a microsoft excel spreadsheet embedded application providing an integrated environment for the analysis of omics data through a user-friendly interface. individual modules enables interactive and dynamic analyses of large data by interfacing rs multivari-ate statistics and highly customizable visualizations with the spreadsheet environment, aiding robust inferences and generating information-rich data visualizations. this tool provides access to multiple comparisons with false discovery correction, hierarchical clustering , principal and independent component analyses, partial least squares regression and discriminant analysis, through an intuitive interface for creating high-quality two-and a three-dimensional visu-alizations including scatter plot matrices, distribution plots, dendro-grams, heat maps, biplots, trellis biplots and correlation networks. availability and implementation: freely available for download at http://sourceforge.net/projects/imdev/. implemented in r and vba and supported by microsoft excel (2003, 2007 and 2010). contact: john.newman@ars.usda.gov supplementary information: installation instructions, tutorials and users manual are available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/imdev/.omics experiments generate complex high-dimensional data requiring multivariate analyses. although basic spreadsheets are widely used for data storage and low-level statistical analyses, these currently lack tools for multivariate analyses and visualization. in contrast, the r project for statistical computing is a freely available software environment (r development core) that provides a variety of multivariate data analysis and visualization methods. despite its power, the command-line interface of r is a barrier to its broad use. through the application of rexcel , interactive modules for data exploration and visualization (imdev) unites the microsoft excel (ms excel) spreadsheet and r, to provide a user-friendly graphical interface to multivariate analysis and visualization. imdev also facilitates multivariate data interpretation by integrating dynamic data visualizations with univariate statistics, dimensional reduction methods, predictive modeling and network analyses tools.  
