imid: integrated molecular interaction database motivation: molecular interaction information, such as protein protein interactions and proteinsmall molecule interactions, is indispensable for understanding the mechanism of biological processes and discovering treatments for diseases. many databases have been built by manual annotation of literature to organize such information into structured form. however, most databases focus on only one type of interactions, which are often not well annotated and integrated with related functional information. results: in this study, we integrate molecular interaction information from literature by automatic information extraction and from manually annotated databases. we further integrate the relationships between protein/gene and other bio-entity terms including gene ontology terms, pathways, species and diseases to build an integrated molecular interaction database (imid). interactions can be selected by their associated probabilities. imid allows complex and versatile queries for context-specific molecular interactions, which are not available currently in other molecular interaction databases. availability: the database is located at www.integrativebiology.org. contact:molecular interactions, such as proteinprotein interaction (ppi) and proteinsmall molecule interaction, play important roles in almost all biological processes. information on molecular interactions is indispensable for our understanding of the mechanisms of biological processes and for the development of drugs. due to the importance of such information, manual annotation has been used to extract it from scientific literature and deposit it into various databases . in recent years, computational methods have also been developed to extract molecular interaction information from the literature .... to whom correspondence should be addressed.the context of molecular interactions such as the functions of the interactions [related pathways or gene ontology (go) terms] and the physical nature of the interactions (regulate, inhibit or phosphorylate, etc.) can be very useful for biologists searching for those interactions. however, current databases do not explicitly document such information. in studying molecular interactions, a researcher may wish to find all protein interactions related to a particular biological process/pathway/disease/species, or a combination of these terms (such as a pathway and a species). in addition, the researcher may want to know those interactions related to a particular type of chemical reaction such as phosphorylation. allowing researchers to perform the above complex searches requires not only integrating the heterogeneous data from different sources, but also organizing them in a highly structured form that enables complicated queries. availability of such tool will greatly help biologists in their daily research. in this study, we integrate molecular interaction information from both manually annotated databases and literature , and build a relational database, integrated molecular interaction database (imid, www.integrativebiology.org). users of imid can perform complex and versatile queries for context-specific molecular interactions. we expect imid to be a useful tool for researchers in biology and biomedical sciences.  
