systems biology immune system simulation online motivation: the recognition of antigenic peptides is a major event of an immune response. in current mesoscopic-scale simulators of the immune system, this crucial step has been modeled in a very approximated way. results: we have equipped an agent-based model of the immune system with immuno-informatics methods to allow the simulation of the cardinal events of the antigenic recognition, going from single peptides to whole proteomes. the recognition process accounts for b cell-epitopes prediction through parker-scale affinity estimation, class i and ii hla peptide prediction and binding through position-specific scoring matrices based on information from known hla epitopes prediction tools, and tcr binding to hlapeptide complex calculated as the averaged sum of a residueresidue contact potential. these steps are executed for all lymphocytes agents encountering the antigen in a wide-reaching monte carlo simulation. availability: http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/c-immsim-10.computational methods for the study of the immune system have grown to embed a great level of sophistication. usually the level of description adopted is that of cells. discrete mathematical models like cellular automata or agent based have shown to be more suitable for representing the details of the immunological processes. models of the immune system include lymphocytes and antigens like viruses or bacteria but they usually keep the description of the molecular recognition events at a very simplified level. this however, is the triggering event in the onset of the immune response. seeking for an adequate solution to this problem, we have enhanced our agent-based model of the immune system celada and seiden (1992) by embedding different in sillico methods for epitope recognition based on statistical methods derived from machine learning and trained on experimental data . the overall simulation is based on three events: (i) b-cell epitopes binding, (ii) class i and ii hla epitope binding and (iii) tcr binding to hlapeptide complexes. these events are independently executed by cells represented by agents and populating a given simulated biological volume. to whom correspondence should be addressed.the outcome is a fully detailed tracking of the dynamics of cell populations together with molecules involved in the epitope recognition process including those immune complexes exposed on the surface of antigen-processing cells.the immune system simulation server described here offers the chance to test the overall immunogenicity of a generic protein sequence in the form of its amino acids sequence. it is based on an agent-based model of the immune system coupled with epitope prediction tools derived from the field of immuno-informatics and novel methods to assess proteinprotein binding affinity on the basis of the work performed by miyazawa and jernigan on protein potentials that provides us with a method for assessing the chances of direct interactions among proteins in the simulation. the proposed methods for assessing epitope discovery and binding are embedded in the architecture in a modular way and as such can be upgraded or substituted by more accurate methods should one become available.we have implemented as a web service a tool to calculate the immune response to a generic pathogenic secondary structure. the user inputs a sequence or a set of sequences comprising the interested pathogen as fasta sequences or by means of uniprot identifiers, then specifies the injection schedule in terms of time and dosage. the simulator will generate a virtual injection schedule and the corresponding immune response (if any) to the peptides identified in the secondary sequences specified in input. other parameters are customizable such as the simulated volume and the random seed determining the specificity of the initial population of lymphocytes. since the method is of the monte carlo type, a larger volume will result in more accurate data. moreover, for the same reason, more simulations will allow for better statistical power.  
