improved large-scale prediction of growth inhibition patterns using the nci60 cancer cell line panel motivation: recent large-scale omics initiatives have catalogued the somatic alterations of cancer cell line panels along with their pharmacological response to hundreds of compounds. in this study, we have explored these data to advance computational approaches that enable more effective and targeted use of current and future anticancer therapeutics. results: we modelled the 50 growth inhibition bioassay end-point (gi 50) of 17 142 compounds screened against 59 cancer cell lines from the nci60 panel (941 831 data-points, matrix 93.08 complete) by integrating the chemical and biological (cell line) information. we determine that the protein, gene transcript and mirna abundance provide the highest predictive signal when modelling the gi 50 endpoint, which significantly outperformed the dna copy-number variation or exome sequencing data (tukeys honestly significant difference, p 0.05). we demonstrate that, within the limits of the data, our approach exhibits the ability to both interpolate and extrapolate compound bioactivities to new cell lines and tissues and, although to a lesser extent, to dissimilar compounds. moreover, our approach outperforms previous models generated on the gdsc dataset. finally, we determine that in the cases investigated in more detail, the predicted drug-pathway associations and growth inhibition patterns are mostly consistent with the experimental data, which also suggests the possibility of identifying genomic markers of drug sensitivity for novel compounds on novel cell lines.cultured cell lines have, despite their inherent limitations, served as versatile preclinical disease models for cancer drug discovery . recent large-scale multi-omics initiatives have catalogued the somatic alterations of cancer cell line panels along with their pharmacological response to hundreds of compounds , enabling us to now make links between the compounds action and the v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.the primary goal of this study was to capitalize on the increasing amount of in vitro cell line sensitivity and molecular profiling data of cancer cells to predict the growth inhibition patterns of compounds on the nci60 panel. although the principles of pharmacogenomicpredicted relative growth inhibition pattern of growth inhibition in the 10-fold cv model (i.e. interpolation) along with the 75 ci calculated using conformal prediction. complex, and overall matching, inhibition patterns are reflected by the predictions. for instance, the tk-10, rxf-393 and a498 renal cell lines (marked with an asterisk) were predicted to be highly resistant to mtx, whereas the effect of mtx on sensitive cell lines, namely uo-31, sn12c, caki-1 and achn, was also correctly predicted. cell lines originating from the same tissue are in the same colour (breast: red, central nervous system: orange, colon: olive green, lung cancer: dark green, leukaemia: turquoise, melanoma: blue, ovarian: blue, prostate: purple, renal: magenta)improved large-scale prediction of growth inhibition patternsmodelling are not new, this study represents novelty in the field, as, to our knowledge, it is the first effort to combine large-scale nci anticancer screening data using the nci60 panel with the available cell line profiling information, including error bars. unlike previous modelling studies on the nci60 panel , we simultaneously integrated the chemical information and cell line profiling data, which enables us to predict the growth inhibition patterns and to inter-and extrapolate on the chemical and cell line domains. in addition, coupling conformal prediction to the random forest enabled the definition of ci for the individual predictions. we consistently found the highest predictive signals in the gene expression, mirna and protein abundance data. the incorporation of prior biological knowledge by summarizing the gene expression data at the pathway level did not provide an additional predictive signal. interestingly, high predictive power was attained with models trained on gene expression data from the genes displaying the most variable transcript levels across the cell line panel. encoding cell lines with cell line kernels led, in some cases, to models with comparable predictive power to those trained explicitly on the cell line profiling data. although encoding cell lines with cell line kernels may be sufficient to model the compound pgi 50 values from the nci60 panel, in our view this would not be the case on datasets comprising highly dissimilar cell lines. in addition, we note, in particular, that the dirac and mlt kernels do not permit us to extrapolate in the cell line space, likely rendering them less useful in those cases. the sparseness of the cnv and exome sequencing data may be the reason for the poor model performance, and, therefore, it remains to be seen whether the modelling of cell line panels with more comprehensive mutational data leads to better predictions . a major challenge to the cell line sensitivity prediction is the extrapolation of compound bioactivities to novel cell lines and to structurally distinct compounds. we did not find significant differences in performance between the interpolation and the extrapolation to new cell lines (loco) and tissues (loto), with mean rmse test values in all cases smaller than twice the mean uncertainty value of the bioactivity measurements. this observation enables the prediction of compound activities on cancer cell lines for which little bioactivity data are currently available; however, extrapolation is still improved by the presence of cell lines from the same tissue/ontogeny in the training set. given that similar compounds exhibit similar growth inhibition profiles , it was expected that the model performance would considerably decrease when predicting the activity of structurally dissimilar compounds. this was indeed the case because mean rmse test values of approximately three times the average experimental uncertainty were obtained when extrapolating in the chemical space (locco). although the error in prediction should ideally be close to the experimental uncertainty, this performance may still be useful for compound prioritization. previous studies have shown that adding physicochemical descriptors or increasing the bit-string length of the morgan fingerprints (set to 256 here) leads to higher predictive power when modelling a highly diverse set of molecules . here, we did not obtain higher predictive power when increasing the bit-string length, when adding physicochemical descriptors to the compound fingerprints, or when using morgan fingerprints in binary format . our approach displays a higher predictive ability (10 decrease of cv rmse) than the methods previously applied to the gdsc dataset (supplementary text and supplementary). moreover, the application of our approach to the cancer cell line encyclopedia (ccle) dataset led to statistically validated models, displaying r 2 0 test values of$0.74, which were comparable to those obtained on the gdsc and nci60 datasets. given that gene expression profiles for the 44 cell lines comprised in the ccle and the nci60 panel are highly correlated (spearmans r s 0.88) (supplementary), we suggest that pgm models trained on the nci60 panel could be applied to the ccle cell line panel, which could identify new purposes for the 17 142 compounds considered here . it is also important to consider how the cell line sensitivity is quantified for the application of the type of model presented here. fallahiapplied a multi-parametric analysis to a dataset comprising the activity of 64 anticancer drugs on 53 breast cancer cell lines. the results of this study indicate that the parameters of the doseresponse curve vary systematically and depend on both the cell line as well as the drug class. for instance, the moa of a drug has a strong influence on drug efficacy (e max ), potency (ic 50 ) and on the steepness of the drug response curve. overall, this study indicates that parameters other than the potency of the drug response curve should be considered in studies comparing drug activity, as they are likely to provide crucial insights into the biology of the cell lines response to drug treatment and into the drugs moa. an additional key aspect is the consistency of the in vitro cell line sensitivity data. a previous study reported a rather low correlation of the cell line sensitivity data from the ccle and gdsc datasets. we found low concordance between the nci60 and the ccle sensitivity data (supplementary), and we did not obtain a high correlation between the predictions calculated with a model trained on the nci60 data for eight drugs on 44 cell lines shared by the ccle and the subset of the nci60 cell lines considered here. actually, the rmse values for these predictions against the experimental data from the ccle and, the pic 50 values from the ccle and the pgi 50 from the nci60 dataset for these eight drugs and 44 cell-lines was comparable, namely 0.87 log 10 units, indicating that high predictive power cannot be attained given the low concordance of the sensitivity data from these two datasets. these results come as no surprise, given the different surrogates of cytotoxicity exploited by the assays used to screen the ccle and nci60 panels, namely metabolic activity and protein abundance, respectively. therefore, we conclude, in accord with haibe, that models trained on the nci60 data set are likely to fail on sensitivity data measured with a different experimental procedure, e.g. the ccle or gdsc datasets. finally, although cultured cell lines and primary tumours differ genetically and 2d cell lines cultures do not recapitulate the complex tumour microenvironment, investigating the extent to which gene expression (and other cell line profiling) data can be used to model in vitro cell line sensitivity can help researchers to develop approaches for the prediction of clinical drug responses using the genomic data of tumour samples .  
