structural bioinformatics improved predictions by pcons.net using multiple templates multiple templates can often be used to build more accurate homology models than models built from a single template. here we introduce pconsm, an automated protocol that uses multiple templates to build protein models. pconsm has been among the top-performing methods in the recent casp experiments and consistently perform better than the single template models used in pcons.net. in particular for the easier targets with many alternative templates with a high degree of sequence identity, quality is readily improved with a few percentages over the highest ranked model built on a single template. pconsm is available as an additional pipeline within the pcons.net protein structure prediction server.accurate predictions of protein structures are important, as we will never have access to experimental structures for the vast majority of proteins. while high-quality experimental structures are extremely important, homology-modeling techniques are, widely applicable, much cheaper and can be applied on genomic scale. a wide array of methods for protein structure prediction exists, both stand-alone software such as modeller and nest , or available as web servers. the performance of different methods is assessed biannually through the community-wide casp experiment. among other things, casp has highlighted the importance of consensus-based approaches to the structure prediction problem. the oldest such method is pcons . the creation of pcons was inspired by the successful consensus predictions made by the cafasp team at casp4. pcons has been among the topperforming automated predictors since casp5 and the top model quality assessment program in both casp7 and 8 . the pcons method is available as a web server at http://pcons.net/, where users can upload their protein sequences and obtain consensus predictions. one limitation in pcons.net is that it is based on single template models, while it is well accepted that the use of multiple templates readily can improve the quality of models . however, one problem when using multiple templates to whom correspondence should be addressed. is that sometimes the different alignments contain contradictory information, which results in convergence problems. here, we show that pconsm on average improve the models with a few percentage points within the popular pcons.net protein modeling web server. the benefits of pconsm are several. primarily, the qualities of the models appear on average to increase somewhat. secondly, the use of multiple templates frequently leads to larger coverage of the target sequence, which means that less free modeling is necessary. the throughput of pcons.net [detailed in] is not affected by pconsm. an initial model is obtained within a few minutes and the final model is achieved within 24 h for the majority of targets.  
