structural bioinformatics improved protein–ligand binding affinity prediction by using a curvature-dependent surface-area model motivation: hydrophobic effect plays a pivotal role in most protein ligand binding. state-of-the-art proteinligand scoring methods usually treat hydrophobic free energy as surface tension, which is proportional to interfacial surface area for simplicity and efficiency. however, this treatment ignores the role of molecular shape, which has been found very important by either experimental or theoretical studies. results: we propose a new empirical scoring function, named cyscore. cyscore improves the prediction accuracy by using a novel curvature-dependent surface-area model, which is able to distinguish convex, planar and concave surface in hydrophobic free energy calculation. benchmark tests show that this model significantly improves the proteinligand scoring and cyscore outperforms a variety of well established scoring functions using pdbbind benchmark sets for binding affinity correlation and ranking tests. we expect the curvature-dependent surface-area model and cyscore would contribute to the study of proteinligand interactions. availability: cyscore is available to non-commercial users atscoring functions are approximate computational methods for predicting the binding affinity of two docked molecules, especially, a protein and a ligand. they are widely used in structure-based drug discovery and other molecular modeling applications, including virtual screening, de novo drug design and lead optimization . in the past several decades, a variety of scoring functions have been developed. in general, they can be classified into three types, force-field-based , knowledge-based and empirical scoring functions . force-field-based scoring functions are derived from first principle, which employs classical force fields to compute the direct interaction energies, e.g. van der waals and electrostatic energies, between the ligand and its target protein. sometimes these methods are combined with gb/sa or pb/sa methods to address the solvation effect . knowledge-based scoring functions are derived from statistical potentials, which predict the binding free energy using the probabilities of finding atom pairs at a given distance between proteins and ligands. they have obtained a high level of prediction accuracy according to some recent studies . however, knowledge-based scoring functions usually require large numbers of terms which are prone to over fitting by training, and can hardly provide immediate physical interpretation of results. those weak points limit their applications. empirical scoring functions incorporate the advantages of both force-field-based and knowledge-based scoring functions. they calculate the overall binding free energy as a sum of several physically meaningful terms, while their coefficients are derived from the regression analysis on experimental data. as they can achieve comparably accurate prediction and provide physical insights of proteinligand binding as well, empirical scoring functions are widely used in structure-based drug-design applications. in this article, we propose a new empirical scoring function, named cyscore. it is composed of hydrophobic free energy, van der waals interaction energy, hydrogen bond interaction energy and ligands conformational entropy. we mainly focus on improving the prediction of hydrophobic free energy, because it is regarded to be dominant in most proteinligand binding . hydrophobic effect is the observed tendency of nonpolar surfaces to association in an aqueous solution. many theoretical approaches have been proposed to study its mechanism, such as iceberg model , scaled-particle theory based void volume models . both experimental and theoretical studies have pointed out that hydrophobic effect depends not only on surface area, but also on shape . in the conventional proteinligand scoring methods, hydrophobic free energy is usually treated as surface tension, which is proportional to interfacial surface area for simplicity and efficiency. obviously, this treatment ignores the role of molecular shape and hinders the more accurate prediction to whom correspondence should be addressed. of hydrophobic free energy. inspired by the thermodynamic research of tolman (1949) and the pioneer work of), we took curvature as the descriptor of shape and proposed a novel curvature-dependent surfacearea model. our analyses demonstrate that this model is superior to the conventional surface-area model significantly in protein ligand scoring. compared to a variety of well-established scoring functions, it achieves the top performance using the well known pdbbind benchmark sets . the methods and results will be elaborated in the following sections.in this section, we first give an overview of cyscore. then we investigate how the curvature-dependent surface-area model is superior to the conventional models in scoring proteinligand interactions. finally, to gain an overall performance of cyscore, we compare it to a variety of well-established scoring functions using pdbbind benchmarks.  
