improved side-chain modeling by coupling clash-detection guided iterative search with rotamer relaxation motivation: side-chain modeling has seen wide applications in computational structure biology. most of the popular side-chain modeling programs explore the conformation space using discrete rigid rotamers for speed and efficiency. however, in the tightly packed environments of protein interiors, these methods will inherently lead to atomic clashes and hinder the prediction accuracy. results: we present a side-chain modeling method (cis-rr), which couples a novel clash-detection guided iterative search (cis) algorithm with continuous torsion space optimization of rotamers (rr). benchmark testing shows that compared with the existing popular side-chain modeling methods, cis-rr removes atomic clashes much more effectively and achieves comparable or even better prediction accuracy while having comparable computational cost. we believe that cis-rr could be a useful method for accurate side-chain modeling. availability: cis-rr is available to non-commercial users at our websiteside-chain modeling is the prediction of a proteins side-chain conformation for a given backbone structure. due to its importance in protein design , point mutation analysis , proteinprotein docking , homology modeling and other aspects of structural modeling, side-chain modeling has been intensively studied for many years. a thorough search through the continuous side-chain conformations is inefficient and not feasible given the existing search algorithms and current computational power. luckily, side-chain dihedral angles are not evenly distributed, which occur in tight clusters around certain values . based on these clusters, the side-chain conformational space can be discretized into rotamers which represent the conformations of these clusters, and an ensemble of rotamers for all side-chain types is thus called a rotamer library . based on rotamer definition, side-chain modeling can be efficiently transformed into a combinatorial search problem which is to find the best rotamer combination from all possible combinations of side-chain rotamers. for this methodology, many efforts have attempted including development of powerful scoring functions , well-sampled rotamer libraries and effective search strategies . so far, rotamer-based side-chain modeling methods have become the most popular ones. however, because the side-chain conformations are approximated by discrete rotamers, these methods could inherently cause atomic clashes in the modeled structures, preventing them from accurate modeling of protein side chains. furthermore, atomic clashes can lead to high energy and instability of structures, and thus the elimination of atomic clashes is beneficial for the subsequent analysis such as proteinprotein docking . atomic clashes can be alleviated to some extent by utilizing a very large rotamer library or expanding a rotamer into finely sampled subrotamers . other more sophisticated approaches could include an additional step of rotamer refinement by off-rotamer space sampling . in our study, to achieve a more effective side-chain modeling, we attempt to integrate the advances from side-chain modeling in both rotamer-based search and rotamer optimization. our method, called cis-rr, performs clash-detection guided iterative search (cis) of side-chain rotamers while continuously optimizes side-chain conformations using a conjugate gradients method. careful implementation of cis-rr shows obvious improvements of prediction accuracy and elimination of atomic clashes, in contrast with the traditional iterative search method. further benchmark testing shows, compared with the existing popular side-chain modeling programs, cis-rr removes atomic clashes much more effectively and achieves comparable or even better predictionpage: 786 785790in this section, we will first give an overview of our method cisrr. then we will analyze the contributions of cis and rr to the improvement of side-chain modeling and further investigate how cis-rr effectively eliminates clashes. finally, to gain an overall performance of cis-rr, we compare it to several existing popular side-chain modeling programs.  
