systems biology improved structure, function and compatibility for cellprofiler: modular high-throughput image analysis software there is a strong and growing need in the biology research community for accurate, automated image analysis. here, we describe cellprofiler 2.0, which has been engineered to meet the needs of its growing user base. it is more robust and user friendly, with new algorithms and features to facilitate high-throughput work. imagej plugins can now be run within a cellprofiler pipeline.cellprofiler is freely available, open-source software that enables researchers without training in computer programming to measure biological phenotypes quantitatively and automatically from thousands of images. with an interface designed by biologists and underlying algorithms developed by computer scientists, cellprofiler bridges the gap between advanced image analysis algorithms and scientists who lack computational expertise. in the 4 years since its publication , it has been rapidly adopted by the worldwide biological community and cited in more than 250 articles. roughly half of its users are outside the usa. cellprofiler was initially designed for high-throughput image analysis but is often used for small-scale projects. this highlights the trend toward quantifying information in images regardless of experiment size. cellprofilers interface lets researchers build customized chains of interoperable image analysis modules to identify and measure biological objects and features in images. these modular pipelines can be saved and shared with colleagues. cellprofiler has been used to measure individual cells, colonies of cells and whole organisms in a wide range of assays (e.g. counting cells, measuring staining intensities and scoring complex phenotypes with machine to whom correspondence should be addressed. learning) and at many experimental scales (from a few to hundreds of thousands of images). a variety of cell types have been analyzed, including budding yeast, drosophila, mouse, rat and dozens of human cell types. the diverse measurements generated by cellprofiler provide raw material for machine-learning algorithms that can identify challenging phenotypes . cellprofiler fills a unique role in the software landscape. it is a modular, high-throughput, open-source biological image analysis package, and it won the 2009 bio-it world best practices award in it & informatics. cellprofiler 2.0 improves upon the design of the original version, resulting in professionally engineered software with improved usability and functionality, as well as integration with other open-source image-related software.  
