sequence analysis a matlab-based tool for accurate detection of perfect overlapping and nested inverted repeats in dna sequences palindromic sequences, or inverted repeats (irs), in dna sequences involve important biological processes such as dnaprotein binding, dna replication and dna transposition. development of bioinformatics tools that are capable of accurately detecting perfect irs can enable genome-wide studies of ir patterns in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. different from conventional string-comparison approaches, we propose a novel algorithm that uses a cumulative score system based on a prime number representation of nucleotide bases. we then implemented this algorithm as a matlab-based program for perfect ir detection. in comparison with other existing tools, our program demonstrates a high accuracy in detecting nested and overlapping irs. availability and implementation: the source code is freely available onpalindromic sequences, or inverted repeats (irs), are sequences that can form complementary pairing with themselves. found in abundance throughout both eukaryotic and prokaryotic genomes, the ability of irs to self-pair allows for the formation of dna secondary structures that serve as intermediates in biological reactions such as dna replication and transposition : cruciforms can initiate dna replication by changing the supercoiling level or chromatin structure, affecting the binding of dna replication regulatory factors ; dna hairpins are a result of the palindromic nature of perfect and imperfect irs, allowing them to act as the binding sites of dimeric regulatory factors and aid in the transposition process . both perfect and imperfect irs also have an impact on genomic structure: transposons prefer palindromic insertion sites . transposons can be present in eukaryotic genomes in a nested manner by occurring within other transposons . hence, analysis of nested and overlapping perfect irs can aid in a variety of research areas including the study of regulatory factor binding sites and of nested transposons. currently available tools in the detection of palindromes do not perform well in terms of result quality . to make genome-wide studies of palindromic sequences feasible, we need to develop efficient and accurate tools for detecting both perfect and quasi-palindromic sequences (palindromes contain mismatches and/or non-palindromic spacers). here we describe a novel algorithm for a tool detecting perfect irs, implemented as a matlab function, capable of running on genome-scale inputs. then process each remaining substring with a filtering step to eliminate non-irs that happen to be balanced in nucleotide numbers.different from conventional string-comparison approaches adopted in the existing tools, our matlab program uses a novel prime number-based algorithm and can accurately detect nested and overlapping irs of lengths ranging from 4 to 1000 nt. this tool is practically feasible for perfect ir detection in large dna sequences. hence, this tool will assist in the effective and accurate detection of perfect irs in a genome-wide scale.  
