systems biology improvements in the reconstruction of time-varying gene regulatory networks: dynamic programming and regularization by information sharing among genes method: dynamic bayesian networks (dbns) have been applied widely to reconstruct the structure of regulatory processes from time series data, and they have established themselves as a standard modelling tool in computational systems biology. the conventional approach is based on the assumption of a homogeneous markov chain, and many recent research efforts have focused on relaxing this restriction. an approach that enjoys particular popularity is based on a combination of a dbn with a multiple changepoint process, and the application of a bayesian inference scheme via reversible jump markov chain monte carlo (rjmcmc). in the present article, we expand this approach in two ways. first, we show that a dynamic programming scheme allows the changepoints to be sampled from the correct conditional distribution, which results in improved convergence over rjmcmc. second, we introduce a novel bayesian clustering and information sharing scheme among nodes, which provides a mechanism for automatic model complexity tuning. results: we evaluate the dynamic programming scheme on expression time series for arabidopsis thaliana genes involved in circadian regulation. in a simulation study we demonstrate that the regularization scheme improves the network reconstruction accuracy over that obtained with recently proposed inhomogeneous dbns. for gene expression profiles from a synthetically designed saccharomyces cerevisiae strain under switching carbon metabolism we show that the combination of both: dynamic programming and regularization yields an inference procedure that outperforms two alternative established network reconstruction methods from the biology literature. availability and implementation: a matlab implementation of the algorithm and a supplementary paper with algorithmic details and further results for the arabidopsis data can be downloaded from: http://www.statistik.tu-dortmund.de/two paradigm shifts have revolutionized molecular biology in the second half of this decade: systems biology, where the objective is to model the whole complexity of cellular processes in a holistic sense, and synthetic biology, which enables biologists to build new molecular pathways in vivo, i.e. in living cells. the combination of both concepts allows the viability of machine learning approaches for network reconstruction to be tested in a rigorous way. as an alternative to mechanistic models , which provide a powerful approach to the modelling of small systems composed of a few components, and correlation/mutual information based approaches, which do not distinguish between direct and indirect interactions , dynamic bayesian networks (dbns) have emerged as a promising tradeoff between over-simplicity and loss of computational tractability . the standard assumption underlying dbns is that of homogeneity: temporal processes and the time-series they generate are assumed to be governed by a homogeneous markov relation. however, regulatory interactions and signal transduction processes in the cell are usually adaptive and change in response to external stimuli. following earlier approaches aiming to relax the homogeneity assumption for undirected graphical models , various recent research efforts have therefore addressed the homogeneity assumption for dbns. an approach that has become popular recently is based on a combination of a dbn with a multiple changepoint process, and the application of a bayesian inference scheme via reversible jump markov chain monte carlo (rjmcmc). robinson andproposed a discrete inhomogeneous dbn, which allows for different structures in different segments of the time series, with a regularization term penalizing differences among the structures.proposed a continuous inhomogeneous dbn, in which the parameters are allowed to vary, while a common network structure provides information sharing among the time series segments. lbre (2007) andproposed an alternative continuous inhomogeneous dbn, which is more flexible in that it allows the network structure to vary among the segments. the model proposed inis a close cousin of an inhomogeneous dbn. as opposed to the first three approaches, (hyper-)parameters are not consistently inferred withinwe have proposed two improvements for time-varying dbns: a gibbs sampling (gs) scheme based on dynamic programming (dp) as an alternative to rjmcmc, and information coupling between nodes based on bayesian clustering. the evaluation on a real gene expression dataset from a.thaliana suggests that gs-dp shows faster mixing and convergence than mh/rjmcmc. a comparative evaluation on synthetic data demonstrates that the new model based on information coupling between nodes compares favourably with earlier models that either employ network-wide (class 1) or nodespecific (class 2) changepoints. on gene expression time series from a recent study of synthetic biology in s.cerevisiae the proposed model has outperformed two state-of-the-art network reconstruction methods. these findings suggest that the proposed method makes important contributions both to inference and performance of network reconstruction methods, and hence adds a valuable new tool to the kit of computational systems biology. in our future work we will investigate different choices for the prior on node cluster formations, introduced in section 2.3, exploring methods from bayesian non-parametrics based on dirichlet process priors.  
