improving microrna target prediction by modeling with unambiguously identified microrna-target pairs from clip-ligation studies motivation: micrornas (mirnas) are small non-coding rnas that are extensively involved in many physiological and disease processes. one major challenge in mirna studies is the identification of genes targeted by mirnas. currently, most researchers rely on computational programs to initially identify target candidates for subsequent validation. although considerable progress has been made in recent years for computational target prediction, there is still significant room for al-gorithmic improvement. results: here, we present an improved target prediction algorithm, which was developed by mod-eling high-throughput profiling data from recent clipl (crosslinking and immunoprecipitation followed by rna ligation) sequencing studies. in these clipl-seq studies, the rna sequences in each mirna-target pair were covalently linked and unambiguously determined experimentally. by analyzing the clipl data, many known and novel features relevant to target recognition were identified and then used to build a computational model for target prediction. comparative analysis showed that the new algorithm had improved performance over existing algorithms when applied to independent experimental data. availability and implementation: all the target prediction data as well as the prediction tool can be accessed at mirdbmicrornas (mirnas) are small non-coding rnas that play important regulatory roles in many physiological and disease processes . about 2000 human mirnas have been reported and collectively these mirnas regulate the expression of thousands of gene targets at both post-transcriptional and translational levels . reliable identification of gene targets is critical for functional characterization of mirnas. currently, experimental identification of mirna targets is a timeconsuming process and thus most researchers rely on computational tools to first predict a set of promising target candidates for further experimental validation. the first step in computational target prediction is to identify relevant features that are characteristic of mirna target recognition. in recent years, significant progress has been made on this subject and multiple features that are relevant to mirna targeting have been reported, such as target pairing to the 5 0-end of the mirna (i.e. the seed sequence) and structural accessibility of the target sites for mirna binding . for algorithm development, the next step is to combine various target recognition features in a computational model for target prediction. to achieve thisimportant but challenging objective, high-quality experimental training data are usually required to properly weight various target features for development of prediction models. most existing target prediction algorithms have been developed in this way by training with various high-throughput profiling data, such as with microarray profiling data or with clip (crosslinking and immunoprecipitation) sequencing data . however, despite steady progress in computational target prediction, available bioinformatics tools still have sub-optimal performance as revealed by subsequent validation experiments. currently, one major obstacle in computational algorithm development is the lack of high-quality training data from experimental studies. in recent years, multiple high-throughput studies have been performed to experimentally identify mirna targets. for example, a major experimental strategy, clip has been developed to identify transcript targets associated with functional mirna-induced silencing complex (mirna-risc) . one prominent example is hits-clip, which identifies short transcript sequences that are bound to the ago protein by cross-linking the rna strand to the protein, followed by immunoprecipitation and high-throughput rna sequencing . another widely used experimental strategy for target identification is to analyze downregulated transcripts by mirna overexpression with microarrays . these high-throughput experimental datasets had previously been utilized to train multiple established algorithms for mirna target prediction. although highly useful, there are also major challenges associated with clip-seq or microarray data for target prediction modeling. one major unresolved issue is that the exact target sequence in each mirna/target pair is unknown. as a result, computational inference, which is an errorprone process, is necessary to predict the target sites from clip-seq or microarray data. to address this challenge experimentally, improved clip strategies have been developed to directly identify mirna-target pairs residing in the same risc complexes (crosslinking and immunoprecipitation followed by mirna/target ligation, termed clipl in our analysis). the first clipl-seq method, termed clash, was reported by helwak and colleagues . subsequently, another similar clipl-seq method was also reported by). the cliplseq method can unambiguously identify both a mirna and its cognate target site in the same risc complex, thus allowing direct characterization of mirna target recognition features. with clipl-seq, thousands of mirna-target pairs have been identified . in this study, public clipl-seq data were systematically analyzed and used to develop an improved algorithm for mirna target prediction.one major obstacle in computational target prediction is the lack of reliable experimental data to guide computational data modeling. to map the target sites for individual mirnas more precisely, clipl methods have been developed recently to link a mirna to its target site in the same risc complex. thus, clipl-seq profiling data have provided an unprecedented opportunity to study mirna target recognition features in a more precise manner as compared with conventional approaches . in particular, by analyzing individual nucleotide positions in the target sites, many novel position-specific sequence and structural features have been identified (presented inand). further, clipl analysis also confirmed certain well-characterized target features such as cross-species conservation of seed-binding sites and the relevance of target site location within the transcript. by combining both known and newly identified target recognition features, an improved target prediction model, mirtarget was developed by training with clipl-seq data. the robust performance of mirtarget has also been validated with independent experimental profiling data. both canonical and non-canonical target sites have been identified in clipl-seq studies. however, our recent clipl-seq analysisimproving mirna target prediction with identified mrna-target pairsindicates that non-canonical targeting usually does not lead to target downregulation . as such, non-canonical targeting represents a set of interesting but poorly understood mirna/target interactions that are not directly related to regulation of target expression. in contrast, canonical targeting involving perfect seed pairing usually leads to significant target downregulation. this raised an interesting question as to how an effective mirna target should be defined. non-canonical binding between a mirna and a transcript could be functionally important, but may not involve target downregulation. one possibility is that non-canonical mirna binding to a transcript may be related to the competing endogenous rnas hypothesis as a way to sequester mirnas from regulating the expression of canonical targets . in this study, the main focus is to identify mirna target sites, which leads to significant downregulation of target expression upon binding by the mirna. thus, only canonical target sites are considered by the prediction model. however, we would like to emphasize that prediction of non-canonical-binding sites may also be of practical importance, especially when functional impacts of such non-canonical interactions are better characterized in the future.  
