structural bioinformatics improving the detection of transmembrane β-barrel chains with n-to-1 extreme learning machines motivation: transmembrane -barrels (tmbbs) are extremely important proteins that play key roles in several cell functions. they cross the lipid bilayer with -barrel structures. tmbbs are presently found in the outer membranes of gram-negative bacteria and of mitochondria and chloroplasts. loop exposure outside the bacterial cell membranes makes tmbbs important targets for vaccine or drug therapies. in genomes, they are not highly represented and are difficult to identify with experimental approaches. several computational methods have been developed to discriminate tmbbs from other types of proteins. however, the best performing approaches have a high fraction of false positive predictions. results: in this article, we introduce a new machine learning approach for tmbb detection based on n-to-1 extreme learning machines that significantly outperforms previous methods achieving a matthews correlation coefficient of 0.82, a probability of correct prediction of 0.92 and a sensitivity of 0.73. availability: the method and the cross-validation sets are available at the web pagetransmembrane -barrel (tmbb) proteins cross the lipid bilayer with a series of -strands arranged in a cylindrical geometry and forming a structure that resembles a barrel . tmbbs can be membrane anchors or membrane-bound enzymes endowed with functions relevant to the entire cell metabolism and including active ion transport, passive nutrient intake and defense against attack proteins . while all living organisms have transmembrane proteins organized into all -helical bundles, tmbbs are presently found in the outer membranes of gram-negative bacteria, mitochondria and chloroplasts. tmbbs are estimated to be encoded by as many as 23 of the genes in gramnegative bacteria . however, very few tmbb structures are available at atomic resolution from gram-negative organismsseveral computational methods have been developed to predict tmbbs from protein sequences. two prediction problems can be addressed: (i) the prediction of protein topology (both strand localization along the protein sequence and orientation of the loops with respect to the membrane plane); and (ii) tmbb detection in genomes. when the interest focuses on the prediction of the protein topology, it has been shown that the best performing methods are based on hidden markov models or grammatical restrained hidden conditional random fields . the detection of tmmbs in a set of proteins, as large as the whole genome, is more difficult due to the cryptic nature of the tmbb structure as compared with that of the all -membrane proteins . computational methods for tmbb detection can identify candidate genes in order to perform experimental validations. to address this task, a wide variety of algorithms has been developed including: approaches based on sequence homology detection , machine learning and physicochemical properties of tmbbs . in this article, we tackle the problem of tmbb detection and significantly improve over existing algorithms taking advantage of previous works. in particular, we exploit the effort made byin generating a reliable dataset and defining a thorough comparison with previous methods. furthermore, we refine the approach of pollastri and co-workers by incorporating their n-to-1 method in an extreme learning machine (elm) framework .  
