structural bioinformatics improving your target-template alignment with modalign modalign is an interactive web-based tool aimed at helping protein structure modelers to inspect and manually modify the alignment between the sequences of a target protein and of its template(s). it interactively computes, displays and, upon modification of the target-template alignment, updates the multiple sequence alignments of the two protein families, their conservation score, secondary structure and solvent accessibility values, and local quality scores of the implied three-dimensional model(s). although it has been designed to simplify the target-template alignment step in modeling, it is suitable for all cases where a sequence alignment needs to be inspected in the context of other biological information. availability and implementation: freely available on the web atprotein sequence alignment is a key step in most, if not all, applications of protein bioinformatics. evolutionary analysis, functional assignment and comparative modeling projects all heavily rely on an accurate sequence alignment. the alignment plays a particularly pivotal role in comparative modeling: if the targettemplate alignment contains errors, it is extremely difficult to correct them in either the model building or the refinement stage. in the case of difficult comparative modeling tasks, there can be several regions that have structurally diverged between the target and the template(s). to optimize the alignment in such regions, expert modelers take into account as much information as possible. this includes sequence conservation patterns in multiple sequence alignments of the target and template evolutionary families, secondary structure states, and often their expert biological knowledge. moreover, to find potential errors in the alignment, several models based on different alignment versions are usually built and analyzed in terms of parameters such as unfavorable burial of charged residues. combining all this information during alignment optimization is often difficult and time-consuming and without thorough inspection of the sequence and structural parameters can lead to unspotted errors and inaccurate models. to whom correspondence should be addressed.here we describe an interactive web-based alignment editor that makes alignment optimization simpler. it works as a dashboard for computing, displaying, inspecting and updating alignment related information in real time. the tool also automatically builds models according to the alignment that is being inspected (without modeling insertions) and allows the quantitative assessment of their global and local quality. finally, the edited alignment can be directly used for building a full length three-dimensional model using modeller .  
