imseq—a fast and error aware approach to immunogenetic sequence analysis motivation: recombined t-and b-cell receptor repertoires are increasingly being studied using next generation sequencing (ngs) in order to interrogate the repertoire composition as well as changes in the distribution of receptor clones under different physiological and disease states. this type of analysis requires efficient and unambiguous clonotype assignment to a large number of ngs read sequences, including the identification of the incorporated v and j gene segments and the cdr3 sequence. current tools have deficits with respect to performance, accuracy and documentation of their underlying algorithms and usage. results: we present imseq, a method to derive clonotype repertoires from ngs data with sophisticated routines for handling errors stemming from pcr and sequencing artefacts. the application can handle different kinds of input data originating from single-or paired-end sequencing in different configurations and is generic regarding the species and gene of interest. we have carefully evaluated our method with simulated and real world data and show that imseq is superior to other tools with respect to its clonotyping as well as standalone error correction and runtime performance. availability and implementation: imseq was implemented in c using the seqan library for efficient sequence analysis. it is freely available under the gplv2 open source license and can be downloaded at www.imtools.org.t-and b-cells are lymphocytes that form part of the adaptive or acquired immune system in vertebrates. these cells express an antigen receptor on their surface, the t-cell receptor (tcr) or b-cell receptor/immunoglobulin (ig), which is responsible for the recognition of antigens. due to the enormous number of potential antigens, a large diversity among these receptors is required. the key behind that diversity is that in the germline genome there is no functional tcr or ig gene. instead, it is generated by recombination of germline encoded gene segments as well as random base additions and deletions upon differentiation of t-and b-cell precursors in the thymus and bone marrow. this somatic recombination process is referred to as v(d)j-recombination and explained in more detail in the following section. the cells transmit their recombined receptor gene to daughter cells upon proliferation, allowing for a targeted immune response against antigens. recently, methods have been developed to enrich these recombined genes in order to capture the repertoires of unique gene sequences using next generation sequencing (ngs). the derived data, i.e. populations of such unique gene sequences, referred to as clonotypes, can be used to better understand how the adaptive immune system works. the underlying samples for this analysis can be full t or b cell populations from blood, urine, biopsies or other sources or antigen specific subpopulations that have been exposed to antigen in vitro and subsequently selected for activation markers using methods such as flow cytometry. also, specialized cells (e.g. regulatory, memory or effector t cells) can be sorted with immunophenotyping protocols. ngs based t-and b-cell clonotype analysis thus opens up new possibilities of qualitative and quantitative repertoire assessment. recently, such methods were applied for tcr and ig repertoire analysis in healthy and diseased conditions. a number of data characteristics can be measured and are medically relevant, including repertoire size and diversity under different conditions or for different subpopulations as well as shared clonotypes across different individuals and the tracking of particular clonotype subgroups. applications in medical and clinical research include the identification and tracking of clonotypes with known antigen specificities in vaccination studies , differential diagnosis in transplant patients or the usage of clonotypes as biomarkers in patients with lymphoid malignancies . here, we present imseq, a method to derive clonotypes from ngs sequence data. it can recognize and correct likely sequencingor pcr-errors, can quickly process large datasets and was extensively tested on simulated and experimental data. we also show that it outperforms currently available software tools. imseq is open source and available online (http://www.imtools.org).we have presented imseq, a fast and flexible tool for tcr/ig repertoire analysis from ngs data. our method is capable of handling se as well as overlapping and spe data. apart from per-read clonotyping it also features error correction methods to resolve false clonotype calls originating from pcr and sequencing errors as well as a method to correct for ambiguously assigned gene segments. the results produced by imseq were thoroughly validated using simulated data. the tools performance was compared with that of other state of the art standalone tcr/ig clonotypers available, namely decombinator, tcrklass, mitcr and migeccdrblast. our evaluations show that the clonotyping capabilities of imseq are superior to those of decombinator and mitcr while being comparable to those of migec-cdrblast and tcrklass. however, imseq substantially outperformed the latter tools with respect to runtime. when it comes to the error correction performance, imseq could only be compared with mitcr, and showed superior performance especially with regards to the precision of clonotype detection. migeccdrblast has additional requirements for the experimental setup, namely the incorporation of umis, to be able to perform any kind of error correction. decombinator does not support error correction at all and was also excluded from the evaluation due to its poor clonotyping performance. the tcrklass error correction does not seem to include the cdr3 region and therefore does not effectively reduce the number of false clonotype calls due to errors. the evaluation of the impact of spe sequencing showed a great improvement in v segment accuracy when compared with se sequencing with the same overall read length. to conclude, imseq is a rapid, well tested, flexible and erroraware clonotyping and repertoire generation tool that was shown to be superior to available tools with regard to clonotyping and standalone error correction capabilities.  
