incorporating key position and amino acid residue features to identify general and species-specific ubiquitin conjugation sites motivation: systematic dissection of the ubiquitylation proteome is emerging as an appealing but challenging research topic because of the significant roles ubiquitylation play not only in protein degradation but also in many other cellular functions. high-throughput experimental studies using mass spectrometry have identified many ubiquityla-tion sites, primarily from eukaryotes. however, the vast majority of ubiquitylation sites remain undiscovered, even in well-studied systems. because mass spectrometrybased experimental approaches for identifying ubiquitylation events are costly, time-consuming and biased toward abundant proteins and proteotypic peptides, in silico prediction of ubiquitylation sites is a potentially useful alternative strategy for whole proteome annotation. because of various limitations, current ubiquitylation site prediction tools were not well designed to comprehensively assess proteomes. results: we present a novel tool known as ubiprober, specifically designed for large-scale predictions of both general and species-specific ubiquitylation sites. we collected proteomics data for ubiquityla-tion from multiple species from several reliable sources and used them to train prediction models by a comprehensive machine-learning approach that integrates the information from key positions and key amino acid residues. cross-validation tests reveal that ubiprober achieves some improvement over existing tools in predicting species specific ubiquitylation sites. moreover, independent tests show that ubiprober improves the areas under receiver operating characteristic curves by $15 by using the combined model. availability: the ubiprober server is freely available on the web atthe 2004 nobel prize in chemistry was awarded to aaron ciechanover, avram hershko and irwin rose for their discovery of ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation in eukaryotes.numerous studies subsequent to their original work showed that the ubiquitinproteasome system (ups) plays a critical role in regulating a variety of biological processes, such as the cell cycle and division, the immune response, inflammation and signal transduction . further analysis proposed that ubiquitin-mediated ubiquitylation was a ubiquitous post-translational modification in eukaryotes. ubiquitylation has a conserved proteasome system in which the conjugation of ubiquitin to substrates usually involves three steps . ubiquitin is first activated by a ubiquitin-activating enzyme (e1), then conjugated to a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (e2) and finally transferred to a substrate molecule with the assistance of a ubiquitin-ligase enzyme (e3), forming an isopeptide bond with an internal lysine of the target protein. in the ups, ubiquitylation regulates a variety of biological processes. thereby, aberrations of ups function in all of the above-mentioned processes have been implicated in the pathogenesis of human diseases, ranging from inflammatory neurodegenerative diseases, to various forms of malignancies . to further decipher the mechanism of the ups or other regulatory roles of ubiquitylation at the molecular level, an initial but crucial step is to identify ubiquitylation substrates and the corresponding ubiquitylation sites . researchers have used several experimental methods to purify ubiquitylation sites, such as the use of affinity-tagged ubiquitin , ubiquitin antibodies and ubiquitinbinding proteins and highthroughput mass spectrometry (ms) technique . unfortunately, experimental identification of ubiquitylation sites in a global manner is still a difficult, expensive and time-consuming task . hence, in silico prediction of ubiquitylation events can be highly valuable in many cases. tung anddesigned the first ubiquitylation sites predictor (ubipred) using a support vector machine (svm) with 31 informative physicochemical features selected from the published amino acid indices . subsequently,proposed a random forest-based predictor called ubpred, in which 586 sequence attributes were used as the input feature vectors.developed a method, ubsite, using an efficient radial basis function (rbf) network to identify protein ubiquitylation sites. cksaap_ubsite was constructed byfor identifying ubiquitylation sites by using the composition of k-space amino acid pairs surrounding a query site with the assistance of a svm. recently,presented a method based on multi-sequence features and the nearest neighbor algorithm. these computational methods can be divided into two categories: methods of ubiquitylation site prediction for single species and multispecies. ubpred and cksaap_ubsite fall into the first category. the latter category includes ubipred, ubsite and the method of cai et al. more information about these tools or methods is given in supplementary table s1. despite the availability of various ubiquitylation site prediction methods, they have limitations when applied to whole proteomes. the first limitation of ubiquitylation site prediction is accuracy. the overall performance of the several aforementioned predictors is still not fully satisfactory, and there is still room to improve the predictive accuracy. the second limitation is that the ubiquitylation relationships among different species are not discussed in these methods. additionally, there is no systematic species-specific model to maximize the predictor performance of ubiquitylation sites. the third limitation is the training data deficiency and homology bias that lead to lack of statistical significance. furthermore, some of these tools were only published as a method and did not provide a user-friendly web service, and this makes predictions a laborious or impossible task. even those tools with web services either do not support stringency adjustment or only support several predefined stringency levels from which a user can choose that may not meet every users requirement. user control of the prediction stringency is important, especially for large-scale predictions, because typically a user is interested only in predictions above a certain confidence threshold. to address the limitations of the existing methods, we developed a new tool known as ubiprober, which is specifically designed to predict both general and species-specific ubiquitylation sites. reliable and large-scale experimental ubiquitin proteomics data from multiple species were collected from several sources and used to train the ubiquitylation site prediction models. three sets of features [k nearest neighbor (knn) feature, physicochemical property (pcp) and amino acid composition (aac)] were extracted from the training data and combined using a svm to make predictions. the knn features capture the local sequence similarity around sites that are ubiquitylated by the same enzyme or enzyme family regardless of whether the enzymesubstrate interactions are known. pcps and aacs reflect the biochemical environment of the regions surrounding ubiquitylation sites, and these regions play various roles in the structure and function of a protein. additionally, to extract the meaningful information and enhance the overall accuracy of the predictor, the information gain (ig) method was first used to choose some key positions and key amino acid residues to optimize each feature set. furthermore, we discussed the relationship of ubiquitylation in different species. our analysis shows the following: (i) the ubiquitylation patterns are conserved across different species; (ii) some key positions and key amino acid residues are essential for improving the prediction performance of a ubiquitylation model; and (iii) the physicochemical properties of residues in the flanking sequences are important for the ubiquitylation process. finally, the software system and web service of ubiprober were implemented in .net 4.0 framework and are freely available to academic researchers. in ubiprober, we have trained the general prediction model for a eukaryotic proteome and species-specific prediction models for three species-specific proteomes. in addition, ubiprober supports continuous stringency adjustment to meet the various confidence requirements of users. cross-validation tests and comparisons with other tools show that ubiprober performs better at general prediction and is comparable with existing methods at species-specific predictions. we believe that ubiprober could serve as a powerful and complementary tool for in vivo or in vitro ubiquitylation site identification. additionally, the combination of computational analyses with experimental verification could greatly speed up our systematic understanding of the mechanisms and dynamics of ubiquitylation.  
