structural bioinformatics incorporating post-translational modifications and unnatural amino acids into high-throughput modeling of protein structures motivation: accurately predicting protein side-chain conformations is an important subproblem of the broader protein structure prediction problem. several methods exist for generating fairly accurate models for moderate-size proteins in seconds or less. however, a major limitation of these methods is their inability to model post-translational modifications (ptms) and unnatural amino acids. in natural living systems, the chemical groups added following translation are often critical for the function of the protein. in engineered systems, unnatural amino acids are incorporated into proteins to explore structure function relationships and create novel proteins. results: we present a new version of sidepro to predict the side chains of proteins containing non-standard amino acids, including 15 of the most frequently observed ptms in the protein data bank and all types of phosphorylation. sidepro uses energy functions that are parameterized by neural networks trained from available data. for ptms, the 1 and 12 accuracies are comparable with those obtained for the precursor amino acid, and so are the rmsd values for the atoms shared with the precursor amino acid. in addition, sidepro can accommodate any ptm or unnatural amino acid, thus providing a flexible prediction system for high-throughput modeling of proteins beyond the standard amino acids. availability and implementation: sidepro programs and web server, rotamer libraries and data are available through the scratch suite of protein structure predictors atpost-translational modifications (ptms) are critical to the function of many proteins in living systems, and understanding their effects at the molecular level is important for both basic and applied research in biology and medicine. to further this understanding, open databases of curated ptm information have been published. for instance, phospho.elm is a publicly available database dedicated to phosphorylation. the database provides the exact positions of experimentally determined phosphorylation sites as well as information on the specific kinases that produce the modifications. other databases such as phosphositeplus, hprd and phosida include information on additional types of ptms (e.g. ubiquitination, acetylation, methylation) but are still dominated by phosphorylation data. an automated curator of information on ptms found in swiss-prot provides the following summary statistics: there are a total of 82 505 ptms determined by experimental methods, with the following types having a frequency 41: phosphorylation, 70.9; acetylation, 8.2; n-linked glycosylation, 6.8; amidation, 3.5; hydroxylation, 2.0; methylation, 1.9; o-linked glycosylation, 1.4; ubiquitylation, 1.1 and pyrrolidone carboxylic acid, 1.0. in addition to methods for curating and organizing existing ptm data, there are also methods for predicting which sites are modified in sequences with unknown ptm status. these methods typically use supervised machine learning, statistical and motif-based approaches to predict sites of phosphorylation , acetylation , glycosylation , sumoylation and less common types of ptms as well . some of these methods predict both the specific phosphorylated sites and the specific kinases responsible for the phosphorylation . in contrast with these approaches, the fundamental problem of predicting accurate three-dimensional (3d) models of ptms in proteins has been largely ignored. none of the widely used or recently published side-chain prediction methods that are free for academic research are capable of incorporating ptms or unnatural amino acids into their predictions. the widely used templatebased modeling software modeller allows for manual creation of custom residues; however, the process for doing so is somewhat cumbersome and not realistic for most modeller users. one notable exception is the incorporation of non-canonical amino acids into rosetta for computational proteinpeptide interface design . the developers of side-chain prediction methods recognize the need for generating accurate models that incorporate ptms; however, there are a number of practical challenges that have stymied progress in this area: (i) there are far less data in the protein data bank (pdb) for ptm to whom correspondence should be addressed. residues than native residues for building rotamer libraries or developing statistical potentials; (ii) although one-character codes (e.g. a for alanine) work well for efficiently defining protein sequences, it is unfeasible to use one-character codes for all possible ptms (there are 4100 ptms documented in the literature); (iii) some important modifications (e.g. o-linked glycosylation) correspond to broad classes of chemical structures rather than a unique chemical structure, and each of the possible molecules would need to be uniquely identified; and (iv) modified residues are generally larger and contain more rotatable bonds than their natural counterparts. beyond the 20 standard amino acids and their ptms, there are also other natural or synthetic amino acids that can be incorporated into proteins. two additional natural amino acids, selenocysteine (sec,u) and pyrrolysine (pyl,o), are coded in some species by codons that are usually interpreted as stop codons. pyrrolysine, for instance, is used by some methanogenic archaea in enzymes used to produce methane. in addition, 440 unnatural amino acids have been incorporated into proteins through synthetic biology projects, often by creating a unique codon (recoding) and a corresponding transfer rna, to explore protein structure and function and create novel proteins . a tool for modeling the side chains of these rare natural or unnatural amino acids would also be desirable. thus, despite the challenges described above, we have taken on the problem of rapidly generating reasonably accurate 3d side-chain models of proteins that incorporate amino acids beyond the standard 20 amino acids. in the remainder of this article, the term non-standard amino acid (nsa) is used to refer to any amino acid other than the 20 standard amino acids. this includes ptms, rare natural amino acids and unnatural amino acids.we evaluate the approach using three standard metrics: (i) rmsd for the side chain, which is calculated using the coordinates of the experimental structure, exactly as described in (the strength of sidepro is that it uses the wealth of data in the pdb to learn energy functions, parameterized by neural networks, to model and predict protein side-chain conformations. in this study, we have extended the capabilities of sidepro to ptms and nsas. for natural amino acids and fptms, when sufficient training examples are available, sidepro uses amino acid-specific energy functions. for all other ptms and nsas, sidepro uses a generic energy function. to flexibly accommodate for any nsa,sidepro allow users to provide 3d structures of nsas to be incorporated into sidepro models. alternatively, the cosmos program is used to predict these structures, and any other similar program [e.g. openbabel (ocan be used for the same purposes. the generic neural networks, trained on all possible pairs of atom types agnostic of residue type, are used to score the atomatom interactions for these nsas. naturally, as more data on nsas become available in the pdb, it will be possible to further expand the set of specific energy functions, thereby increasing the accuracy of the program over time. as demonstrated here for some of the nsas, accuracy can also be improved by increasing the number of 3d samples produced by cosmos, at the expense of time. finally, sidepro is to be used in protein structure prediction and engineering projects for the rapid prediction of side-chains conformations in high-throughput mode, or to provide good starting points for molecular or quantum mechanics simulations of side-chain atoms, for both standard and non-standard amino acids.  
