inductive matrix completion for predicting gene–disease associations motivation: most existing methods for predicting causal disease genes rely on specific type of evidence, and are therefore limited in terms of applicability. more often than not, the type of evidence available for diseases variesfor example, we may know linked genes, keywords associated with the disease obtained by mining text, or co-occurrence of disease symptoms in patients. similarly, the type of evidence available for genes variesfor example, specific micro-array probes convey information only for certain sets of genes. in this article, we apply a novel matrix-completion method called inductive matrix completion to the problem of predicting gene-disease associations ; it combines multiple types of evidence (features) for diseases and genes to learn latent factors that explain the observed genedis-ease associations. we construct features from different biological sources such as microarray expression data and disease-related text-ual data. a crucial advantage of the method is that it is inductive; it can be applied to diseases not seen at training time, unlike traditional matrix-completion approaches and network-based inference methods that are transductive. results: comparison with state-of-the-art methods on diseases from the online mendelian inheritance in man (omim) database shows that the proposed approach is substantially betterit has close to one-in-four chance of recovering a true association in the top 100 predictions , compared to the recently proposed catapult method (second best) that has 515 chance. we demonstrate that the inductive method is particularly effective for a query disease with no previously known gene associations, and for predicting novel genes, i.e. genes that are previously not linked to diseases. thus the method is capable of predicting novel genes even for well-characterized diseases. we also validate the novelty of predictions by evaluating the method on recently reported omim associations and on associations recently reported in the literature. availability: source code and datasets can be downloaded fromin silico prioritization of disease genes is an important step towards discovering causal genes and understanding genetic disorders. many diseasegene prioritization tools have been developed in the last decade, some generic and some disease-class specific. due to the inherent difficulty and latency in human genedisease studies, very few reliable associations are reported to public databases such as the online mendelian inheritance in man (omim) and the genetic association database . therefore, exploiting multiple auxiliary sources of data is essential for predicting genes related to polygenic traits, and many existing methods have been developed for this purpose. for example, a popular family of network-based methods include cipher , genewalker (k ohler et al., 2008), prince , rwrh and catapult . these methods exploit biological networks such as the functional gene interactions network and disease similarity network; they infer genedisease connections by using random walk procedures on different biological networks or computing a similarity measure between nodes. the problem of predicting genedisease associations can be thought of as analogous to designing a recommender system where the goal is to predict the preference that a user (gene) would give to an item (disease). an important formulation used in recommender systems such as the netflix movie recommendations is matrix completion, where the problem is to complete the user-item preference matrix given a sample of observed preferences. the standard matrix completion techniques for recovering the user-item preference matrix assume that the true underlying matrix is low-rank. to the best of our knowledge, there is no existing successful application of the matrix completion approach to recovering the genedisease associations matrix. two reasons are the extreme sparsity of the associations matrix and the lack of negative associations. also, all matrix completion approaches suffer from the cold-start problem, that of making predictions for a new user (see section 2). our approach in this article is based on matrix completion and is best motivated by the limitations of the existing methods discussed next. most of the aforementioned methods typically rely on a seed or candidate set of genes already linked to the query disease and therefore fail to make predictions for a new disease of interest, for which there are no gene linkage studies yet; a few make reasonable predictions if we could compute some similarity measure with existing diseases on which the methods were trained. however, more often than not, the type of evidence available for diseases of interest variesfor example, we may know already linked genes, keywords associated with the disease obtained by mining text, or co-occurrence of disease symptoms in patients. methods relying on a specific type of evidence (such as disease similarities) cannot be applied to a query disease with a different type of evidence (say keywords associated with the disease). the same is true for the type of evidence available for genes. network-based methods cannot predict a gene that is not connected to any other node in the network. on the other hand, methods that exploit gene-expression profiles, functional annotations and signaling pathways exist but have primarily to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2014. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com been developed for specific disease-classes, and therefore fall short in generalizing to new diseases. it is imperative that complementary types of evidence be merged to provide better coverage and generalization than any single data source. the survey article by piro and di cunto (2012) discusses the following different types of evidence used by prioritization tools: text-mining of biomedical literature, functional annotations, pathways and ontologies, phenotype relationships, intrinsic gene properties, sequence data, protein protein interactions, regulatory information, orthologous relationships and gene expression information. in this article, we propose a framework that can seamlessly integrate features from the aforementioned data sources. our approach involves two steps. first, we derive features for diseases and genes from multiple sources. next, we incorporate the features while trying to learn genedisease associations in a novel inductive matrix completion (imc) approach [recently developed and theoretically analyzed by jain and. the entries of the associations matrix are assumed to be generated by applying the corresponding gene and disease feature vectors on an unknown low-rank matrix z. the parameter matrix z is learnt using a training set of omim genedisease associations, and predictions for a disease are obtained as a function of the features of all genes and the feature vector for the disease. we evaluate our proposed approach through comprehensive experiments and demonstrate substantial increase in the quality of predictions compared to state-of-the-art methods. our findings and contributions are summarized below.(1) integrating diverse feature sets of genes and diseases obtained through a wealth of publicly available data overcomes extreme sparsity in the genedisease associations data.(2) our approach is a novel application of the inductive matrix completion method; it can be applied to diseases not seen at training time, unlike traditional matrix completion approaches and other network-based inference methods that are transductive.the approach is particularly effective for a query disease with no previously known gene associations, and for predicting novel genes, i.e. genes that are previously not linked to diseases, thus capable of making novel predictions even for well-characterized diseases.(4) comparison with state-of-the-art methods on omim diseases shows the superiority of the inductive method. we also validate the novelty of predictions by evaluating the method on recently discovered gene associations recorded in the omim database, as well as on associations recently reported in the literature curated by b ornigen et al.we begin by discussing the limitations of traditional matrix completion techniques, motivating our approach and describing the inductive method in section 2. in section 3, we describe our experimental datasets and construction of gene and disease features. extensive quantitative analysis of the new approach is presented in section 4, and conclusions are presented in section 5.  
