gene expression inference of alternative splicing from rna-seq data with probabilistic splice graphs motivation: alternative splicing and other processes that allow for different transcripts to be derived from the same gene are significant forces in the eukaryotic cell. rna-seq is a promising technology for analyzing alternative transcripts, as it does not require prior knowledge of transcript structures or genome sequences. however, analysis of rna-seq data in the presence of genes with large numbers of alternative transcripts is currently challenging due to efficiency, identifia-bility and representation issues. results: we present rna-seq models and associated inference algorithms based on the concept of probabilistic splice graphs, which alleviate these issues. we prove that our models are often identifiable and demonstrate that our inference methods for quantification and differential processing detection are efficient and accurate. availability: software implementing our methods is available at http:// deweylab.an important aspect of eukaryotic molecular biology is the fact that a single gene can give rise to a wide variety of transcripts as a result of pre-mrna alternative processing (ap) events. ap events result from the phenomena of alternative splicing and alternative polyadenylation sites, which can give rise to different mrnas from the same pre-mrna, and alternative transcription start sites, which can lead to different pre-mrnas produced from the same gene locus. the alternative transcripts resulting from these processes are important for development and have also been implicated in disease . recent studies have shown that 490 of human genes and 60 of drosophila genes are alternatively spliced, indicating that this phenomenon is the rule rather than the exception. the relatively recent technology of rna-seq is revolutionizing the way alternative transcripts are identified and quantified . unlike microarrays, which can only measure what their probes are designed to detect, rna-seq allows for the detection of novel splice junctions and exonic sequences [e.g.. in fact, rna-seq is now commonly being used to perform de novo transcriptome assembly , a powerful approach for studying gene expression in species without sequenced genomes. in this article, we present a novel approach to the tasks of alternative transcript quantification and differential processing (dp) detection given rna-seq data and fixed gene structures, which may be provided by an existing genome annotation or predicted from the data via transcriptome assembly. our approach is based on a class of models that were first independently described in the context of expressed sequence tag (est) analysis . we refer to these models as probabilistic splice graphs (psgs). psgs build on the concept of splice graphs , structures that compactly represent the possible isoforms of a gene, given a set of known exon boundaries and splice junctions. the primary contribution of this work is efficient methodology for applying psgs to rna-seq data, which are more powerful than ests for quantifying alternative splicing owing to larger numbers of reads, but more challenging to analyze owing to shorter read lengths. in general, psgs provide a statistical framework for representing dependencies between ap events. the existence of dependencies, or lack thereof, between ap events is currently an active area of research. several genes have been found to have independent splicing events , whereas others suggest that dependencies exist . however, there is currently not enough full-length cdna sequence data to determine if there are widespread dependencies between ap events. as we will discuss, our psg-based rna-seq analysis methods can be configured to model and detect such dependencies, when they exist. when processing events are largely independent of each other, a psg allows for a compact statistical model of the frequencies of a genes isoforms. our rna-seq analysis methods take advantage of this strength of psgs to address a number of challenges posed by alternative splicing that are not thoroughly dealt with by previous methods. all of these challenges are rooted by the facts that (i) rna-seq reads identify only a small fraction of the transcript from which they are derived and (ii) alternative transcripts from the same gene typically share a large amount of sequence. a first challenge is that a gene may have an exponential number of alternative splice forms, which makes quantification of individual isoforms extremely difficult. an exponential blowup in the number of possible isoforms occurs when multiple to whom correspondence should be addressed.we performed a variety of experiments on both simulated and real rna-seq data to analyze the accuracy and performance of our psg methods. on simulated data, we first quantify the theoretical advantage of our method over a more simplistic jrbased method for estimating processing event frequencies. on real drosophila data, we compare the estimates from the psg and jr method and measure the improvement in the convergence rates of our methods estimates with bootstrapping experiments. we then evaluate the accuracy of our dp tests through experiments on sets of real and simulated rna-seq samples that include biological and technical replicates. lastly, with real data from the drosophila gene dscam, we demonstrate the superior time complexity of using a factorized splice graphbased method.  
