gene expression inference of combinatorial boolean rules of synergistic gene sets from cancer microarray datasets motivation: gene set analysis has become an important tool for the functional interpretation of high-throughput gene expression datasets. moreover, pattern analyses based on inferred gene set activities of individual samples have shown the ability to identify more robust disease signatures than individual gene-based pattern analyses. although a number of approaches have been proposed for gene set-based pattern analysis, the combinatorial influence of deregulated gene sets on disease phenotype classification has not been studied sufficiently. results: we propose a new approach for inferring combinatorial boolean rules of gene sets for a better understanding of cancer transcriptome and cancer classification. to reduce the search space of the possible boolean rules, we identify small groups of gene sets that synergistically contribute to the classification of samples into their corresponding phenotypic groups (such as normal and cancer). we then measure the significance of the candidate boolean rules derived from each group of gene sets; the level of significance is based on the class entropy of the samples selected in accordance with the rules. by applying the present approach to publicly available prostate cancer datasets, we identified 72 significant boolean rules. finally, we discuss several identified boolean rules, such as the rule of glutathione metabolism (down) and prostaglandin synthesis regulation (down), which are consistent with known prostate cancer biology. availability: scripts written in python and r are available at http://biosoft.kaist.ac.kr/ihpark/. the refined gene sets and the full list of the identified boolean rules are provided in the supplementarywith the advent of microarray technologies, genome-wide gene expression profiling has become a crucial tool in biomedical research during the past few decades. in cancer research, genome-wide gene expression profiling has been used to discover new cancer subtypes ; to develop gene expression signatures for cancer diagnosis, prognosis or prediction of drug responsiveness (; potti to whom correspondence should be addressed); and to identify cancer associated signaling pathways or cellular processes . in a typical analysis of cancer gene expression profiles, individual genes are ranked by the statistical significance of the differential expression between two different experimental conditions; several tens of top-ranked genes are then selected for further analysis, such as cancer classification and functional enrichment analysis . to investigate the combinatorial influences of deregulated genes on disease phenotype classification, researchers have proposed a number of multivariate approaches . however, all of these individual gene-based approaches tend to produce unstable gene lists or combinations of genes due to the small sample size used in individual studies . a recently developed type of gene set analysis aims to directly evaluate the statistical significance of coordinated expression changes of genes belonging to specific pathways or functional categories without selecting an arbitrary number of highly ranked genes in advance, and the gene sets are usually derived from the gene ontology , kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg;), reactome , and other knowledge bases. these approaches have the ability to detect gene sets whose constituent genes show subtle but coordinated expression changes, which might not be detected by conventional functional enrichment methods . moreover, several cancer classification approaches based on the gene set activities inferred from individual samples perform better than other cancer classification approaches based on the expression levels of individual genes . besides the gene set based cancer classification approaches, various other approaches to the study of interdependencies among gene modules have been proposed.) proposed a module network for learning about transcriptionally coexpressed modules and their dependency structure so that gene expression patterns in different types of cancer could be characterized. that model differs from other gene set dependency models in that it learns about the gene modules and their dependency structure simultaneously from data rather than frompage: 1507 15061512we have presented a method of inferring boolean rules of gene sets from cancer microarray datasets. we first identified small subsets of gene sets that are synergistic; we then enumerated all the possible conjunctive boolean functions of the gene sets within each group of gene sets; and, finally, we evaluated the predictive powers of the boolean functions. although several approaches have been proposed to reveal the boolean logic of individual molecules , our method is different with those methods in that we try to identify relevant variables by using a synergy network before we search for the boolean rules. we have identified and discussed several significant boolean rules of gene sets that are frequently observed in prostate cancer. our results show the possibility of using boolean rules of gene sets for cancer classification, and the identified boolean rules provide insights into the combinatorial influences of deregulated gene sets on cancer developments. the coverage of gene set analysis increases as the information on pathway interactions is accumulated. thus, further research directions should include the pathway interaction information for the dissection of coherent submodules in a gene set.  
