systems biology inference of gene networks—application to bifidobacterium motivation: the reliable and reproducible identification of gene interaction networks represents one of the grand challenges of both modern molecular biology and computational sciences. approaches based on careful collection of literature data and network topological analysis, applied to unicellular organisms, have proven to offer results applicable to medical therapies. however, when little a priori knowledge is available, other approaches, not relying so strongly on previous literature, must be used. we propose here a novel algorithm (based on ordinary differential equations) able to infer the interactions occurring among genes, starting from gene expression steady state data. results: the algorithm was first validated on synthetic and real benchmarks. it was then applied to the reconstruction of the core of the amino acids metabolism in bifidobacterium longum, an essential, yet poorly known player in the human gut intestinal microbiome, known to be related to the onset of important diseases, such as metabolic syndromes. our results show how computational approaches can offer effective tools for applications with the identification of potential new biological information. availability: the software is available at www.bioconductor.org and at www.picb.ac.cn/clinicalgenomicntw/temp2.html.recent advances in (bio)technology have provided researchers with several powerful data platforms, able to collect biological molecules activity at the genome-wide level . nowadays, such an abundance of data potentially allows reconstruction of the complex interplay among molecules, responsible for diverse cellular functions. network reconstruction, which is a broad area in modern biology research, focuses on two main directions : reconstruction of physical networks, where the relationships inferred represent actual connections among molecules of a diverse nature (i.e. metabolic networks), and reconstruction of interactions called influence networks. physical networks allow to infer precise information, to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. but require a priori knowledge to support initial assumptions. an interesting and successful example of physical network reconstruction application is given in, where the authors were able to describe in detail several mechanisms of action occurring in leishmania major, a protozoan that causes cutaneous leishmaniasis in mammalian hosts. the network was reconstructed with extensive data collection, manual curation and finally automated topological analysis. very interestingly, the whole approach generated hypotheses that were then experimentally validated to identify therapeutic targets. therefore, the application of computational tools to simpler organisms that are in tight relation with the evolving health state of more complex organisms, like humans, can bear fruitful results. conversely to physical networks, influence networks infer generic connections among genes, but require very little preliminary evidence and can therefore be applied to systems for which little a priori knowledge is available. in this work, we explore a gene network related to bifidobacterium, a crucial player in the gut intestinal (gi) microbiome, the importance of which is becoming more and more central in the onset of several types of diseases, despite little knowledge available today. the gi tract with its microbiome, in fact, is an important organ responsible for digestion, absorption and metabolism of dietary nutrients. it contributes to 912 of whole-body protein synthesis and is the most important route of entry for foreign antigens (i.e. natural toxins, invading pathogens, . in particular, the human gut is the home of a complex and vast array of bacterial cells, which are estimated to be 10 times more numerous than the total number of cells in the human body , and with a collective genome (metagenome) that contains at least 100 times as many genes as our own genome . comparative metagenomics has uncovered functional attributes of the microbiome involved in the metabolism of glycans and amino acids, the production of methane and the biosynthesis of vitamins . in particular, the amino acid (aa) metabolism appears to be a core functional group, highly consistent across different human microbiome samples. processes performed by the microbiome are strictly intertwined with the host metabolism, to the point that life without this contribution may not be possible. this concept is summarized in the definition of sym-xenobiotic metabolites formed by both gut microbial and host metabolism that cannot be synthesized by either in isolation, and which forms no part of the energy metabolism, or biosynthetic machinery of either system . in particular, bifidobacterium longum (a subspecies of bifidobacteria) has been reported to be crucial in a number of functions and is protective against the onset of obesity, prodrome of metabolic syndromes [see only as an example and our recent validationand the perturbation vector pfor gene i are optimal under the sse, i.e.i = (tmpa 1 tmpp) i , 1 i n. see section 2.2 and the supplementary materials for more details on ntw. in (. given these fact, we have chosen to apply our gene network reconstruction method to the aa metabolism of b.longum ncc2705, a particular strain of b.longum, isolated from infant feces, and which genome sequence was the first completed within the bifidobacterium genus and revised in 2005 (genbank database accession number no. ae014295). our method, network of transcripts wirings (ntw), is an ordinary differential equations (ode) based model. despite prior work showing good performances , the superiority of ode models is far from assessed. however, ode-based algorithms frame the reverse engineering problem with the quite flexible identification of a function that describes the variation of gene expression vector x over time x = f (x,p), where x represents the expressions of the n genes involved in the network across m experiments, f is the function that models how the transcriptional perturbations p lead to the new equilibria in x. as pointed out in , an extensive comparison with previous work is not easy, due to the abundance of algorithms produced and the partial availability of data and software, and would represent a work in itself. nevertheless, we describe here some recent or popular approaches we will compare to. nir uses a linearized version of this equation, leading to the matricial form of the linearized equation ax =p, where a represents the interaction network (adjacency matrix, nn), x the steady state expression values (expression matrix, nm) and p the transcriptional perturbations (a matrix of the same size as x, nm). under the assumption that transcriptional perturbations triggering the new equilibria are known, nir assumes that only a certain number of genes have interactions and minimizes the sum of squared errors (sses) to get the approximation of gene network matrix. recently, a parallelized version of nir has been published . nirest builds upon the original nir and extends its use to cases in which the perturbations are not known, assuming only a few genes are perturbed in each experiment. nirest first produces a rough estimation of the gene interaction matrix a, it then infers p based on the estimated a and x. based on the same ode model, other algorithms have been designed. for example, inthe smallest possible genetic network is obtained from the minimization of a convex cost function over a convex set of feasible solutions. like nir, this algorithm requires the transcriptional perturbations to be known. combinatorial perturbation-based interaction analysis (copia;) uses a non-linear function f and minimizes two errors: an sse to measure the difference between the model predicted expression values and the corresponding observational values, and a structure error, which takes into account the number of interaction in the predicted gene network. finally in, a mixed model is adopted, using information theory (mix-clr method,) to extract preliminary knowledge and an ode model to refine it. we had also considered this type of approach and tested it using aracne and nir with little success (data not published). our method, ntw, is part of this large family of ode methods, which make use, like nir and nirest, of a linearized version of the original equation (ax =p). the major advance offered by our approach compared with the seminal work inpage: 234 232237from the benchmarks validation, ntw shows some interesting advantages over other state-of-the-art methods. more concretely, comparing to nir , ntw does not need to know p, which can be an important unknown of the system, to compute a. comparing to nirest , ntw directly produces a rough perturbation matrix without computing an estimate of a first, and infers a and p by page: 237 232237  
