inference with viral quasispecies diversity indices: clonal and ngs approaches given the inherent dynamics of a viral quasispecies, we are often interested in the comparison of diversity indices of sequential samples of a patient, or in the comparison of diversity indices of virus in groups of patients in a treated versus control design. it is then important to make sure that the diversity measures from each sample may be compared with no bias and within a consistent statistical framework. in the present report, we review some indices often used as measures for viral quasispecies complexity and provide means for statistical inference , applying procedures taken from the ecology field. in particular , we examine the shannon entropy and the mutation frequency, and we discuss the appropriateness of different normalization methods of the shannon entropy found in the literature. by taking amplicons ultra-deep pyrosequencing (udps) raw data as a surrogate of a real hepatitis c virus viral population, we study through in-silico sampling the statistical properties of these indices under two methods of viral qua-sispecies sampling, classical cloning followed by sanger sequencing (ccss) and next-generation sequencing (ngs) such as udps. we propose solutions specific to each of the two sampling methods ccss and ngsto guarantee statistically conforming conclusions as free of bias as possible.rna viruses show a high replication error rate due to the lack of proofreading mechanisms, and it is estimated that for viruses with typically high replicative loads every possible point mutation and many double mutations are generated with each viral replication cycle, and may be present within the population at any time . in the case of hepatitis c virus (hcv), the viral loaddefined as the number of viral particles per milliliter of serum in acutely or chronically infected patientsmay reach 10 7 in immunocompetent patients, which roughly means a population of circulating particles of 10 10 10 11 at any given time. this population is highly dynamic, with a viral half-life of a few hours, and with the production and clearance of 10 10 10 12 genomes per day in a patient . given this inherent dynamics, we are often interested in the comparison of diversity indices of sequential samples of a patient or among groups of patients. these comparisons may be informative of the patient evolution or the appropriateness of a given treatment (supplementary material). next-generation sequencing methods (ngs) will likely be increasingly adopted in clinical diagnostics in the next years. improvements in costs, protocols and coverage are closing the gap between what was feasible in research and diagnostics. the first diagnostics likely to be moved to ngs will be those currently based on classical molecular cloning and sanger sequencing (ccss) because it is labor intensive and has limited sensitivity. in this work we use in-silico sampling from viral reference distributions to study the statistical properties of diversity indices aimed at quantifying rna virus quasispecies complexity. estimates of the species richness and other diversity indices as defined in ecology (supplementary material) are challenging when populations are complex in genomic composition as is the case with viral quasispecies . the approaches in the ecology domain are extensive and still active and can be useful for the analysis of viral quasispecies. although the quasispecies definition as a dynamic distributions of non-identical but closely related mutant and recombinant viral genomes subjected to a continuous process of genetic variation, competition and selection, and which act as a unit of selection conveys an intuitive image of complexity, no comprehensive and universally admitted to whom correspondence should be addressed. index of quasispecies complexity exists. in a large population in equilibrium or with small perturbations, the genome frequencies are related with their relative fitness. there are a number of useful indices and variables but none of them fully captures that intuitive image. viral quasispecies complexity may be viewed as a multivariate feature, where the number of haplotypes of polymorphic sites and their relative frequencies are its dimensions. each of these indices and variables are difficult to estimate given the expected diversity of a quasiespecies from available data and the limited sample size amenable to analysis . the primary indices measure the extend of the viral quasispecies complexity by the number of haplotypes, polymorphic sites and number of different mutations; these may be considered as richness indices. other indices such as the shannon entropy (s) or the simpson index measure the diversity, or the evenness when normalized to maximum diversity (sn), while others such as the mutation frequency (mf) or the nucleotide diversity (pi) measure the intrapopulation heterogeneity, that is how different are the members of the population among them. s and sn, or the simpson index, are not sensitive to the number of mutations. the simpson index has been less used with viral quasispecies , as it provides a more stable, although less sensitive, measure of diversity by downweighting the rare haplotypes. mf measures the heterogeneity with respect to the most represented (dominant) sequence or the consensus sequence of the population . pi gives the global population heterogeneity, taking into account the average number of mutations between each pair of individuals in the viral population . each of these variables describes a different part of the mutation space occupied by a quasispecies, and they all provide relevant information regarding mutation barriers to antiviral treatment resistance. we studied by in-silico sampling the distribution and properties of three of the most common variables used to quantify the viral quasispecies complexity in the literature, the diversity through s and sn and the heterogeneity through mf. the quasispecies richness by the number of estimated haplotypes in the population is also studied because of its implications on sn and mf. we propose methods for inference for each sampling schemeccss and ngswith these complexity indices.quasispecies dynamics represents an important challenge for the control of infectious diseases associated with rna viruses and some dna viruses. in particular, we are interested in improved molecular diagnosis of b and c hepatitis viruses, which are responsible for4500 million cases of chronic infections worldwide.as strongly evidenced by recent reports, viral quasispecies complexity, measured by diversity indices, has clear clinical relevance in the course and prognosis of these diseases. moreover, the adequate diagnosis of quasispecies complexity has direct implications for antiviral treatment failure because of its reflection in genetic barriers to resistance . because of these reasons, it is paramount to establish a standard method of measuring and comparing diversity indices with statistic grounds and fitted to the expected degrees of viral quasispecies complexity. we argue that the virus field would benefit of implementing solutions already established in ecology to compare diversity indices. useful connections between ecology and viral quasispecies have been previously established. self-organization of subpopulations from a viral quasispecies that exhibited competition-colonization dynamics was approached by applying ecological models of biodiversity in spatially structured habitats . the study revealed that host cell killing by viruses can be modulated by a trade-off between competition and colonization, and suggested a model of virus virulence based on intramutant spectrum interactions . also niche theory of competition communities and the replicator-mutator equation were combined to show that a typical quasispecies profile required both competition and cooperation among variants . by a review of methods used in ecology that could be approached to describe rna viral quasispecies, and thanks to deep coverage amplicon udps data, which has been used as source of in-silico sampling, we have studied the behavior and statistical properties of s, sn and mf under the sampling schemes of ccss and ngs. by ccss, we may sample any virion with equal chance, but their estimated frequency will never be lower than 1/n, the granularity or resolution of the device, where n is the number of clones in the experiment. that is, when using 20 clones, no observed haplotype will have an estimated frequency in the population 55. this granularity together with the high diversity of rna viruses causes a systematic bias in the estimation of s and sn. on the other hand, mf does not suffer of estimation bias. another consideration for the ccss method is that we lack any means to control whether any of the observed clones are artifactual or of low abundance. in a recently published study , we compared experimentally a patient sample of hbv sequenced in replicates by udps (two 454flx, one 454-flx and one 454 junior, in the forward and reverse) and by 150 sequences obtained by ccss. among the 36 singleton haplotypes by ccss, 10 were also identified by udps in 58 of the udps replicates, and 24 could not be identified in any of the replicates with 96 221 quality filtered reads covering the full amplicon. as an example, filtering at 0.5 the high complexity reference population, a 36.2 of the reads is removed (supplementary), which means that in ccss experiments, on this kind of viral populations, roughly one outunder the assumption that all observed clones are true members of the population, we observed by this sampling scheme that s and sn are biased, and that the bias is sample size-dependent. we also observed that s shows a better behavior to analytical bias correction than sn, and that mf is an unbiased estimator. a less biased comparison of s or sn values between samples requires of intra-sample normalization, composed of terms of correction (supplementary equations sii and siii). when the sample sizes are unbalanced, the normalization requires a rarefaction of the big sample to the small sample size as well. on the other hand, ngs methods are highly sensitive and reproducible but they are limited by the technical noise level. by discarding observed haplotypes, our diversity estimates are biased with respect to the true population values. we may nevertheless consider the haplotypes below the 0.5 frequency in our example as spurious or of low biological relevancy at the sampling time point. in this case, we used the diversity values of the filtered population as gold standard, being the best we can achieve by ngs. we observed a sample size-dependent bias on s, sn and mf. the minimum differential bias is provided by rarefaction for s and sn. for mf, fringe trimming provides an unbiased comparison. when the samples to be compared are not very unbalanced and the abundance filter is above noise level, fringe trimming could give good results for s, sn and mf. the in-silico sampling and simulation allowed us to assess the validity of the estimate and tests used in ecology when dealing with viral quasispecies with s, sn and mf, and permitted to identify the key points for less biased comparisons of complexity indices under the same sampling scheme. in this work, we have empirically studied the statistical properties of s, sn and mf while observing the quasispecies viral complexity either by ccss or by ngs, and through this we assessed the means for less biased comparisons of complexity indices. these methods could allow us to statistically conclude whether a viral quasispecies is expanding or contracting in diversity, independently of the size of the samples being compared. in the supplementary material we give the formulation, and in  
