infernal 1.1: 100-fold faster rna homology searches infernal builds probabilistic profiles of the sequence and secondary structure of an rna family called covariance models (cms) from structurally annotated multiple sequence alignments given as input. infernal uses cms to search for new family members in sequence databases and to create potentially large multiple sequence alignments. version 1.1 of infernal introduces a new filter pipeline for rna homology search based on accelerated profile hidden markov model (hmm) methods and hmm-banded cm alignment methods. this enables 100-fold acceleration over the previous version and 10 000-fold acceleration over exhaustive non-filtered cm searches. availability: source code, documentation and the benchmark are downloadable from http://infernal.janelia.org. infernal is freely licensed under the gnu gplv3 and should be portable to any posix-compliant operating system, including linux and mac os/x. documentation includes a users guide with a tutorial, a discussion of file formats and user options and additional details on methods implemented in the software. contact:many structural rnas conserve their sequence and secondary structure, and the most effective rna homology search and alignment tools incorporate both types of conservation into their scoring systems. covariance models (cms) are profile stochastic context-free grammars , probabilistic models of the conserved sequence and secondary structure of an rna family, analogous to sequence-based profile hidden markov models (hmms) commonly used for protein sequence analysis, with added complexity necessary for modeling rna secondary structure. infernal implements methods for constructing cms from input structurally annotated rna alignments or single sequences and for using those models to search for and align homologous rnas. compared with the previous version 1.0.2, infernal 1.1 accelerates typical rna homology searches 100-fold using a filter pipeline based on accelerated profile hmm methods [the hmmer3 project (] and constrained cm alignment algorithms . the increased speed comes at a negligible cost to sensitivity . additionally, version 1.1 implements specialized algorithms for structural alignment of truncated rna sequences commonly found in sequencing reads, which were prone to misalignment in previous versions.  
