inferring cluster-based networks from differently stimulated multiple time-course gene expression data motivation: clustering and gene network inference often help to predict the biological functions of gene subsets. recently, researchers have accumulated a large amount of time-course transcriptome data collected under different treatment conditions to understand the physiological states of cells in response to extracellular stimuli and to identify drug-responsive genes. although a variety of statistical methods for clustering and inferring gene networks from expression profiles have been proposed, most of these are not tailored to simultaneously treat expression data collected under multiple stimulation conditions. results: we propose a new statistical method for analyzing temporal profiles under multiple experimental conditions. our method simultaneously performs clustering of temporal expression profiles and inference of regulatory relationships among gene clusters. we applied this method to mcf7 human breast cancer cells treated with epidermal growth factor and heregulin which induce cellular proliferation and differentiation, respectively. the results showed that the method is useful for extracting biologically relevant information. availability: a matlab implementation of the method is available fromin this article, we propose a new statistical method for analyzing time-course gene expression data collected under multiple conditions. although the probabilistic model assumed in our method is simple, we confirmed that our method can induce biologically important information. furthermore, we verified using synthetic data that as the number of experimental conditions increases, the network estimation accuracy improves. note that many model-based methods assume some generative models considering the situation of interest. if multiple stimuli are not incorporated into the model, the method cannot deal with them. methods which do not assume specific probabilistic models (e.g. k-means) are comparatively broadly applied in various situations such as multiple stimulation conditions. nevertheless, we think model-based methods are beneficial because we can extract the nature of the data by investigating estimated parameters of the models. state-space model is not the only one suitable for dealing with multiple conditions. for example, we can make dbn so as to page: 1080 10731081treat several different conditions by adding new nodes representing the existence of the stimuli. to take advantage of differently stimulated multiple time-course expression data for inferring gene networks, wet-lab experimental designs must be carefully considered at the stage of collecting data. furthermore, it is necessary to further elaborate the statistical method. inferring gene networks is a very challenging project. we believe that collecting comparative temporal profiles collected under multiple stimulation conditions greatly facilitates this task.  
