data and text mining inferring disease association using clinical factors in a combinatorial manner and their use in drug repositioning motivation: complex physiological relationships exist among human diseases. thus, the identification of disease associations could provide new methods of disease care and diagnosis. to this end, numerous studies have investigated disease associations. however, combinatorial effect of physiological factors, which is the main characteristic of biological systems, has not been considered in most previous studies. results: in this study, we inferred disease associations with a novel approach that considered disease-related clinical factors in combina-torial ways by using the national health and nutrition examination survey data, and the results have been shown as disease networks. here, the fp-growth algorithm, an association rule mining algorithm, was used to generate a clinical attribute combination profile of each disease. in addition, we characterized the 22 clinical risk attribute combinations frequently discovered from the 26 diseases in this study. furthermore, we validated that the results of this study have great potential for drug repositioning and outperform other existing disease networks in this regard. finally, we suggest a few disease pairs as new candidates for drug repositioning and provide the evidence of their associations from the literature.complex physiological relationships exist among human diseases. thus, the identification of disease similarity has been used to study etiology and pathogenesis of similar diseases , as well as have provided novel ways for disease diagnosis, drug repositioning . therefore, many studies to elucidate disease associations have emerged, and the results of which have been presented as disease networks (dns). previous studies of dns can be classified into two categories based on the used data, molecular data and electronic health record (ehr) data. from a molecular perspective, goh et al. constructed dns that were linked if they shared one or more disease genes . following gohs study, functional modulebased studies by using molecular data have also appeared to clarify disease associations. lee et al. created dns that were linked if the enzymes related to diseases shared metabolic reactions . in addition,also built dns by an integrated analysis of disease-related mrna expression data and the human protein interaction networks. here, two diseases were linked if they had similar profiles of 4620 functional modules that were described by differently expressed genes of the disease., more recently, published the article of disease associations by considering both disease-related proteins and their localization in a cell. the other approach for constructing dns based on ehr data have also emerged. ehr data have usually been used for obtaining comorbidity, which implies the presence of one or more diseases in addition to a primary disease that the patient has. for example,introduced dns obtained from the disease history of more than 30 million patients.also presented networks from phenotype information including both structured and unstructured electronic patient records, such as free-text diagnosis reports. furthermore,introduced adams for discovering disease associations using multiple sources, such as pubmed articles, discharge summaries and so on. however, previous studies overlooked the combinatorial effect, which is one of main biological characteristics. combinatorial effects exist in biological system, and biological factors influence a disease in combinatorial rather than individual ways. as evidence, studies for combinatorial effects in biology and physiology have recently appeared. in molecular biology field,presented that most saccharomyces cerevisiae genes were shown to be influenced by combinatorial effects of cultivation parameters. these combinatorial effects led to higher explained variance of the gene expression patterns.showed that the combination of rapamycin and lapatinib significantly decreased growth of triple-negative breast cancers. we also explored some clinical studies devoted to identifying the combinatorial effects of diseases . furthermore, the combinatorial approach has been applied in adverse drug event field.extracted multi-item adverse drug events from the food and drug administrations adverse effect reporting system by using association rule mining. all of these studies have shown that combinatorial effects exist in physiological system and are worthy to be regarded to elucidate diseases and disease associations. to whom correspondence should be addressed.the fundamental assumption of previous studies, on the other hand, is that higher association exists between diseases as more disease-related factors are shared individually, not combinatorially. especially in gohs study , individual sharing genes is a measure of similarity. however, even though two diseases share disease genes, the etiological factors of each disease could be totally different due to the combinatorial effects on biological factors. for example, there are two diseases sharing disease genes, gene a and b. one disease occurs when both gene a and gene b are not working properly; however, the other disease presents when gene a or gene b is not functioning. then, it is hard to conclude that these two diseases have a perfect association (more explanation in). thus, when we try to get more precise and accurate association between diseases from a biology perspective, combinatorial effect profiles of them should be analyzed. this explanation can be applied to other molecule-based studies and ehr-based studies in the same manner. from this background, we present a novel approach that considers disease-related physiological factors in combinatorial ways for inferring disease associations. here, we decided to use clinical data, rather than molecular data or comorbidity data. molecular information is incomplete and should be further explored, even though much knowledge has been discovered by development of recent technology and analysis. on the other hand, clinical data provide practical explanations of disease associations and is becoming available to researchers in massive amounts . the national health and nutrition examination survey (nhanes; http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes.htm), a major clinical survey of the national center for health statistics, was used as primary data for this study. molecule and comorbidity data were incorporated to evaluate the results of this study in evaluation part as well. in this article, we constructed the dns from the information of disease-related clinical attribute combinations . in addition, we generated the 22 clinical attribute combinations frequently discovered from the 26 diseases concerned in this study, named as clinical risk attribute combinations (cracoms). in the evaluation section, we showed that the results of this study have great potential to be used for drug repositioning and outperform other existing dns in this regard. furthermore, we investigated a few disease pairs as candidate disease for drug repositioning and present some valuable evidence of the associations.we further explored disease pairs that are able to be new candidates for drug repositioning. as a result, we found that the gout and heart diseases pairs were positioned at high ranks in this study, but drugs hardly shared for the disease pairs yet . to verify the potential for new candidates of drug repositioning, we investigated relationships between gout and heart diseases from literature, and we could obtain some evidence that they are closely associated. choi and curhan (2007) and declaimed that men and women with gout have an increased risk for heart diseases, such as myocardial infarction and coronary heart disease. moreover,also revealed that gout is a risk factor of myocardial infarction, using multivariable regression models. in krishnans article, they referred that further research will be needed for the exact links between two diseases, and the combinatorial approach of this study could give some clues for it. we also disclosed disease pairs of cataract and heart diseases that has great potential for new drug repositioning candidates . to understand the results further, we surveyed articles that support the observed disease association.reported that coronary heart disease is one of the statistically significant risk factor of cataract. in addition,provided some evidence supporting a relationship between cardiovascular diseases and incident cataract.the combinatorial approach is highly necessary to explain disease associations because the real diseases occur in combinatorial ways. in this study, we inferred disease associations with a novel approach that considered disease-related physiological factors in combinatorial ways by using nhanes data. this study will give good explanations for understanding disease associations, and it will also provide inspiration to combinatorial approach studies not only in the disease related field but also in other fields having combinatorial characteristic. furthermore, we generated disease specific clacops as well as cracoms, which will give a few clues for disease prevention and etiology. those profiles will be investigated in the future.). this results show that the networks of this study (clacop-sharing dn) performed better than other networks at almost every top k, when compared with both reference networks 1 (approved drug-sharing dn) and reference networks 2 (trial drug-sharing dn))we also validated the potential of this study to be used in the drug repositioning field, and showed that this study outperformed other approaches in this regard. as a result, a few disease pairs such as the gout and congestive heart failure, and the cataract and coronary heart disease, were suggested as the candidate diseases for drug repositioning. we will investigate these drug repositioning candidate diseases on hereafter studies. in addition, when molecular data and their combinatorial analysis are incorporated, further improvements could be achieved in elucidating disease associations because molecular data provide the information that physiological data cannot cover. this further work also will be investigated in the future.note: four disease pairs in this table have been revealed as candidates for drug repositioning. those pairs had relatively high similarities in this study but relatively low similarities in the reference dn, indicating that they have not been used for drug 55 repositioning yet in spite of the potential. chf: congestive heart failure, chd: coronary heart disease.  
