a method for integrating and ranking the evidence for biochemical pathways by mining reactions from text motivation: to create, verify and maintain pathway models, curators must discover and assess knowledge distributed over the vast body of biological literature. methods supporting these tasks must understand both the pathway model representations and the natural language in the literature. these methods should identify and order documents by relevance to any given pathway reaction. no existing system has addressed all aspects of this challenge. method: we present novel methods for associating pathway model reactions with relevant publications. our approach extracts the reactions directly from the models and then turns them into queries for three text mining-based medline literature search systems. these queries are executed, and the resulting documents are combined and ranked according to their relevance to the reactions of interest. we manually annotate document-reaction pairs with the relevance of the document to the reaction and use this annotation to study several ranking methods, using various heuristic and machine-learning approaches. results: our evaluation shows that the annotated document-reaction pairs can be used to create a rule-based document ranking system, and that machine learning can be used to rank documents by their relevance to pathway reactions. we find that a support vector machine-based system outperforms several baselines and matches the performance of the rule-based system. the success of the query extraction and ranking methods are used to update our existing pathway search system, pathtext. availability: an online demonstration of pathtext 2 and the annotated corpus are available for research purposes atthe scale and speed with which biological literature is published introduces multiple challenges for the creation, verification, maintenance and further development of formal, comprehensive and up-to-date models of the physical entities and reactions involved in biological systems . efforts to understand a complex biological system in detail need to incorporate knowledge that may be distributed over a large number of scientific publications from among the tens of millions available today. to reduce the demands of discovering and integrating this knowledge, several text mining systems have been proposed , which address many of the aspects of pathway curation. however, despite the obvious potential that automatic analysis of the literature holds for assisting large-scale integration of biological knowledge, pathway curation efforts remain largely manual , carried out with limited or no support from advanced text mining methods. one way to try to remedy this situation is through the use of semantic search systems that make use of these methods. however, there are several technical challenges to overcome, such as interfacing with such systems and integrating information from various systems in a coherent way, as well as the fact that few semantic search systems directly involve either the representations or the semantics (physical entity and reaction definitions) used in pathway model curation efforts. to address these issues and support pathway curation, we have developed pathtext 2, an integrated search system designed to link biological pathways with supporting knowledge in the vast body of literature. given a pathway model and a reaction, the system is able to find documents that are relevant to the given reaction from medline. the literature search in pathtext 2 is implemented by translating each reaction into a set of queries that are then executed using several semantic search systems. the results of the queries are then combined, ranked and presented to the user in a unified user interface. with these pathway-specific functions, i.e. the reaction-based retrieval of documents and ranking of unified documents by their relevance to pathway reactions, pathtext 2 aims to reduce the number of documents curators need to focus on, thus increasing the productivity of pathway curation. the documents retrieved by pathtext 2 can help curators to maintain the textual evidence for reactions and to extend pathways by finding related reactions from the documents. pathtext 2 is designed to read formal pathway models represented in the systems biology markup language (sbml) with celldesigner extensions. sbml is a major standard format for pathway representation and interchange, and its use assures compatibility with a large ecosystem of existing pathway curation tools and resources. celldesigner extensions are essential for determining the correct participants in the reaction in our system; sbml itself does not define a fixed set of semantic types for its primitives but instead defines an extension mechanism (e.g.), allowing such types to be defined . pathtext 2 is a comprehensive enhancement of a previously released system, pathtext . pathtext2 to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com extends the core functionality of pathtext by combining the multiple results received for a single document from the various semantic search systems into a single result, introducing a new document ranking heuristic based on the relevance of the document to the given reaction, offering a new api allowing other systems to easily interface with the system and supporting a novel interface for human users to access the system. furthermore, we have updated the individual semantic search systems that are queried by pathtext 2 and updated the generation of queries applicable to these systems. this is done by implementing a query generation and expansion system based on reaction-event mapping . as we are trying to support improved automatic association between pathway models and documents, we have removed previous pathtext functionality for the manual annotation and association of documents with pathways. the improved query generation and ranking of the results should make this functionality obsolete, thus reducing the burden on curators. we evaluate pathtext 2 in detail on two corpora annotated by domain experts, both containing judgments on the relevance of various documents to specific pathway model reactions. the evaluation shows that use of pathtext 2 substantially improves on pubmed search for discovering relevant documents, that the annotations can support the development of heuristics for document ranking and that the task of determining documentreaction relevance is feasible using machine learning methods.we initially evaluated the individual contribution of each semantic search system on the training data by measuring the average hit ratio of each system separately . this evaluates the ranking performance of each semantic search system on fixed document sets (i.e. system recall is not evaluated); documents that were not retrieved by a semantic search system were assigned the lowest ranking. the results show that the semantic search systems vary in their effectiveness, with medie event best matching the gold standard. these results were used to define the ordering for the priority ranking heuristic (section 3.2). we note that although some systems show similar overall ranking performance, detailed analysis indicates substantial differences in the document sets retrieved by the systems (see supplementary material).shows the ndcg score of each ranking system. for the machine-learning methods, we found that the svm method achieved the best results, notably outperforming the average hit ratio heuristic and bm25. ranksvm slightly outperformed the average hit ratio method, but svr did not. the results for svr are to be expected, as we treated relevance judgments as linearly increasing absolute scores, which imposes considerable constraints on svr. in contrast, svm and ranksvm do not have these constraints. the priority ranking heuristic shows competitive performance on the test data, outperforming two of the machine-learning methods and showing a notable performance improvement compared with the average hit ratio heuristic. for machine-learning methods, using the pairs curated in pathway models, an svm trained on the pairs (pathway) performed as well as ranksvm, and the pairs slightly improved performance when used for creating an additional feature for training with the data specifically annotated for ranking (svm pathway). these results demonstrate that existing pathway annotations can be beneficially combined with data annotated for the ranking task. we note that the performance of the methods on the test data appears somewhat lower than the results obtained for thewe have presented pathtext 2, an integrated search system designed to link biological pathways with supporting knowledge in the vast body of literature. this system allows direct access to the most relevant documents from the literature, thus supporting various tasks in the creation, verification, maintenance and extension of pathway models. the system implements sbml parsing, the conversion of reactions into system-specific queries, query result combination and ranking by relevance to the given pathway reaction using heuristic or machine learningbased methods and an api supporting programmatic access to the search functionality. a major focus of our efforts has been. learning curve on svm-based ranking i50 the development of ranking functionality that combines the candidate document information retrieved by the various text mining-based search systems into a list ordered in a way where documents most likely to be relevant to the query reaction are presented first. we created a corpus of 450 judgments that identify on a four-point scale the relevance of documents to reactions randomly selected from a set of four panther db pathways and used it to evaluate simple ranking heuristics, advanced heuristics informed by evaluation of the training set and three machine learning-based ranking methods. our results show that an svm-based ranking with annotations in pathway models can notably outperform the simple ranking heuristics, achieving a 0.788 ndcg score. an online demonstration of the pathtext 2 system is accessible, and the annotated corpus is available for research purposes from the project homepage (http://www. nactem.ac.uk/pathtext2/). access to the pathtext 2 api is available on request.  
