inferring dynamic gene networks under varying conditions for transcriptomic network comparison motivation: elucidating the differences between cellular responses to various biological conditions or external stimuli is an important challenge in systems biology. many approaches have been developed to reverse engineer a cellular system, called gene network, from time series microarray data in order to understand a transcriptomic response under a condition of interest. comparative topological analysis has also been applied based on the gene networks inferred independently from each of the multiple time series datasets under varying conditions to find critical differences between these networks. however, these comparisons often lead to misleading results, because each network contains considerable noise due to the limited length of the time series. results: we propose an integrated approach for inferring multiple gene networks from time series expression data under varying conditions. to the best of our knowledge, our approach is the first reverse-engineering method that is intended for transcriptomic network comparison between varying conditions. furthermore, we propose a state-of-the-art parameter estimation method, relevance-weighted recursive elastic net, for providing higher precision and recall than existing reverse-engineering methods. we analyze experimental data of mcf-7 human breast cancer cells stimulated by epidermal growth factor or heregulin with several doses and provide novel biological hypotheses through network comparison. availability: the software netcomp is available at http://bonsai .ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp/shima/netcomp/.systems biology aims to understand a cellular process through quantitative mathematical models . one of the important problems in systems biology is to reverse-engineer the dynamics of genegene interactions, called gene network, from time series expression data. several techniques have been developed for the mathematical modeling of these dynamics from time series expression data, notably differential equation , state space model (; rangel to whom correspondence should be addressed), vector autoregressive (var) model (opgen) and dynamic bayesian networks . in this light, a key challenge in the application of these methods is to develop new strategies and theoretical frameworks for the comparative analysis of multiple gene networks, that is, to infer gene networks from multiple time series expression data under various biological conditions or external stimuli, for example, different doses of a chemical compound or a growth factor, and to identify subnetworks (interactions) that are conserved or not conserved among the conditions. comparative topological analysis provides a very good opportunity to reveal the differences between regulatory structures and understand cellular responses to varying conditions. however, this is not an easy task because the number of candidate interactions is very large as compared to the number of true interactions. this problem becomes more serious for short time series data. as of october 2009, in time series experiments designed to comparison between multiple biological conditions from public databases such as gene expression omnibus (geo) and array express, 90 were short time series with fewer than 10 time points. in these cases, the application of existing reverseengineering methods to these short time series data leads to poor performance in that a large number of false positives and false negatives are produced in network inference. therefore, the noisy interactions inferred using existing methods make it difficult to identify critical differences and similarities between conditions and to produce useful results. in this study, we propose a novel-integrated approach for inferring multiple gene networks from time series expression data under varying biological conditions. it should be noted that earlier algorithms aimed to infer a gene network under a condition of interest and they were not intended to compare multiple gene networks, that is, to infer each gene network independently based on only samples from a condition of interest, called exact samples . our approach is different from these earlier approaches in that it aims at both network inference and comparison, and it uses exact samples along with samples from other conditions, called relevant samples . to the best of our knowledge, other than the proposed method, no other method is available for reverse-engineering multiple gene networks in order to compare transcriptomic responses under different conditions.shows a conceptual view of the proposed method. our key assumption is that large regions of the gene networks are conserved and that small regions are changed between conditions. this implies that a network model for generating a sample under. conceptual view of our method using an example of inferring gene networks under three different biological conditions (no stimulation and no perturbation, stimulation with receptor ligands and perturbation with small compounds) from time series microarray experiments. traditional inference is based on exact sample information (black line). our proposed inference is based on both exact sample information (gray line) and relevant sample information (black line). a condition is partially related to the other network models for generating a sample under other conditions. we develop a new parameter estimation method called relevance-weighted recursive elastic net (rw-renet) for inferring multiple network structures based on both exact sample information and relevant sample information. rw-renet automatically infers conserved interactions from samples under all the relevant conditions and unconserved interactions from samples under each condition with a similarity based on the comparison between estimators. this enables us to achieve a higher prediction accuracy of inferring gene networks as compared to earlier methods without losing critical differences between gene networks under certain conditions. we test our approach using simulated data and experimental data of mcf-7 human breast cancer cells to assess its performance relative to that of the existing methods.we addressed the problem of inferring and comparing multiple gene networks between varying conditions from time series gene expression data. numerous approaches have been developed using mathematical models in order to reverse-engineer a gene network under a condition of interest from time series data. however, no studies have addressed the problem of gene network inference from the viewpoint of network comparison. we proposed a novel integrated approach for reverse-engineering multiple gene networks that is intended for transcriptomic network comparison. a stateof-the-art estimation method called rw-renet automatically infers conserved interactions from samples under all the relevant information and unconserved interactions from samples under each condition with a similarity based on the comparison between the estimators; this method achieves higher pr and rc than the earlier methods in gene network inference and comparison. we also supported biological hypotheses and provided new biological findings in experimental data of mcf-7 breast cancer cells under egf and hrg stimulations through comparative network analysis using rw-renet.  
