gene expression inferring epigenetic and transcriptional regulation during blood cell development with a mixture of sparse linear models motivation: blood cell development is thought to be controlled by a circuit of transcription factors (tfs) and chromatin modifications that determine the cell fate through activating cell type-specific expression programs. to shed light on the interplay between histone marks and tfs during blood cell development, we model gene expression from regulatory signals by means of combinations of sparse linear regression models. results: the mixture of sparse linear regression models was able to improve the gene expression prediction in relation to the use of a single linear model. moreover, it performed an efficient selection of regulatory signals even when analyzing all tfs with known motifs (600). the method identified interesting roles for histone modifications and a selection of tfs related to blood development and chromatin remodelling. availability: the method and datasets are available fromblood development in mammals is an ideal system to study cell differentiation and proliferation. all blood cells arise from a single multipotent hematopoietic stem cell (hsc). this stem cell can differentiate in lymphoid and myeloid progenitors, which will give rise to erythrocytes and immune cells such as monocytes, megakaryocytes, b and t cells . the different cell types are distinguishable by specific cell surface proteins and can readily be obtained from the blood of adult individuals through cell sorting. for the purified cell populations, cell type-specific expression profiles and dnaprotein interactions can subsequently be obtained using microarrays and chromatin immunoprecipitation (chip) assays . blood cell development is thought to be controlled by a circuit of transcription factors (tfs), that determine the cell fate through activating cell type-specific expression programs . to whom correspondence should be addressed.in addition, there is an increasing awareness of the role of chromatin structure in regulating expression during development . in particular, the presence or absence of posttranscriptional histone modifications (hms), termed the histone code, modulates the affinity of histones to dna and thus determines whether a dna region is accessible for the transcriptional machinery . for instance, the histone marks h3k4me3, h3k79me and h3kac are known to be associated with genes that are either actively transcribed or whose transcription is readily activated upon stimulus while promoters bearing the histone marks h3k27me3 and h3k9me3 tend to be inactive. understanding the interplay between particular hms and tf binding is crucial for uncovering cell differentiation processes. to shed light on the interplay between histone marks and tfs during blood cell development, in this study we model gene expression by means of combinations of linear regression models. the main idea behind this approach is to combine all regulatory signals to explain the expression pattern of the genes, as tfs and hms can act in a multi-functional manner, conveying both transcriptional repression and activation depending on their location with respect to the transcription start site (tss) and the presence of other tfs in the surroundings . the value of the regression coefficients thereby indicates not only the importance of a particular regulatory signal but also whether a signal activates or represses transcription. we have recently shown that combining more than one regression model in a mixture, where each of the regression models explains the expression of a particular group of genes, improves the expression prediction and identification of important regulatory players . previous works were however based on the analysis of only a small subset of possible regulatory signals (100) , as standard linear regression suffers from over-fitting on high-dimensional space . in addition, regulatory signals tend to be correlated, with a given subset of tfs and/or hms being present on the same group of promoters. although it is important that the model indicates all regulatory signals that are important to a particular cell type, standard regression models give arbitrary coefficients for correlated (or co-linear) variables, failing to give a proper interpretation of all important variables . here, we propose a novel methodology, mixture of sparse linear regression models, to describe the expression of genes. sparse linear models perform a time efficient selection of important features even in the presence of a high number of regression variables. the sparse model is determined. the elastic net displays the so-called grouping effect, that is, co-linear variables are simultaneously included in or excluded from the model and all grouped variables have equivalent regression coefficients . therefore, our method is not only capable of analyzing all tfs with known motifs (600) but also allows to identify all regulatory signals (co-linear or not), which play an important role in a particular cell type.we have developed a novel method for predicting gene expression that combines the use of linear mixture models with an efficient way to select the relevant predictor variables from a large set of regulatory signals. the approach is ideally suited to integrate high-dimensional data normally not applicable in standard linear regression analysis. for instance, when provided the full set of binding affinities from vertebrate transfac matrices together with hm data to model gene expression in blood cells, the algorithm performed a sparse selection retaining only 29 out of over 600 input variables. the resulting sparse linear mixture models not only significantly improved gene expression predictions by capturing non-linear relations with the retained regulatory signals but also allowed to readily identify and characterize the relevant regulatory signals. in particular, the model predicted known roles of hms and could select a small set of tfs related to development and hematopoiesis to particular developmental stages. the proposed method has three main parameters to be optimized (k, 1 and 2 ) and at the moment cannot make use of the regularization paths together with the em algorithm. further work will thus be required to develop efficient methods for optimizing the parameters. in addition, tf binding affinities can accurately be predicted only for proximal promoters and well-conserved upstream elements. the addition of epigenetic information, which can further characterize distal enhancers and active promoters , is likely to improve the tf binding predictions and is current work in progress. large consortia such as the epigenetic roadmap, encode and blueprint epigenome are releasing expression, epigenetic and binding data on an unprecedented scale. although our approach offers a new way to integration such large-scale datasets it remains a big challenge to further unravel the regulatory mechanisms underlying the developmental processes shaping the human body.  
