data and text mining inferring microrna–mrna causal regulatory relationships from expression data motivation: micrornas (mirnas) are known to play an essential role in the post-transcriptional gene regulation in plants and animals. currently, several computational approaches have been developed with a shared aim to elucidate mirnamrna regulatory relationships. although these existing computational methods discover the statistical relationships, such as correlations and associations between mirnas and mrnas at data level, such statistical relationships are not necessarily the real causal regulatory relationships that would ultimately provide useful insights into the causes of gene regulations. the standard method for determining causal relationships is randomized controlled perturbation experiments. in practice, however, such experiments are expensive and time consuming. our motivation for this study is to discover the mirnamrna causal regulatory relationships from observational data. results: we present a causality discovery-based method to uncover the causal regulatory relationship between mirnas and mrnas, using expression profiles of mirnas and mrnas without taking into consideration the previous target information. we apply this method to the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (emt) datasets and validate the computational discoveries by a controlled biological experiment for the mir-200 family. a significant portion of the regulatory relationships discovered in data is consistent with those identified by experiments. in addition, the top genes that are causally regulated by mirnas are highly relevant to the biological conditions of the datasets. the results indicate that the causal discovery method effectively discovers mirna regulatory relationships in data. although computational predictions may not completely replace intervention experiments, the accurate and reliable discoveries in data are cost effective for the design of mirna experiments and the understanding of mirnamrna regulatory relationships. availability: the r scripts are in the supplementary material. contact: thuc_duy.micrornas (mirnas) are short ($22 nt) endogenous non-coding rnas that regulate gene expression by promoting mrna degradation and repressing translation. they recognize target mrnas by base pairing to complementary sequences in the 3 0-untranslated region (3 0-utr) of the target mrna . mirnas have also been observed to target genes through sites in the 5 0-utr and sometimes in the open reading frames . it has been demonstrated in a body of literature that mirnas regulate a wide range of biological processes in proliferation , metabolism , differentiation (esquela), development , apoptosis , cellular signalling and even cancer development and progression . since the advent of microarray data on gene expression programs, various statistical data mining methods have been devised in recent years in an attempt to discover the mirnamrna regulatory relationships. this research into the regulatory relationships between mirnas and mrnas can be recognized in two main streams. in the first stream, researchers developed various methods to identify a group of co-expressed mirnas and mrnas in data. for instance,applied bayesian network parameter learning,proposed a population-based probabilistic learning model andused a rule-based method. in the second stream, attempts were made to predict the regulatory networks of mirnas and mrnas for specific biological processes. some highlights in this direction includeapplying a probabilistic graphic model adopted from the authortopic model in information retrieval,using bayesian network learning andproposing a graphical model inspired by the correspondence latent dirichlet allocation. these methods, although varied, all identify only the statistical relationships in the data. these relationships are either correlations or associations between the two types of variables, mirna and mrna. however, correlations or associations are not causality. for instance, the expression values of an mirna to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com and an mrna may be strongly correlated across samples, but it is not sufficient to conclude that the mirna regulates the mrna. the strong correlation between the mirna and the mrna may be a result of the mrna regulating the mirna, or a third molecule regulating both the mirna and the mrna. in this article, our ultimate goal is to discover which mirnas causally regulate which mrnas. a regulatory relationship between an mirna and an mrna means that a change in the expression level of the mirna will result in a change in the expression level of the mrna. associations or correlations are not the right tools to test the causal hypothesis. therefore, we aim to discover the causal effects of an mirna on an mrnas. we refer to this causal effect as mirna causal regulatory relationship to emphasize the difference between causal discovery and statistical discovery. the gold standard method for tackling this problem is randomized control experiments. for example, we can use gene knockdown experiments to knockdown mirnas one by one while measuring changes (i.e. causal effects) in the expression level of mrnas. however, such experiments are time consuming, expensive and not necessarily definitive. fortunately, with the foundation created by, the recent advances in causal discovery research have opened the door to discovering causal relationships from observational data. instead of conducting controlled experiments, we can use do-calculus to estimate the causal effects of a variable on other variables based on observational data. the do-calculus requires a causal structure of the variables to be given as a dag (directed acyclic graph); however, such a structure is often unknown in reality. to bridge the gap,) proposed a method to estimate causal effects from observational data alone. the method is called intervention calculus when the dag is absent (ida), and it includes two main phases: (i) to learn a causal structure from observational data and (ii) to apply do-calculus to infer causal effects. our method is based on ida. given the observational data of variables, ida can capture the causal effects of the variables on one single response variable. we extend the application of ida and build our model for multiple response variables, and then apply the model to discover the mirna causal regulatory relationships. in our problem, mirnas and mrnas are nodes or variables in the model, and observational data are the expression profiles of the mirnas and mrnas. we can view genes as subjects and mirnas as analogous to treatments, which may have causal effects on the responses (i.e. expression levels) of the genes. our aim is to measure the causal effect of each mirna on mrnas. applying this approach, we tackle two drawbacks of current mirna regulatory relationships research. first, the method discovers causal relationships between mirnas and mrnas, not just the statistical relationships. second, we assume that mirnas and mrnas interact with each other in a complex system, for instance, an mirna can causally regulate mrnas as well as other mirnas. this assumption is more reasonable than the commonly used approach that considers only the bipartite of interactions between mirnas and mrnas. for example, (shows that let-7 can regulate other non-coding rnas including mirnas.in this work, we first derive the solution to discover the causal mirna regulatory relationships based on the ida approach. then we apply the method to the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (emt) datasets. we implement a controlled experiment for the mir-200 family to validate the results. the outcome shows that the causal mirna regulatory relationships discovered using our method largely overlap the findings from the experiment, suggesting that the causal relationships between mirnas and mrnas can be identified from expression profiles.in this section, we present the results and analysis of applying our algorithm to the nci-60 dataset for emt.  
