genetics and population analysis inferring rare disease risk variants based on exact probabilities of sharing by multiple affected relatives motivation: family-based designs are regaining popularity for gen-omic sequencing studies because they provide a way to test co-segregation with disease of variants that are too rare in the population to be tested individually in a conventional casecontrol study. results: where only a few affected subjects per family are sequenced, the probability that any variant would be shared by all affected relativesgiven it occurred in any one family memberpro-vides evidence against the null hypothesis of a complete absence of linkage and association. a p-value can be obtained as the sum of the probabilities of sharing events as (or more) extreme in one or more families. we generalize an existing closed-form expression for exact sharing probabilities to more than two relatives per family. when pedigree founders are related, we show that an approximation of sharing probabilities based on empirical estimates of kinship among founders obtained from genome-wide marker data is accurate for low levels of kinship. we also propose a more generally applicable approach based on monte carlo simulations. we applied this method to a study of 55 multiplex families with apparent non-syndromic forms of oral clefts from four distinct populations, with whole exome sequences available for two or three affected members per family. the rare single nucleotide variant rs149253049 in adamts9 shared by affected relatives in three indian families achieved significance after correcting for multiple comparisons (p 2 10 6). availability and implementation: source code and binaries of the r package rvsharing are freely available for download at http://cran. r-project.org/web/packages/rvsharing/index.html.the advent of high-throughput sequencing of whole exomes and even whole genomes opens the possibility of detecting rare variants (rvs, including those unique to a family, and alleles up to a frequency of 1 in a population) impacting human health. the first successful applications of exome sequencing have been with rare mendelian traits . a common study design to discover highly penetrant causal variants that are rare in families where previous genotyping has not been performed is to sequence the exome (or increasingly, the whole genome) of two or three affected subjects, and focus on novel variants predicted to be functional and shared by all sequenced family members as likely causal variants . contrary to monogenic mendelian traits, considerable genetic heterogeneity must be expected with complex diseases. familial forms of numerous common complex diseases are caused by rvs, supporting the hypothesis that rvs may explain a part of the so-called missing heritability of these diseases, although the extent of the contribution of rvs to complex disease heritability is an ongoing debate . in a family where cases cluster, there is a high probability that multiple affected members carry the same rare disease predisposing variant if such a variant exists and its penetrance is high . this gives an advantage to family samples over the samples of unrelated individuals, where disease-causing rvs may be seen only once or twice among tens of thousands of subjects. as with mendelian disorders, it has initially been proposed to use the rv sharing information to filter out rvs not shared in at least one family . for variants sufficiently rare so copies in the sequenced relatives are almost certainly identical by descent (ibd), the probability that an rv independent of the disease and detected in at least one sequenced subject would not be shared by other sequenced relatives who are affected was computed byto quantify the effectiveness of what they call the concordance filter in discarding irrelevant rvs. we adopt the view that the probability that an rv would to whom correspondence should be addressed. be shared by all affected relatives in a familygiven it occurs in any one of themcomputed disregarding the disease phenotype can be used to quantify evidence against the null hypothesis of absence of linkage and association to the disease and, therefore, establish that the rv may predispose to disease. we emphasize that rv sharing probabilities are not the same as ibd sharing probabilities. a parentoffspring pair carries dna from three distinct chromosomes at any locus: one the parent and offspring share ibd, one in the parent and one in the offspring. the probability they share one allele ibd is hence equal to 1. however, a rv seen in one of the two relatives is present on only one of the three chromosomes. the probability that this chromosome is the one shared ibd is 1 3. so, parentoffspring pairs are informative for rv sharing analysis, whereas they are uninformative for ibd sharing-based linkage analysis. for more distant relationships, rv sharing probabilities remain smaller than ibd sharing probabilities as explained in section 4. this information can be combined across all the families where the rv is seen, if more than one occurs. mathematical expressions generalizing sharing probabilities to more than two relatives per family are given in the section 2. this approach for calculating sharing probabilities does not require knowledge of the actual variant allele frequency in the population, and only assumes there is no identity by state (ibs) without ibd among sequenced family members. we illustrate that these calculated sharing probabilities are good approximations of the true ibs sharing probabilities for allele frequencies up to $1, and also explore the power of the test based on these probabilities to detect disease susceptibility rvs using relative pairs under genetic heterogeneity models. in addition to variant rarity, the known pedigree must be correct (in particular, all founders are unrelated) to insure a variant is introduced only once in the family. cryptic relatedness can often be detected from dense marker genotype data. when founders of a known pedigree are related, an rv may be introduced more than once, leading to greater actual sharing probabilities than the value computed based on the known pedigree, and to an overstatement of the evidence against the null. we examine the impact of unknown relationships and propose to approximate the sharing probability using kinship coefficients among founders, estimated empirically from genome-wide marker data on family members. the validity of the approximation is evaluated in a simulation of small populations. we then apply the rv sharing probability computation to a whole exome sequencing study of 55 multiplex families with apparent non-syndromic forms of oral clefts from four distinct populations. oral clefts are the most common craniofacial malformations, representing a good example of a genetically heterogeneous disorder with at least a dozen different genes previously identified as genetic risk factors via genome-wide association studies .in this article, we propose using the probability of sharing of an rv by affected subjects under the null hypothesis of complete absence of linkage and association between an rv and disease status to build evidence against this null hypothesis in the context of exome sequencing studies of complex diseases in family samples. this approach will be successful at finding rvs with high penetrance for diseases where such variants are involved. we have presented formulas to compute exact probabilities of sharing of an rv by any number of affected subjects in arbitrary non-inbred pedigrees under the assumption the variant is sufficiently rare to be introduced only once in the pedigree, generalizing a previous formula applicable to two affected subjects. it is important to stress that more information is extracted in this approach from each family than in the case of testing for linkage alone because we require the rv in question, and not any allele, to be shared. this is most easily illustrated with two relatives of degree d, for which the probability of sharing an allele ibd is 1 2 d1 while the rv sharing probability is 1 2 d1 1. the ratio p/pwill tend to 1 4 as d tends to infinity so rv sharing is more informative for making inference on a particular rv in families where the rv is seen. our power study indicated moderate to good power to detect highly penetrant variants with a small number of families where the variant is observed. power declines as the relative risk decreases, but if several rvs are involved in a heterogeneous disease, the probability of finding at least one would remain good even if power is low. first cousin pairs provided more power than second cousin and parentoffspring pairs under genetic heterogeneity and dominant effect of the variant, the model most compatible with rvs causing disease in unilineally related subjects. the assumption that a rv is sufficiently rare for being almost certainly ibd among relatives is crucial to the validity of the rv sharing probabilities. we recommend performing an analysis of sensitivity to this assumption for any potential finding, as we have done for the two hits in the oral clefts study.a potential pitfall with rv sharing probabilities based on a known pedigree structure is the possibility of cryptic relatedness among founders that would make the actual null sharing probability greater than the one computed here. we have developed an adjustment to rv sharing probabilities based on estimates of the kinship coefficients among founders of known pedigrees under the assumption of equal kinship coefficients for all pairs of founders. our simulation study on a pedigree whose founders were drawn from larger pedigrees representing small populations showed the approximation is accurate when the mean kinship coefficient among founders of the known pedigree is no greater than the kinship coefficient of second cousins once removed ( 1 32 ), but will underestimate rv sharing probabilities with closer relationships. the simulation study also revealed an accurate approximation can be achieved using monte carlo sampling with a reasonable number of draws for sharing probabilities of the order of 10 3. an important aspect of our adjustment for unknown relationships is to be based solely on estimated kinship between founders, and not require an estimate of the rv frequency in the population from which the pedigree founders were drawn. we have proposed a formula to estimate mean kinship among founders based on the kinship estimates between sequenced subjects. a number of methods can be used to estimate kinship coefficients from genome-wide genotype data , and an appraisal of these methods is beyond the scope of this article. because our approximation method requires only a mean kinship coefficient between founders, variation in the length of genome shared by pairs of subjects is smoothed by averaging. using a population average instead of the true average over the founder pairs of the pedigree had a moderate impact on the error in our simulation study. for this work, we have implemented the formulas to compute our numerical approximation of the rv sharing probability allowing for relatedness among founders and assess the sensitivity to allele frequency specifically for the family structures shown inand supplementaryand reported in supplementary table s2. developing an implementation of these formulas to general pedigree structures remains challenging. however, these checks of the analysis assumptions can also be performed by monte carlo simulation, implemented in the rvsharing r package. in our extension of the rv sharing probability to more than two subjects, we considered only the probability that all affected sequenced subjects share the rv. this is appropriate for three affected subjects sequenced in a pedigree as in the oral cleft study, where causal rvs not shared by all sequenced subjects are indistinguishable from benign rvs. however, it is too stringent a requirement when larger numbers of affected subjects from large multiplex families are sequenced, given the intrafamilial heterogeneity in disease causes typical of complex traits . at the same time, with n43 sequenced subjects in a family, the event that n 1 or n 2 affected subjects out of n share an rv is itself evidence against the null hypothesis. the computation of the probability of such events in pedigrees of arbitrary structure will require further work. non-affected family members may also be included in future sequencing studies. while sequencing non-affected family members has been used to exclude private benign variation in studies of mendelian traits , this risks excluding causal variants showing incomplete penetrance in studies of complex traits. an affected only analysis of rv sharing protects against unaffected carriers reducing evidence for a variant in the same way as it does in linkage analysis . sequence data on non-affected family members, in particular subjects marrying into the pedigree, will still be useful in narrowing down the number of founders that could have introduced a given rv in the pedigree and refine these rv sharing probabilities. the methods and analyses presented are limited to considering a single rv at a time. our results illustrate how with a few families it is possible to obtain substantial evidence of cosegregation between a rv and disease. yet, rare causal variants found in a single family were not considered in our analysis of these multiplex cleft families because individual families provide limited information. a combined analysis of multiple rvs from the same functional unit, typically the same gene, will be needed to detect significant rv sharing at that level. various issues still need to be resolved to implement such analysis, in particular, dealing with multiple rvs within the same family. this will be the object of future work.  
