inferring single-cell gene expression mechanisms using stochastic simulation motivation: stochastic promoter switching between transcriptionally active (on) and inactive (off) states is a major source of noise in gene expression. it is often implicitly assumed that transitions between promoter states are memoryless, i.e. promoters spend an exponentially distributed time interval in each of the two states. however, increasing evidence suggests that promoter on/off times can be non-exponential, hinting at more complex transcriptional regulatory architec-tures. given the essential role of gene expression in all cellular functions, efficient computational techniques for characterizing promoter architectures are critically needed. results: we have developed a novel model reduction for promoters with arbitrary numbers of on and off states, allowing us to approximate complex promoter switching behavior with weibull-distributed on/off times. using this model reduction, we created bursty monte carlo expectation-maximization with modified cross-entropy method (bursty mcem 2 ), an efficient parameter estimation and model selection technique for inferring the number and configuration of promoter states from single-cell gene expression data. application of bursty mcem 2 to data from the en-dogenous mouse glutaminase promoter reveals nearly deterministic promoter off times, consistent with a multi-step activation mechanism consisting of 10 or more inactive states. our novel approach to modeling promoter fluctuations together with bursty mcem 2 provides powerful tools for characterizing transcriptional bursting across genes under different environmental conditions. availability and implementation: r source code implementing bursty mcem 2 is available upon request.the process of gene expressionwhereby the information contained in a dna sequence is converted into rna and proteinsplays an essential role in the execution of nearly all cellular functions. as a result, the misregulation of this process underlies a large number of human diseases including cancer, diabetes and neurological disorders . despite its importance, the mechanistic details of gene expression are still not well understood. in particular, we lack a comprehensive molecular-level explanation for expression burstsperiods of intense rna and protein production separated by periods of quiescenceobserved in pro-and eukaryotes . precise characterization of the mechanisms underlying expression bursts is profoundly important, as the properties of these bursts have been implicated in v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com disease-related processes such as bacterial phenotype switching and hiv activation . recent advances in single-cell monitoring and single-molecule detection have made possible the experimental characterization of gene expression bursts . specifically,have quantified transcriptional bursts from 11 endogenous mouse promoters, demonstrating that each observed expression pattern can be approximated using a stochastic two-state model of promoter architecture. this commonly used random telegraph model assumes that each promoter can exist in one of two stateson or offwith synthesis of rna only possible in the on state. because of intrinsic noise exhibited by the small numbers of molecules involved in transcription (e.g. 12 copies of dna, few available copies of transcriptional regulators) , the promoter produces expression bursts by switching randomly between the transcriptionally active (on) and inactive (off) states according to kinetic parameters (rate constants) that can be estimated from single-cell time series data . although conceptually useful and amenable to analytical characterization, the random telegraph model is an oversimplification of the architecture of most promoters. because of simultaneous regulation by multiple transcription factors as well as chromatin modifications, the effective number of states for most promoters is thought to be larger than two . a recent study of the human prolactin gene supports this assertion, where the distribution of time its promoter spent in an inactive state was inferred to be strongly non-exponential and thus indicative of multiple, sequential off states . classical examples of multi-state promoters include that of p rm in phage lambda, whose complex mechanism of regulation gives rise to 128 regulatory states and the endo16 gene in sea urchin, whose cisregulatory domain contains 30 binding sites for 15 different proteins that perform combinatorial regulation . in light of these observations and the increasing availability of single-cell expression data, computational methods are needed for characterizing complex promoter architectures and efficiently simulating their behavior. an ideal candidate for such a method would (i) leverage the intrinsic noise of the system to better identify underlying mechanisms , (ii) simultaneously infer both the configuration of promoter states and the associated kinetic parameters needed for predictive simulation and (iii) provide computationally efficient performance for a wide range of architectures. currently existing methods satisfy only a subset of these requirements.performed hidden markov model parameter inference for two-and three-state promoter architectures, but their models assume constant (noise-free) promoter activity and rna levels between discretely observed time points and they do not provide an efficient means to characterize architectures with larger numbers of states. we previously developed monte carlo expectationmaximization (mcem) with modified cross-entropy method (mcem 2 ), which uses statistically exact stochastic simulations to infer kinetic parameters from single-cell time series data . however, the original version of mcem 2 does not enable characterization of promoter architecture.developed an approximate bayesian computation-based method for inferring both parameters and model structure using stochastic simulations. unfortunately, when using this method to discriminate between promoter models with increasing numbers of states, the addition of each state increases the number of unknown kinetic parameters (e.g. switching rates). in the presence of limited amounts of experimental data, this quickly renders more complex (and thus more realistic) models non-identifiable. we note that this drawback applies to any inference method that represents transitions between individual promoter states explicitly. finally, stochastic simulation of multi-state promoter architectures suffers from a linear increase in computational cost with the addition of each promoter state, making the study of more complex models difficult. because of the limitations described above, our goal in this work was to develop a computationally efficient method for characterizing gene expression bursts by inferring the number and configuration of promoter states from single-cell time series data.our results are structured as follows: we first devise a novel model reduction strategy that represents arbitrary numbers of promoter states by a single state accompanied by a time-dependent switching rate. as we demonstrate below, this strategy enables both efficient simulation and parameter inference. next, we incorporate this model reduction into mcem 2 and augment the method to perform model selection for configuration of promoter states. we demonstrate the resulting approachbursty mcem 2 by inferring the effective numbers of promoter states underlying simulated singlecell expression data. in addition, we use bursty mcem 2 to characterize the architecture of the endogenous mouse glutaminase promoter given experimentally observed time series data .in this work, we present a novel model reduction for multi-state promoters along with an efficient computational technique for inferring the number and configuration of promoter states from singlecell gene expression data. specifically, we first developed a timedependent reaction propensity function for transcriptional bursting that generates weibull-distributed on/off promoter state dwell times. using this function, we demonstrated an ability to closely approximate the behavior of promoters undergoing multi-step transitions between off and on states. next, we created bursty mcem 2 which, when combined with our model reduction, allows for computationally efficient parameter inference and model selection across a wide range of promoter architectures. as an example of the computational savings conferred, we note that modeling a promoter transitioning between nine off states and one on state requires specification of 10 switching parameters and simulation of 10 chemical reactions per transcriptional cycle. in contrast, use of our time-dependent propensity function introduces only three parameters and requires the simulation of only two reactions per cycle. these computational and parametric savings increase linearly with the number of promoter states modeled, enabling efficient analysis of arbitrarily complex promoter architectures with bursty mcem 2. through a simulation study, we demonstrated the ability of bursty mcem 2 to correctly identify the number of promoter states used to generate single-cell time-series trajectories. in addition, we showed that our method accurately infers the values of kinetic parameters within the chosen promoter model. we then applied bursty mcem 2 to experimental time-lapse microscopy data from a reporter gene driven by the endogenous mouse glutaminase promoter . our results suggest that, rather than occupying two or three states as previously described, the glutaminase promoter likely traverses through 10 or more off states before transcribing mrna from an on state. we hypothesize that a distinct advantage of a promoter architecture with 10 states lies in its potential noise buffering properties. as the number of states increases, promoter off times become more deterministic, leading to more consistent rates of mrna production. as shown in, this leads to less variable protein levels over time (particularly at lower levels), which can confer more robust behavior in response to stochastic perturbations. because of the intrinsic noise present in the transcriptional and translational machinery, we note that the confidence interval accompanying our estimated number of glutaminase promoter off states is somewhat large (1050). the addition of measurements at later time points would certainly help reduce this uncertainty. however, if protein measurements were replaced with direct quantification of mrna, we would expect a much more precise estimate, since translational noise would no longer affect our analysis. results from the simulation study support this, where we obtained more precise estimates of numbers of promoter states by performing inference on mrna data. when discussing particular numbers of promoter states within our model reduction, it is important to note that these values represent effective numbers of states rather than distinct biochemical configurations. in particular, since the correspondence between the parameters of the weibull distribution and the number of promoter states (4) is most accurate when the switching rates are equal, the effective number of states is likely an underestimation of the true number. this follows from the observation that as the switching rates depart from equality, the slowest promoter transitions become ratelimiting and thus mask the presence of faster transitions. given that. two-and three-state promoter models exhibit more variable off times than 26-state promoter model. values of c 1 and c 2 used for each model version are shown one of our goals in this work was to demonstrate that mammalian promoters occupy more than two or three states, this discrepancy only strengthens the conclusions drawn from our results. in conclusion, we anticipate that our novel approach to modeling promoter fluctuations together with bursty mcem 2 provides powerful tools for characterizing transcriptional bursting across genes under different environmental conditions. future work will focus on discovering general transcriptional regulatory principles by applying these methods to single-cell expression data from a wide range of promoters.  
