inheritance-mode specific pathogenicity prioritization (ispp) for human protein coding genes downloaded from motivation: exome sequencing studies have facilitated the detection of causal genetic variants in yet-unsolved mendelian diseases. however, the identification of disease causal genes among a list of candidates in an exome sequencing study is still not fully settled, and it is often difficult to prioritize candidate genes for follow-up studies. the inheritance mode provides crucial information for understanding mendelian diseases, but none of the existing gene prioritization tools fully utilize this information. results: we examined the characteristics of mendelian disease genes under different inheritance modes. the results suggest that mendelian disease genes with autosomal dominant (ad) inheritance mode are more haploinsufficiency and de novo mutation sensitive, whereas those autosomal recessive (ar) genes have significantly more non-synonymous variants and regulatory transcript isoforms. in addition, the x-linked (xl) mendelian disease genes have fewer non-synonymous and synonymous variants. as a result, we derived a new scoring system for prioritizing candidate genes for mendelian diseases according to the inheritance mode. our scoring system assigned to each annotated protein-coding gene (n 18 859) three pathogenic scores according to the inheritance mode (ad, ar and xl). this inheritance mode-specific framework achieved higher accuracy (area under curve 0.84) in xl mode. conclusion: the inheritance-mode specific pathogenicity prioritization (ispp) outperformed other well-known methods including haploinsufficiency, recessive, network centrality, genic intolerance, gene damage index and gene constraint scores. this systematic study suggests that genes manifesting disease inheritance modes tend to have unique characteristics. availability and implementation: ispp is included in kggseq v1.0whole-exome sequencing has been widely used for the identification of disease-associated genetic variants. for severe and rare mendelian diseases, it has been proven to be an effective approach . exome sequencing may also contribute to the understanding of the etiology of complex diseases, e.g. schizophrenia and type 2 diabetes . however, the functional annotation of the protein-coding genes is still far from complete. by007 protein-coding genes had been registered in the hugo gene nomenclature committee database , which includes most of the relevant dna regions responsible for severe mendelian diseases and some complex diseases. on the other hand, the data from the 1000 genomes project indicate that an apparently healthy person could carry approximately 250300 loss-of-function (lof) single-nucleotide variants (snvs) on average (1000 genomes). therefore, the accurate estimation of both gene and variant pathogenicity and corresponding etiologic architecture pose a considerable challenge to human genetic community. a number of bioinformatics tools based on predicted deleteriousness and distinct biological features have been developed to prioritize protein-changing (i.e. non-synonymous) variants in the human protein-coding genes. the tools fathmm , gerp , lrt , mutationassessor , sift , siphy and provean mainly consider sequence similarities and conservation patterns across various species, whereas cadd , mutationtaster and polyphen-2 consider the functional information of the genetic variations from multiple different information sources in their algorithms. moreover, the mutation significance cutoff uses gene-level dynamic thresholds generated by cadd, polyphen-2 or sift to reduce false-negative rate . these tools are particularly useful in clinical sequencing studies of mendelian diseases as to exclude a large number of neutral variants. however, inconsistencies in prediction results among all these different variant-based prediction tools have been demonstrated and results from variant-based functional prediction are hard to be generalized into the gene level. a few gene scoring systems have been proposed to estimate the effect of genetic variations at the gene level. first, haploinsufficiency (hi) score combines a list of biological properties by inspecting the copy number variations (cnv) among thousands of healthy individuals. in this system, genes with a higher hi score may imply their potential of causing dominant traits. second, recessive (rec) score uses 213 known lof tolerant genes and 858 known recessive disease genes to build up a linear discriminant model to estimate the probability that a gene can cause a recessive disease. third, genic intolerance (rvis) score assesses functional genetic variation tolerance ability from profiles of snvs with allele frequency information. fourth, network indispensability (net) score calculates the gene centrality and indispensability in various proteinprotein interactions and regulatory networks to dissect the gene importance. fifth, gene constraint (cons) score compares the genomic background mutation profile with the observed mutation profile of a gene for interpreting de novo mutations. lastly, human gene damage index (gdi) also utilizes the mutation profile in both monogenic disease patients and the general population to prioritize exome variants. however, each of these popular gene scoring systems can only explain part of the genetic architecture from different perspectives. for example, (i) hi estimation does not include the profiles of non-cnv genetic variants; (ii) the rec score does not consider the dominant disease-predisposing genes; (iii) the rvis score does not deal with variations of allele frequencies in different populations; (iv) the systematic comparison for different known disease-associated genes is missing in net score study and the sample size of lof-tolerant and essential genes are moderated; (v) the cons score is only applicable for the interpretation of de novo mutations and (vi) the gdi score only considers mutation profiles. therefore, more sophisticated analysis and comprehensive prioritization schemes on genes causing human disease are needed. one of the most important characteristics of a mendelian disease is that its mode of inheritance can be inferred from the pedigree. however, only a few studies have partially examined the unique biological features of genes causing the different inheritance modes of mendelian diseases . therefore, we developed a new gene-level scoring system, inheritance mode specific pathogenicity prioritization (ispp) for the prediction of inheritance-specific pathogenicity. in addition to the consideration of the different inheritance modes, ispp also combines six existing gene-level prioritization systems with many gene features. the performance of the proposed approach was evaluated systematically by multiple curated disease-associated gene sets.in this study, we first collected 30 known disease-associated gene lists from independent studies or public databases as the benchmark dataset for building and testing the inheritance-specific disease gene prediction models. while various, these disease-associated gene lists are not necessarily mutually exclusive. we included nine gene groups of different inheritance modes and eight gene groups for disease with different ages of onset. besides, we collected 14 gene features as well as six widely used gene prioritization scores as predictors in our prediction models (see section 2 for details). the data collection and analysis framework are summarized in supplementary table s1 and.  
