inhibition of hiv-1 protease: the rigidity perspective motivation: hiv-1 protease is a key drug target due to its role in the life cycle of the hiv-1 virus. rigidity analysis using the software first is a computationally inexpensive method for inferring functional information from protein crystal structures. we evaluate the rigidity of 206 high-resolution (2 or better) x-ray crystal structures of hiv-1 protease and compare the effects of different inhibitors binding to the enzyme. results: inhibitor binding has little effect on the overall rigidity of the protein homodimer, including the rigidity of the active site. the principal effect of inhibitor binding on rigidity is to constrain the flexibility of the -hairpin flaps, which move to allow access to the active site of the enzyme. we show that commercially available antiviral drugs which target hiv-1 protease can be divided into two classes, those which significantly affect flap rigidity and those which do not. the non-peptidic inhibitor tipranavir is distinctive in its consistently strong effect on flap rigidity.hiv-1 protease is a key drug target due to its role in the life cycle of the hiv virus , and many protease inhibitors have been designed to block its function and to prevent virus replication . hiv-1 is a retrovirus; after it enters a host cell, its viral rna is reverse transcribed into double-stranded dna and then integrated into host dna. the host cell subsequently transcribes this integrated virus-specific dna and translates the transcribed message into a single extended translation product containing the sequences of all the viral-encoded proteins required to make further copies of the virus. the role of hiv-1 protease is to cleave this product at specific cleavage sites to generate the individual functional viral proteins. successful inhibition of the protease prevents this maturation step and hence blocks proliferation of the virus. many x-ray crystal structures of hiv-1 protease have been resolved and deposited in the rscb protein data bank (pdb) . the wild-type protease is a symmetric homodimer with a largely -sheet secondary structure . the active site of the protease lies in a cleft where the two chains meet; this cleft is covered by -hairpin flaps to whom correspondence should be addressed.. experimentally, nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) and fluorescence spectroscopy have been used to study the flexibility of the protein. the flaps have been found to be highly flexible in the unbound enzyme, with internal flap motion occurring on a sub-ns timescale . on a timescale of 100 s, they undergo a different large amplitude motion in slow dynamic equilibrium between semi-open and less ordered open conformations . the conformational dynamics of the protease have also been investigated using molecular dynamics simulations and coarse-grained models . again, the flaps have been found to be highly flexible with distances between their tips ranging from 7 to 25 . the conversion between closed, semi-open and fully open flaps has been simulated in qualitative agreement with experimental data . here we examine hiv-1 protease by performing rigidity analysis on a set of 206 x-ray crystal structures that have been solved to a resolution of 2 or better and made available in the pdb. in our analysis, we determine the locations of flexible regions within the protein and hence study the potential for motion. first identifies rigid clusters and flexible regions by matching atomic degrees of freedom with the constraints present due to bonding . we examine the effect of inhibitor binding on flap rigidity using a comparative approach; for each structure crystallized with an inhibitor bound, we perform rigidity analysis on the structure with the inhibitor present and on the same structure with the inhibitor deleted .  
