inps: predicting the impact of non-synonymous variations on protein stability from sequence motivation: a tool for reliably predicting the impact of variations on protein stability is extremely important for both protein engineering and for understanding the effects of mendelian and somatic mutations in the genome. next generation sequencing studies are constantly increasing the number of protein sequences. given the huge disproportion between protein sequences and structures, there is a need for tools suited to annotate the effect of mutations starting from protein sequence without relying on the structure. here, we describe inps, a novel approach for annotating the effect of non-synonymous mutations on the protein stability from its sequence. inps is based on svm regression and it is trained to predict the thermodynamic free energy change upon single-point variations in protein sequences. results: we show that inps performs similarly to the state-of-the-art methods based on protein structure when tested in cross-validation on a non-redundant dataset. inps performs very well also on a newly generated dataset consisting of a number of variations occurring in the tumor suppressor protein p53. our results suggest that inps is a tool suited for computing the effect of non-synonymous polymorphisms on protein stability when the protein structure is not available. we also show that inps predictions are complementary to those of the state-of-the-art, structure-based method mcsm. when the two methods are combined, the overall prediction on the p53 set scores significantly higher than those of the single methods. availability and implementation: the presented method is available as web server at http://inps. biocomp.unibo.it.the increasing amount of data generated by the several sequencing initiatives calls for accurate and reliable computational approaches to predict the impact of mutations on the phenotype, and possibly for methods to correlate them with diseases . more to this, the ability of accurately predicting the impact of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nssnps) on protein stability is essential for understanding the effects of human genome variations . several methods have been developed so far to predict the effect of nssnps on the protein stability. some of them require the knowledge of the protein structure: auto-mute , cupsat , dmutant , foldx , eris , popmusic , sdm , mcsm (. other methods are based only on protein sequences (iptree-stab:) or can use both protein sequences and protein structures (i-mutant2.0:). besides the single methods, other approaches have been tested, such as meta-predictors (istable:), filtering approaches based on the available information about mutations in the same protein site and ensemble predictors . the available methods were trained under different conditions and on different datasets. they address three different questions. briefly, they can: (i) predict the ddg real values (in regression) upon residue substitution, (ii) predict whether a residue substitution promotes a ddg increase or decrease (two class predictors) and (iii) predict whether a mutation is stabilizing, destabilizing or not affecting the protein stability (three class predictors). noticeably, it is also very difficult to find a good benchmark test set, since all the methods have to deal with the paucity of the available experimental data. almost all methods are trained on data derived from the same source: the protherm database . in 2010, khan and vihinen made a thorough evaluation of the different methods considering them as pure classifiers (i.e. the methods that predicted the ddg real values were converted into classifiers). the authors showed that the best performing methods (i-mutant3.0, dmutant and foldx) exploit the protein structure information . recently, pires et al. (2014a) introduced two relevant advancements when evaluating the performance of different methods. they described: (i) a more correct way to avoid similarity between training and testing sets when adopting a cross validation procedure and (ii) a new independent benchmark consisting of a wide range of mutations occurring in the tumor suppressor protein p53, not present in the original protherm database . in this article, we take advantage of these efforts, and we describe inps (a predictor of the impact of non-synonymous-variations on protein stability), a new method that computes the ddg values of protein variants without requiring the knowledge of the protein structure. we show that when evolutionary information is taken into account, inps performances are very close to those obtained by the state-ofthe-art methods based on 3d structure, mcsm and duet. we also show that inps predictions are complementary to those obtained with mcsm (or duet) and that their combinations, obtained by averaging the predictions, outperform previously introduced and combined approaches .  
