genetics and population analysis inrich: interval-based enrichment analysis for genome-wide association studies here we present inrich (interval enrichment analysis), a pathway-based genome-wide association analysis tool that tests for enriched association signals of predefined gene-sets across independent genomic intervals. inrich has wide applicability, fast running time and, most importantly, robustness to potential genomic biases and confounding factors. such factors, including varying gene size and single-nucleotide polymorphism density, linkage disequilibrium within and between genes and overlapping genes with similar annotations, are often not accounted for by existing gene-set enrichment methods. by using a genomic permutation procedure, we generate experiment-wide empirical significance values, corrected for the total number of sets tested, implicitly taking overlap of sets into account. by simulation we confirm a properly controlled type i error rate and reasonable power of inrich under diverse parameter settings. as a proof of principle, we describe the application of inrich on the nhgri gwas catalog. availability: a standalone c++ program, user manual and datasets can be freely downloaded from: http://atgu.mgh.harvard.edu/inrich/.multi-locus approaches (often known as pathway or gene-set enrichment analysis methods) can be used to ask whether sets of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), often defined by groups of functionally related genes, are in aggregate more highly associated with a phenotype than expected by chance. consideration of the biological relationships among the top hits in a genomewide association study (gwas) can provide orthogonal evidence, over and above the functionally agnostic analysis of the number, statistical significance and/or variance explained of those hits. for example, that a gwas has three independent snps with p-values around at 110 6 is in itself unremarkable. however, if the associated regions independently map to three of a small set of functionally related genes, this will be very unlikely to occur by chance: consequently, we would likely wish to put more weight to whom correspondence should be addressed. on these associations. as well as providing additional statistical evidence to sub-threshold association results, another use of geneset analysis can be called in silico fine-mapping, or prioritizing specific genes in loci that contain multiple genes with equivalent association evidence. for example, of 10 associated genes within a block of strong linkage disequilibrium (ld), we may find that only one shows above-chance relatedness to genes that appear in other, statistically independent association intervals. all other things being equal, one would presumably consider that gene as more likely to be causally related compared with the other nine. furthermore, the identity of the particular enriched gene-sets may offer insights into disease mechanism and biology, although this will be contingent on the gene-sets accuracy, comprehensiveness and relevance to the phenotypes underlying biology. over the past few years, several gene-set methods for gwas have been developed (). still, there clearly exist challenges and limitations to be addressed (. desirable properties of a gene-set test include the following: (i) robust, and so able to calculate experimentwide significance, with adjustment for common biases due to gene size, ld within and between genes, etc.); (ii) flexible, with application to (summary) data from different sources, such as gwas, from imputed data, copy number variant (cnv) studies, targeted sequencing, from tables in manuscripts, etc.; and (iii) computationally manageable, allowing genome-wide analysis in a reasonable time on a single machine. here, we describe the gene-set enrichment analysis tool inrich (interval enrichment analysis) that aims to satisfy the above properties. inrich takes a set of independent, nominally associated genomic intervals and then tests for the enrichment of predefined gene-sets. an interval will typically correspond to a genomic region of snp association defined by ld from a genome-wide scan, although intervals could also represent, e.g. deletion or duplication events observed in cases, regions identified as homozygous-bydescent, etc.  
