sequence analysis insect 2.0: a web-server for genome-wide cis-regulatory modules prediction insect is a user-friendly web server to predict the occurrence of cis-regulatory modules (crms), which control gene expression. here, we present a new release of insect which includes several new features, such as whole genome analysis, nucleosome occupancy predictions, and which provides additional links to third-party functional tools that complement user capabilities, crm analysis and hypothesis construction. improvements in the core implementation have led to a faster and more efficient tool. in addition, this new release introduces a new interface designed for a more integrative and dynamic user experience. availability and implementation: http://bioinformatics.ibioba-mpsp-conicet.gov.ar/insect2the complexity of multicellular organisms is principally a product of the intricate regulatory networks through which they control cell expression, in a range of spatiotemporal conditions. the high specificity required for gene expression regulation is acquired mainly through the physical interaction of many transcription factors (tfs) that bind to groups of cis dna elements (transcription factor binding sites, tfbss) in a coordinated manner. these elements are often located close to each other and follow specific and highly conserved patterns, generally known as cis-regulatory modules (crms). mathematical models of many tfbss have been obtained and incorporated into publicly available databases. these models, usually represented as position weight matrices (pwms), can be used to predict new instances of regulatory sites over specific sets of sequences. however, the major obstacle for prediction of tfbss, when aligning pwms to gene regulatory sequences, is the vast amount of artifactual findings due to random and non-functional sites with high pwm scores (i.e. false positives). insect first version was presented as a crm detector that outperforms most of the available tools with similar characteristics in terms of sensitivity and specificity, by the implementation of several strategies to lower the rate of false positives. the main advantage of our method is a more realistic semantic representation of crms structures. insect offers several features that allow users to easily extract information related to the genes of interest from the ensembl annotations and other third-party tools, such as the ucsc genome browser. the tool interface minimizes usage complexity, allowing a highly integrative analysis to be performed. insect 2.0 is significantly faster than its previous version, allowing for genome-wide analysis. new third-party tools have been included to help in the processes of further analysis and finding of crms, which can maximize the likelihood of representing true regulatory elements. insect 2.0 is a new online tool of great value to every researcher interested to predict the occurrence of crms at genome level and over long lists of genes, with no requirement to install prior infrastructure. v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.cominsect 2.0 is a powerful tool for researchers requiring search and analysis capabilities for potential crms presence at a genomic scale. this new release has added several features to help users further explore predicted crms based on the biological aspects of genome structure. the implementation of search filters reduces the search space to specific sets of genes of interest, minimizing the rate of false positives. new visualizations and statistical histograms of the global results have also been included. by linking the genes with predicted crms to additional third-party resources such as the ucsc genome browser, genemania or ensembl regulation, the powerful functionalities of its interface make insect 2.0 a unique integrative platform for crms prediction. the combined feature set allows users to exploit crms information that otherwise may remain hidden in huge tables, or that would require programming, data gathering or computational skills which would be barriers for non-specialized users.  
