sequence analysis insect: in-silico search for co-occurring transcription factors motivation: transcriptional regulation occurs through the concerted actions of multiple transcription factors (tfs) that bind cooperatively to cis-regulatory modules (crms) of genes. these crms usually contain a variable number of transcription factor-binding sites (tfbss) involved in related cellular and physiological processes. chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (chip-seq) has been effective in detecting tfbss and nucleosome location to identify potential crms in genome-wide studies. although several attempts were previously reported to predict the potential binding of tfs at tfbss within crms by comparing different chip-seq data, these have been hampered by excessive background, usually emerging as a consequence of experimental conditions. to understand these complex regulatory circuits , it would be helpful to have reliable and updated user-friendly tools to assist in the identification of tfbss and crms for gene(s) of interest. results: here we present insect (in-silico search for co-occurring transcription factors), a novel web server for identifying potential tfbss and crms in gene sequences. by combining several strategies, insect provides flexible analysis of multiple co-occurring tfbss, by applying differing search schemes and restriction parameters. availability and implementation: insect is freely available as a web server atregulation of transcription occurs through the concerted actions of multiple tfs that bind to cis-regulatory modules (crms) . experimental techniques such as chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (chip-seq) have provided valuable insight into the mechanisms governing gene regulation. however, these techniques produce large amounts of data of variable quality, inherent to the complex experimental conditions used . the inconvenience, together with high data analysis costs, makes this strategy unappealing without specific information to help reduce the dataset before performing experiments. the availability of more efficient sequencing techniques, together with the growing number of genomes deposited on public databases, provides an ideal scenario for development of bioinformatics tools facilitating design of future experiments in this field. several tools have been recently developed to search and characterize the transcription factor-binding sites (tfbss) of crms by dissecting relationships among them (van). currently available tfbss search tools can be grouped into two major approaches: (i) motif discovery: tfbss are inferred by analyzing a group of sequences that are considered to be under the regulation of a particular transcription factor (tf) and (ii) motif search: to determine the location where a tf is more likely to bind by searching its corresponding tfbs over sequence datasets. the constant progress in experimental technologies and the establishment and execution of initiatives such as the encode project have helped to characterize large sets of tfbss. thus, a considerable amount of position weight matrices (pwms, i.e. elements that represent a group of sequences that are recognized by a specific tf) has been deposited on databases such as transfac , jaspar and uniprobe . such matrices derived from alignment and processing of target sequences can be used to search potential tfbss over genomes and sequences as well as to establish potential sites of gene regulation. an important limitation of this methodology is its high false-positive rate (fpr). according to the futility theorem , the presence of non-functional binding sites for a given tf can be three orders of magnitude higher compared with the actual number of functional sites of genomes . fpr reduction without compromising the sensitivity of the method is challenging, and several strategies have been designed to tackle this problem. however, many of these tools are organism specific (i-cistarget, dire), discontinued in their maintenance (mscan, cis-analyst), outdated (moduleminer, tfbscluster, premod) or lack flexibility and are difficult to use by non-computational scientists (as reviewed by van). importantly, most of these tools do not allow implementation of rules regarding the relationships between the individual tfbss of a particular crm . this caveat represents a significant limitation during crm screening. nevertheless, most of these tools have to whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. proven quite valuable to the scientific community, assisting in the characterization and study of crms. here we present insect (in-silico search for co-occurring transcription factors), a novel motif search web tool for identification of potential tfbss and crms. by combining different strategies, insect allows for complete and flexible analysis of multiple co-occurring tfbss. we have compared insect performance with other tools analyzing experimental data related to the regulation of genes by sox2 and oct-4 tfs in embryonic stem cells (escs). the regulatory networks of mouse and human esc properties have been studied extensively . many target genes of the sox2 and oct-4 tfs have been identified using genome-wide chip followed by dna microarray analysis . these tfs (in addition to an additional tf, nanog) appear to act in concert to regulate a limited repertoire of target genes, tightly regulating the escs pluripotent state.insect was tested by searching two experimental datasets for tfbss of sox2 and oct-4, two tfs involved in maintaining pluripotency in escs. in the rodda dataset analysis, crms composed by sox2 and oct-4 binding sites were searched over potential regulatory sequences corresponding to six genes that were experimentally demonstrated to have these tfbs by. we compared insect results and performance with three existing motif search tools. we show that insect outperformed the other tools in almost every analysis. in the boyer dataset analysis, sox2 and oct-4 co-occurrences were analyzed in gene sequences from a chip experiment reported by).(a) sliding window search for three co-occurring tfbss with spacing restriction set by a window size of n bp. (b) master-driven search for a master tf and two co-occurring tfs with differing maximum spacing restrictionsinsect is designed as a user-friendly interface to minimize tool usage complexity along with integration of several methods that aim to assist in visualization and analysis of results. insect dynamically generates tracks that can be submitted and automatically opened within the ucsc genome browser to analyze the detected crms and their relationship to surrounding genomic regions. in this context, insect tracks can be analyzed along with tracks, as the chip-seq, dnase i hypersensitivity, rnaseq, dna methylation information and many other features provided by the encode project on the ucsc genome browser. while insect only provides in silico estimation, the information generated using this tool may be a valuable guide for experimentation design and hypothesis construction. for example, it was previously suggested that the relative orientation between sox2 and oct-4 binding sites is critical, based on structural analysis of ternary complex among these two factors and dna . insect is the only solution among the tools evaluated here that can apply the strand restriction and restrict relative orientations between tfbss within crms. we have demonstrated how insect facilitates crm search analysis on experimental data derived from different biochemical techniques in the rodda dataset. we found that insect outperforms other tools in terms of sensitivity and specificity in cases where the true positive is known a priori. we also showed a more real exploratory analysis with chip data from the boyer dataset. finally, we analyzed the genomic environment of different crms detected by displaying them in the ucsc genome browser as a custom track. to detect those genes with more promising tfbs hits, analysis accounted for whether crms were located on regions corresponding to the encode tfs, chip-seq data, histone marks and regions of high transcriptional activity. many tools were developed to search for potential tfbss within crms by implementing pwms. however, there are differing criteria for scoring and determining whether a given subsequence is a potential tfbs or not. a group of tools statistically decides whether a substring constitutes a possible tfbs comparing its enrichment within a promoter region with respect to a background set and the subsequent calculation of p-values. there are several ways of achieving this comparison, as seen in the implementation of tools such as cpmodule, motifviz and cluster buster. as p-value-based algorithms require a background set for comparison, there are many variables that can affect results that are not inherent to the pwm definition itself, but the background. some parameters, such as the length of the analyzed sequences, number of random pwm used to measure enrichment or even the motif lengths represented by the pwms, can affect the results obtained by p-value-based methods. we considered that normalization of pwm scores by mmsc eliminates this problem, given that determination of quality for a site does not rely on comparison with random sequences, but the pwm itself. the latter relies on the hypothesis that, if the pwm is representative of the real motif, the mmsc value potentially has a more relevant biological meaning, as it relates directly to the affinity between tfs and their dna target sites. we have built a flexible method that allows researchers to define parameters to find potential crms instead of isolated. insect visualization in ucsc genome browser for hoxb1 along with histone markers and tfs chip-seq tracks from encode sets of tfbss. by adding the phylogenetic footprinting search option, insect makes crm identification more robust. we confirmed the search and result display capabilities of insect in two different datasets. the ability to perform analyses that are usually difficult, or not possible, with most of the available tools, because they are not available fully as web servers, command line programs are difficult to use or they do not offer the insect web server functionality, demonstrates the advantages of having an integrated motif search tool.  
