bioinformatics discovery note systems biology insights into polypharmacology from drug-domain associations motivation: polypharmacology (the ability of a single drug to affect multiple targets) is a key feature that may explain part of the decreasing success of conventional drug discovery strategies driven by the quest for drugs to act selectively on a single target. most drug targets are proteins that are composed of domains (their structural and functional building blocks). results: in this work, we model drugdomain networks to explore the role of protein domains as drug targets and to explain drug polyphar-macology in terms of the interactions between drugs and protein domains. we find that drugs are organized around a privileged set of druggable domains. conclusions: protein domains are a good proxy for drug targets, and drug polypharmacology emerges as a consequence of the multi-domain composition of proteins.the decrease in the translation of drug candidates into effective therapies during the past two decades has occurred concurrently with the goal of rational drug design of developing selective ligands that act on a single target . this classical perspective is an oversimplification challenged by a growing body of evidence showing that there are many drugs for each target and that a single drug can affect multiple targets . the emergent concept of polypharmacology bears this out, both from a target and a drug perspective. on one hand, we can obtain the correct combination of targets from analyses of the biological networks associated with a given disease, and on the other hand, we can select or design magic shotguns, i.e. drugs that are able to bind multiple targets with low specificity . the network perspective from the study byillustrates this situation well. they organized all approved drugs reported by drugbank into a drug target network in which the drugs are depicted as nodes that are connected if the drugs share a protein target, and they also generated a targetprotein network in which the proteins are nodes that are connected if the proteins are targeted by the same drug. more than half of the drugs in the drugtarget network formed a giant interconnected cluster, and in both networks, the majority of the nodes were connected to at least one other drug/target, that is drugs share protein targets and proteins are targeted by more than one drug. although yildirim et al. bring up polypharmacology as a general attribute of drugs, their results also illustrate an important bias of drug design, which is that many approved drugs are based on the same therapeutic targets. mestres et al. pursue this topic further and show that because of limited time and resources, small molecules are not screened systematically through a large and complete panel of proteins. thus, drugtarget networks derived on the basis of public bibliographic sources may be more representative of the target space explored by the pharmaceutical industry rather than being a true reflection of drug polypharmacology . when they take into account drug affinity data by including targets with no particular therapeutic interest, they find that drugs target even more proteins, illustrating that drug polypharmacology is the rule rather than the exception. polypharmacology has recently been explained in terms of protein modularity within protein interaction networks. within any protein interaction network, a module represents a densely connected group of nodes (and these may be either proteins or functional motifs/domains) that are weakly connected to the remaining network. a rich variety of global measures based on reverse engineering of network topologies have been suggested to uncover the organizing principles behind complex networks. such reverse engineering of network topologies-based measures reveal that networked structures can emerge at different levels, from single-node characteristics and the tendency of pairs of nodes to connect to each other, to the patterns exhibited by associations of three or more nodes known as motifs . here, we aim to re-orientate the field to the fundamental principle of protein science, the premise that the functional units of proteins are domains, to explain polypharmacology. protein domains are compact and functional structures that can be considered the building blocks of proteins. the definition of protein domains overlaps the structural and functional views of proteins . because domains are units of structure and there is a limited repertoire of domain types , protein domains are combined to form different proteins with different functions . furthermore, proteinprotein interactions are dominated by domaindomain interactions . therefore, we think that drugtarget interactions may be mediated by drugdomain interactions; hence, we argue that protein domains can be major contributors to polypharmacology. in other words, because proteins have a modular structure and the same domains can be repeatedly found in different proteins, the reason why a drug binds multiple protein targets to whom correspondence should be addressed. may be related to the proteins sharing a common domain that the drug may be targeting. in this work, we attempt to unravel the association between drugs and protein domains to address the hypothesis that protein domains are the areas on which drugs act and are an important factor in the polypharmacological behaviour of most drugs.our work is not the first to attempt to associate drugs with protein domains.developed a statistical approach to predict potential targets for new drugs based on interactions between drugs and protein domains. interestingly, they assumed that drugs act by binding to specific proteins, contrary to the idea proposed by drug polypharmacology. moreover, they relied on the idea that drugs interacting with the same domain tend to share therapeutic effects; hence, they associate domains with therapeutic categories using the anatomical therapeutic chemical (atc) codes, that is, a domain is associated with a group of drugs sharing the same atc code. as far as we know, the work described in this report is the first attempt to identify direct drugdomain associations in a systematic and comprehensive manner. other previous research has focused on drugdomain relationships as well.and russ and lampel (2005) relied on manual annotations of drug-binding domain to explore the druggable genome. we obtained roughly the same setof druggable domains with our automatic method. we found that drugs tend to revolve around a privileged set of domains, as can be observed in the drugdomain bipartite networks and can be deduced from the monopartite projections of the drug domain and drugprotein networks. network heterogeneity reflects the tendency of a network to contain hub nodes; a drug drug projection of a bipartite network with a low heterogeneity reflects a trend in which drugs are organized around a privileged set of targets. this is the case for the drugdrug projections of both drugdomain networks when compared with their corresponding drugprotein subnetworks, as shown in. drug degree distributions (particularly in drugdomain networks), after we corrected for the co-occurrence of domains in the same proteins, clearly show that drugs target domains in a more specific way than they target proteins. different domain targets for a polypharmacological drug tend to cluster in the same modules, within domain interaction networks such as domine. these domains, and in particular co-occurring domains, can be interpreted as a single module or as a single pharmacological target, in the same sense that protein complexes are considered as drug targets in the work of nacher and schwartz (2012). to get a hint of the evolutionary perspective of druggable domains, we selected polypharmacological drugs that target the two main families of druggable proteins, as described byin the druggable genome, i.e. gpcrs and kinases. although both doxepin and staurosporine can be associated with protein domains that are archetypical for each protein class, the targets of doxepin are closely related in the gpcrs phylogenetic tree, whereas the targets of staurosporine are widespread in the human kinome. these two examples illustrate a difference in the subfamily targeting specificity of the selected drugs and suggest further studies, such as the implications in drug polypharmacology of the evolutionary conservation of structural domains (with particular focus on binding site conservation) and the structural similarity of domains for distinct targets. our results support the idea that protein domains are a good proxy for drug targets when considering the structural and functional perspectives of their definition. hence, drug polypharmacology, understood as the ability of a single drug to bind several proteins, emerges as a consequence of the multidomain composition of proteins.  
