genome analysis insights into structural variations and genome rearrangements in prokaryotic genomes structural variations (svs) are genomic rearrangements that affect fairly large fragments of dna. most of the svs such as inversions, deletions and translocations have been largely studied in context of genetic diseases in eukaryotes. however, recent studies demonstrate that genome rearrangements can also have profound impact on pro-karyotic genomes, leading to altered cell phenotype. in contrast to single-nucleotide variations, svs provide a much deeper insight into organization of bacterial genomes at a much better resolution. svs can confer change in gene copy number, creation of new genes, altered gene expression and many other functional consequences. high-throughput technologies have now made it possible to explore svs at a much refined resolution in bacterial genomes. through this review, we aim to highlight the importance of the less explored field of svs in prokaryotic genomes and their impact. we also discuss its potential applicability in the emerging fields of synthetic biology and genome engineering where targeted svs could serve to create sophisticated and accurate genome editing.the sequencing of a large number of prokaryotic genomes and sequence comparison of closely related species have unraveled a large repertoire of genomic variations . a large number of studies focusing on variations in prokaryotic genomes have been majorly concentrated on single-nucleotide variations and small insertiondeletion events . it is now being increasingly recognized that in addition to single-nucleotide variations, other types of variations that include large genomic rearrangements are not infrequent in bacterial genomes . among the different types of genetic variations found in genomes, structural variants have remained the most difficult to identify and interpret. structural variations (svs) encompass a fairly large piece of dna and can emerge as a result of different cellular mechanisms such as dna recombination, replication and dna repair . svs introduce variability in gene copy number, position, orientation and, in several cases, combinations of these events . the mechanisms of sv formation appears to be similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes (, b). but, svs have not been widely explored and studied in prokaryotic genomes as compared with eukaryotes . the comprehensive assessment of svs has been a challenge largely due to the underlying complex mechanisms that gives rise to them. accurate and precise identification of svs would require prediction of three features, namely, copy, content and structure . over the years, several approaches have been developed to detect and characterize svs. some of the classical methods include arraycgh (array comparative genomic hybridization) and single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) arrays, which have been extensively reviewed earlier . arraycgh is based on hybridizing fluorescently labeled sample with normal dna immobilized on a glass surface and analyzing hybridization ratios. snp arrays on the other hand use single sample per array and measure the intensities of the probe signals on the basis of single base difference. the major understanding on the genomic landscape of svs was facilitated by the availability of sequencing technologies coupled with computational algorithms to map and identify svs at a much higher resolution . in sequencing-based approaches, paired-end reads generated with an approximate insert size are mapped onto the reference genome. the pairs mapping at a distance substantially different from expected length or in altered orientation are nominated as structural variants. svs identified by means of sequencing data offer a strong advantage of detecting breakpoints (i.e. sequence boundaries where an sv begins and ends) , which can further aid to unravel the functional impact of a variant and the mechanisms that created it . though the high-throughput technologies have significantly contributed to the understanding of the repertoire of svs in prokaryotic genomes, the problem of sv detection has always remained challenging as none of the methods can appropriately address the complexity of repetitive regions found in genomes. it is widely believed that the svs arise as a by-product of illegitimate recombination events (homologous recombination) and also by imprecise non-homologous repair mechanism to whom correspondence should be addressed. during aberrant dna replication to repair broken replication forks . apart from being the focus of evolutionary analysis , the phenotypic implications of svs in bacterial genomes have also been deciphered , which are discussed in detail in the later part of the manuscript. in this review, we provide a comprehensive overview of the present understanding of svs in general and in the context of prokaryotic genomes. we briefly describe the various types of svs, discuss their probable molecular mechanisms of formation, advances in the development of tools and techniques to detect svs and also their phenotypic consequences in context of prokaryotic genomes. we also discuss currently used methodologies of next-generation sequencing (ngs) and analysis algorithms, which could provide a comprehensive and high-resolution map of svs and how they could be extensively used for understanding biological phenomena of strain variability and evolution. we also describe their potential applications in the emerging fields of synthetic biology and genome engineering.  
