structural bioinformatics in silico analysis of phytoene synthase and its promoter reveals hints for regulation mechanisms of carotenogenesis in duanliella bardawil motivation: previous researches showed that phytoene synthase (psy) from dunaliella bardawil is the first regulatory point in carotenogenesis. we hypothesize certain interactions between the environmental stress factors and the regulatory sequences of psy in d.bardawil (dbpsy). consequently, la pcr-based genomic walking approach was performed for isolation of psy promoter and terminator, respectively. the obtained nucleic acid sequences and the corresponding protein structure of dbpsy were analyzed and predicted using various bioinformatics tools. finally, we presented some hints for the regulation mechanisms of dbpsy at the molecular level according to the computed results. results: la pcr-based genomic walking results showed that the isolated sequences are the promoter and terminator of psy, correspondingly. computational analysis demonstrated several candidate motifs of the promoter exhibiting hypothetic uv-b-, norglurzon-and salt-induced characteristics, as well as some typical domains universally discovered in promoter sequences, such as tata-box, ccaat-box and gata-box, etc. furthermore, the structure of psy was also predicted and aligned along with many counterparts at the protein level. low homology of n-terminus was found in d.bardawil, while a relatively conserved c-terminus was predicted to be involved in the catalytic activity and substrate recognization/binding. phylogenic analysis classified the dbpsy into a cluster with other algae. these results implied that psy may share similar regulation mechanisms among algae with respect to their c-termini; while the diversity in n-terminus among psys, along with the predicted inducible motifs in psy promoter from d.bardawil, may confer the fine tuning differences between d.bardawil and other algae. conclusion: by means of computer techniques, we found in d.barawali that two interesting conserved motifs of psy promoter may involve in uv-b, norglurzon and salt regulation correspondingly; and that the diversity of psy protein mainly lies in the n-termini among algae. these results indicate some hints for regulation mechanisms of carotenogenesis in d.bradawil.carotenoids are a wide family of polyene pigments synthesized by all plants, various algae and certain species of bacteria, fungi and archaea . in photosynthetic organisms, carotenoids carry out several essential functions, i.e. participating in photosynthesis to protect the photosynthetic apparatus from potential oxidative damage besides light harvesting (demmig). animals cannot synthesize carotenoids but may obtain them through derivative pigmentation from diet . some carotenoids have vitamin a activity in humans; therefore, they are classified as essential nutrients . many researches show the prevention and treatment properties of carotenoids against several kinds of diseases, such as certain chronic disease , cardiovascular disease as well as certain cancers . these promoting properties of carotenoid have attracted intensive interesting in carotenoid biosynthesis and its commercial exploitation. so far, at least 700 carotenoids have been characterized from nature carotenoid biosynthetic pathways involving in c30 and c40 isoprenoids . in recent years, dunaliella bardawil has received intensive attention as a natural rich source of -carotene, owing to its capability to accumulate massive amount of -carotene under stress conditions such as high light density, high salt concentration and nutrient starvation . many studies on accumulation of -carotene and phytoene have been conducted to date . for large production of -carotene, the optimal conditions should be high uv-a intensity, slightly alkaline ph, low nacl concentration and moderate nano 3 concentration ; while uv-b and other photobleaching compounds could elevate phytoene production, instead of -carotene . nevertheless, these investigations were primarily focused on culture condition optimization at physiologic and biochemical level, none of them probed into the molecular mechanisms for carotenogenic regulation in d.bardawil. the hypothetic biosynthetic pathway of carotenoid in dunaliella is disproportional to synthesize various carotenoids such as -carotene, neoxanthin, lutein and so on . the most universal carotenoid biosynthetic pathway is the successional  
