a method to infer positive selection from marker dynamics in an asexual population motivation: the observation of positive selection acting on a mutant indicates that the corresponding mutation has some form of functional relevance. determining the fitness effects of mutations thus has relevance to many interesting biological questions. one means of identifying beneficial mutations in an asexual population is to observe changes in the frequency of marked subsets of the population. we here describe a method to estimate the establishment times and fitnesses of beneficial mutations from neutral marker frequency data. results: the method accurately reproduces complex marker frequency trajectories. in simulations for which positive selection is close to 5 per generation, we obtain correlations upwards of 0.91 between correct and inferred haplotype establishment times. where mutation selection coefficients are exponentially distributed, the inferred distribution of haplotype fitnesses is close to being correct. applied to data from a bacterial evolution experiment, our method reproduces an observed correlation between evolvability and initial fitness defect.the potential of a biological system to adapt to a given environment is a key characteristic, measurements of which shed light on a critical aspect of the process of evolution. how adaptation takes place depends to a large extent on the distribution of the fitness effects of mutations (eyre). therefore, quantitative measurements of selection are biologically interesting and valuable. neutral markers provide one tool for identifying selection in experimental populations. in an experimental population, markers allow for the easy identification of variants. selection pressures acting on marked populations can then be seen by changes in their relative frequencies . in initially isogenic, asexual populations, neutral markers have been used to characterize novel beneficial mutations (; rozen to whom correspondence should be addressed), and to study evolutionary processes such as clonal interference and evolvability . where marked subpopulations have differing initial fitness, their relative fitnesses can be derived by considering the ratio between their malthusian parameters . where the initial population is isogenic, these growth rates are theoretically identical, but novel beneficial mutations lead to changes in the marker frequencies. in a study of beneficial mutations arising inexamined the log ratio between marker population frequencies. for each set of observed marker frequencies, a deterministic curve, parameterized by a mutation time and a selection coefficient, was fitted. multiple simulations of populations were then generated, giving an estimate of a single beneficial mutation rate and selection coefficient fitting the set of observations as a whole. while this characterization of multiple populations by single mutation and selection parameters provides a useful approach where clonal interference between mutations is severe, it is not applicable to all evolutionary scenarios . under a very low beneficial mutation rate, where competition between clones is rare, mutations under a range of strengths of positive selection would be likely to fix. furthermore, in the application of this method, where only the first mutational event in an experiment is considered, frequencies at later time-points are discarded . potentially valuable information on the evolution of the system is lost. here, we describe an alternative method that uses a maximum likelihood approach to infer selective effects and establishment times of mutants in an asexual population from individual marker frequency trajectories. our method enables the inference of fitness of multiple mutant haplotypes arising in an experiment, with no prior assumption of their distribution of fitness effects, while also allowing for the detection of standing variation in the initial pool. we test our method against data generated from simulations using a range of evolutionary parameters, and against experimental results from a recent study of marker populations .  
