systems biology in silico site of metabolism prediction for human ugt-catalyzed reactions motivation: the human uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransfer-ase enzyme family catalyzes the glucuronidation of the glycosyl group of a nucleotide sugar to an acceptor compound (substrate), which is the most common conjugation pathway that serves to protect the organism from the potential toxicity of xenobiotics. moreover, it could affect the pharmacological profile of a drug. therefore, it is important to identify the metabolically labile sites for glucuronidation. results: in the present study, we developed four in silico models to predict sites of glucuronidation, for four major sites of metabolism functional groups, i.e. aliphatic hydroxyl, aromatic hydroxyl, carboxylic acid or amino nitrogen, respectively. according to the mechanism of glucuronidation, a series of local and global molecular descriptors characterizing the atomic reactivity, bonding strength and physical chemical properties were calculated and selected with a genetic algorithm-based feature selection approach. the constructed support vector machine classification models show good prediction performance , with the balanced accuracy ranging from 0.88 to 0.96 on test set. for further validation, our models can successfully identify 84 of experimentally observed sites of metabolisms for an external test set containing 54 molecules. availability and implementation: the software somugt based on our models is available at www.dddc.ac.cn/adme/jlpeng/somugt_human uridine diphosphate (udp)-glucuronosyltransferases (ugts) are major phase ii drug-metabolizing enzymes that catalyze transfer of glucuronic acid from udp-glucuronic acid to various substrates containing nucleophilic functional group, e.g. alcohols, phenols, carboxylic acids, amines, thiols and so forth. up until now, 22 human ugt proteins have been identified, and they can be classified in four families: ugt1, ugt2, ugt3 and ugt8 . these isoforms are widely distributed and can be found in liver, intestine, kidney, lung and skin. both endogenous (e.g. bilirubin) and xenobiotic (e.g. drug) chemicals can be metabolized by this family of enzymes, yielding water-soluble products that are easier to be excreted . most of those isoforms possess the overlapping substrate specificities as well as the capacity to metabolize a variety of structure unrelated substances. for example, ugt1a3 can catalyze glucuronidation of phenols, carboxylic acids and amines . in addition to an essential detoxification mechanism for structurally diverse drugs, the glucuronidation can also lead to short duration of action and the loss of pharmacological activity of the drugs. in such cases, medicinal chemist needs to optimize the lead compound to improve its pharmacokinetic properties. for example, to reduce potential for glucuronidation,designed metabolically more stable compounds by incorporating substituents at the ortho position of the phenolic hydroxyl group or exchanging the phenyl group. in addition, strategy like bioisosteric modifications of phenol moiety was also reported to overcome the issue of rapid glucuronidation . in contrast, the property that glucuronidation may lead to a minimized systemic exposure can be used to reduce adverse events. for example,designed inhaled p38 inhibitors by introducing functional groups prone to be metabolized via cytochromes p450 (cyps) or ugts, to achieve high intrinsic clearance. therefore, glucuronidation provides access to modifying the pharmacokinetic profile during lead optimization. it is necessary to identify whether a compound can be glucuronidated, as well as which functional group of the compound is able to undergo the reaction. normally the ugt-catalyzed biotransformation is determined experimentally by metabolite identification techniques. however, given that such experimental techniques are cost-intensive and time-consuming, there is growing interest to develop reliable in silico models to predict and deepen our understanding of the reaction. till now, only the crystal structure of c-terminal domain of human ugt2b7 was determined . accordingly, current computational models for ugtmediated reaction were based on the reported substrate profile. early studies mainly focused on analyzing kinetic constants for the glucuronidation of homologous series of substrates, suggesting that glucuronidation rate was related to to whom correspondence should be addressed. molecular lipophilic, electronic and/or steric properties. miners, smith and sorich extensively studied substrates and nonsubstrates of ugt isoforms (reaction phenotyping) . by trying various machine learning methods, classification models for discriminating substrates of different ugt isoforms were developed. they also applied the strategy of pharmacophore fingerprint analysis to mine the structure signature related to glucuronidation, and found that local environment of nucleophilic site played an important role in identifying potential sites of metabolism (soms) . though many computational studies have been reported to simulate reaction rate and phenotyping, models predicting sites of glucuronidation were rare.reported navenave bayes models trained for eight ugt isoforms using three quantum chemical (qc) and constitutional descriptors. their results indicated that the local environment of nucleophilic site is an important feature to characterize the som of glucuronidation, and general chemical properties may be of secondary importance. however, this study was based on a small dataset containing only dozens of glucuronidated sites, which limited its application to structurally diverse compounds outside the range of training data. in the present study, we combined local qc descriptors and global physicalchemical properties to build four classification models to predict sites of glucuronidation using the learning method support vector machine (svm) and a dataset covering a large chemical diversity space. first, human ugt-catalyzed reactions were retrieved from mdl metabolite database, and potential sites of glucuronidation were marked by matching predefined smarts strings. then, both qc and geometrical descriptors were calculated to train svm classifiers for each type of sites, i.e. aliphatic hydroxyl, aromatic hydroxyl, carboxylic and amino nitrogen. in the end, model performance was assessed by 10-fold cross-validation (10-fold cv) and test set. for further validation, another 54 molecules were collected and predicted using our constructed models.in the present work, we developed four in silico models to predict human ugt-catalyzed soms for the following potential sites: aliphatic hydroxyl, aromatic hydroxyl, carboxyl group, aliphatic/ aromatic amino nitrogen and heterocyclic nitrogen. extensive validations were carried out on the models, and the results demonstrated good predicting performances on both internal and external tests. among the ga-selected descriptors, we found that local descriptors such as bond strength (between reactive site and its neighbor) and fukui atomic reactivity indices are important to characterize the glucuronidation potential of a site. moreover, the distribution analysis of global descriptors suggested that molecules with higher lipophilicity and relatively small molecular size are generally more liable to glucuronidation. overall, the current study may provide insight for understanding human phase ii metabolic profile of a chemical, and the resulted in silico models allow chemists to make rational decisions more quickly during pharmacokinetic lead optimization.  
