databases and ontologies instruct: a database of high-quality 3d structurally resolved protein interactome networks instruct is a database of high-quality, 3d, structurally resolved protein interactome networks in human and six model organisms. instruct combines the scale of available high-quality binary protein interaction data with the specificity of atomic-resolution structural information derived from co-crystal evidence using a tested interaction interface inference method. its web interface is designed to allow for flexible search based on standard and organism-specific protein and gene-naming conventions, visualization of protein architecture highlighting interaction interfaces and viewing and downloading custom 3d structurally resolved interactome datasets. availability: instruct is freely available on the web at http://instruct. yulab.org with all major browsers supported.proteinprotein interactions demonstrate functional principles of biological processes because most proteins carry out their cellular functions by interacting with other proteins. the set of all protein interactions within an organism, known as the interactome, is often represented as a network . interactome networks are powerful resources for biologists because they help elucidate the interconnected nature of signaling and communication within cellular systems. it has also been suggested that mechanistic explanations of many human diseases can be obtained by studying alterations to this network . for example, a global guilt-by-association principle has been widely used to predict disease genes by dissecting molecular networks . however, for an interactome network to be successfully applied in biological studies, it is imperative that it incorporate the intricate structural details of proteins within the network and not simply treat the proteins as mathematical points in a graph-theoretic network (schuster). as structure is the basis of protein function , elucidating structural details of interactions can help refine our current understanding of biochemical function from proteinprotein interaction networks . here, we present instruct (http://instruct.yulab.org), a comprehensive database of high-quality, 3d, structurally resolved protein interactome networks in human and six widely studied model organisms. to our knowledge, instruct is the first online repository containing structurally resolved interaction interfaces between proteins for which no co-crystal structure is available. to accomplish this, we used an interaction interface inference method to structurally resolve interactions based on 37 210 known co-crystal structures in the pdb . in total, instruct currently contains 6585 human, 644 arabidopsis thaliana, 120 caenorhabditis elegans, 166 drosophila melanogaster, 119 mus musculus, 1273 saccharomyces cerevisiae and 37 schizosaccharomyces pombe structurally resolved interactions. as a comprehensive database providing structural details not previously annotated in protein interactome networks, instruct will be an invaluable resource in a wide array of biological research.instruct will be a useful tool in a broad spectrum of fundamental biological research. with the continued growth of data sources, especially available co-crystal structures in the pdb, we expect the coverage of our structurally resolved interactome networks to increase over time . we plan to update instruct at least once per year to incorporate newly available information and to expand our repertoire of model organisms. as more structural data become available, we will build more comprehensive 3d, structurally resolved interactome networks for different organisms.  
