genome analysis integirty: a method to identify genes altered in cancer by accounting for multiple mechanisms of regulation using item response theory motivation: identifying genes altered in cancer plays a crucial role in both understanding the mechanism of carcinogenesis and developing novel therapeutics. it is known that there are various mechanisms of regulation that can lead to gene dysfunction, including copy number change, methylation, abnormal expression, mutation and so on. nowadays, all these types of alterations can be simultaneously interrogated by different types of assays. although many methods have been proposed to identify altered genes from a single assay, there is no method that can deal with multiple assays accounting for different alteration types systematically. results: in this article, we propose a novel method, integration using item response theory (integirty), to identify altered genes by using item response theory that allows integrated analysis of multiple high-throughput assays. when applied to a single assay, the proposed method is more robust and reliable than conventional methods such as students t-test or the wilcoxon rank-sum test. when used to integrate multiple assays, integirty can identify novel-altered genes that cannot be found by looking at individual assay separately. we applied integirty to three public cancer datasets (ovarian carcinoma, breast cancer, glioblastoma) for cross-assay type integration which all show encouraging results. availability and implementation: the r package integirty is available at the web site http://bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/main/ oompa:overview.cancer progression involves successive genetic and epigenetic alterations that transform normal cells into malignant derivatives by acquiring the eight hallmarks of cancer: sustaining proliferative signaling, evading growth suppressors, resisting cell death, enabling replicative immortality, inducing angiogenesis, activating invasion and metastasis, reprogramming energy metabolism and evading immune destruction . as a result, it is of great interest to identify altered genes as potential therapeutic targets. in the past, this would have been a daunting task considering that the human genome contains more than 20 000 genes. using rapidly evolving high-throughput technologies, researchers can now profile the whole genome with multiple assay modalities in a time and cost-effective manner. the cancer genome atlas (tcga) is one current initiative that exploits these technological advances . for the same set of samples, tcga applies a variety of technologies including gene expression microarray, microrna array, methylation array, array cgh, snp array and sequencing, to interrogate the genomes of several types of cancer. tcga and similar datasets pose a great challenge and opportunity for integrative bioinformatics research. over the last decade, several methodologies have been proposed for integrating genome-wide expression and copy number (cn) data. these methods can be roughly grouped into four categories: stepwise, regression-based, correlationbased and latent variable models . many existing methods focus on the correlation between assays and/or outcome. for example,developed a stepwise method called sodegir to identify overlapping genomic regions of differential expression and genomic imbalance.used linear mixed models to search for genes whose expression is affected by cn change. peng et al. proposed penalized multiple regression to model the dependence of rna expression on dna cn. there are also methods based on canonical correlation analysis that aim to find associations between cn and expression or even with outcome . comparison of existing two-way integration methods is available . the cnamet method developed by) takes methylation data into account and is able to integrate three types of assays. our proposed method, integration using item response theory (integirty), is a latent variable approach with a different goal: integirty aims to use multiple assays to identify genes that are altered in cancer samples compared to normal controls. this general task is similar to differential expression analysis in a tumor/normal comparison, for which good reviews are available . conventional methods for differential expression analysis only deal with one to whom correspondence should be addressed. type of data. integirty extends the analysis to multiple assay types and defines an overall metric for gene alteration. integirty automatically adjusts for heterogeneity in the data and in principle can be applied simultaneously to any number of whole genome assays. the integirty model is motivated by the biological observation that tumor suppressor genes can be blocked (or oncogenes can be activated) by different mechanisms in different patients. one patient may have a deletion of the chromosomal region containing a gene; another may exhibit hypermethylation; a third may have a mutation that hampers transcription or translation or leads to a loss of function. each kind of alteration could be sufficiently rare that the importance of the gene might be overlooked in analyses that study only one kind of assay. mechanism-driven analytical methods for data integration (such as those that prioritize genes with evidence that cn alterations lead directly to mrna expression changes) could still overlook genes that are sometimes deleted and sometimes hypermethylated. we address this situation statistically using a (binary) latent variable that serves as an indicator of whether a gene is important for an individual patients cancer. conditional on this latent variable, we assume that changes in different assay platforms (cn, mutation, methylation, etc.) are statistically independent. changes in mrna expression may still occur independently of these assays if, for example, they result from failures of regulation by mirs or transcription factors. thus, the goal of our method differs from existing methods; we want to identify genes that are frequently altered in cancer, regardless of the kind of alteration. we base integirty on irt, which is widely used to construct, score, evaluate and compare psychological and educational tests . a test consists of a set of items (or questions) designed to measure a certain ability. unlike earlier test theories, irt models a persons response to a test at the item level rather than the test level. therefore, irt can simultaneously model two entities: (i) the examinees latent trait (or ability) that determines his or her performance on the test and (ii) the characteristics of each item, represented by its difficulty and discrimination. this ability to simultaneously model examinees and test items makes irt ideal for modeling complex and heterogeneous genomic data where different genes and samples from various assays behave differently. to transform the irt terminology to our application, we treat genes as examinees and samples as items. in this way, we can unleash the power of irt to address many difficulties in integrative analysis: (i) the heterogeneity between assays can be resolved by the auto-adjustable item parameters, making the estimation of an overall latent trait of alteration possible and meaningful. (ii) integration across assays can be easily achieved by assembling a larger test with different assays supplying the items. (iii) the estimated latent trait of gene alteration as well as the item difficulty parameters are intuitive and can be used for further inference. we have applied this method to three public datasets: two tcga datasets, ovarian carcinoma (ov) (the cancer genome atlas research network, 2011) and glioblastoma (gbm) and one breast cancer (brca) dataset . all three datasets contain multiple high-throughput assays interrogating the same set of samples. we estimated the latent trait of alteration for each gene from each individual assay and after combining assays. we show that after integrating multiple assays, novel genes can be identified. the new method was also compared to conventional methods such as students t-test and wilcoxon rank-sum test and to the cnamet approach for integrating different assays. to assess statistical significance, which is not provided by ordinary irt applications, we used a permutation test to compute empirical p-values.we performed a simulation study to show that the model can recover both the item parameters and latent traits in an integration setting (see section 5 in supplementary material). we then investigated three public datasets . details about the samples and preprocessing steps are provided in section 1 in supplementary material. both the ov and gbm datasets contain three types of assays interrogating expression (expr), methylation (methy) and cn. the brca dataset only contains data for expression and cn. all three datasets have been examined in detail. however, due to page limitations, we mainly focus on ov data and present other datasets when necessary. the 1pl, 2pl and 3pl models have been fitted on each dataset. based on bic, the 2pl model is shown to be the preferred model in all datasets (supplementary). hence, all results presented below are from 2pl model.as the cost of high-throughput technology drops dramatically, it becomes common to interrogate samples with multiple modalities of assays simultaneously. however, systematically integrating these assays is rarely achieved by existing methods. here, we propose a natural and interpretable framework to integrate heterogeneous high-throughput datasets using irt. this is the first application of irt to integrative bioinformatics research. in our approach, both samples and genes are simultaneously modeled through the item response model. the heterogeneity among different datasets is automatically adjusted by fitting different item parameters. the integrated latent trait provides a nice metric to define the overall propensity to alteration in all assays. importantly, the integrated latent trait can be used to identify novel genes that cannot be identified by looking at each dataset individually. furthermore, the estimated latent trait together with item parameters characterizing the properties of genes and patient samples can be used as an intuitive visual aid to examine the high-dimensional dataset. compared to conventional methods, our method is able to identify altered genes that are more reliable and likely to be biologically meaningful. with increased sample size, the conventional method has increased power to detect a difference between tumor and normal samples. however, in many cases, such differences are dubious and irrelevant to the underlying biology. in comparison, genes identified by our method ensure a biological difference. the reason is that latent traits are computed from the dichotomized data with the biology (alteration status) already built in. another advantage of our method is that it does not make any distributional assumption about the data. this enables us to identify genes that are missed by conventional methods such as the t-test. it should be pointed out that our method mainly focused on the alteration status rather than the correlations between different assays. as a result, the direction of regulation is not modeled. for instance, identified alteration in expression can be either overexpression or underexpression. nevertheless, when a gene is overexpressed in one group of patients while underexpressed in another group, our method has the advantage to still identify such genes even when the mean expression is unaffected. in this respect, it is similar to the ppst test introduced to find markers in mrna expression data . we have chosen to dichotomize all of the assays as part of our approach to integration; this approach simplifies the integration step because all of the data inputs are binary. while the logistic model in equation (1) requires binary data, the heart of our approach lies in the latent variable that indicates alteration and appears as a probability on the left-hand side of the equation. irt has been generalized to other kinds of data by changing the right-hand side of equation (1). for ordinal data with more than two categories (which might arise from categorizing cn data as loss, normal or gain), one can use the generalized partial credit model , the rating scale model or the graded response model . for continuous-bounded data (like that from a methylation array), one can use beta distributions . for normally distributed data (such as log-transformed mrna expression data), the natural generalization of the irt model is equivalent to factor analysis (fa). fa has been used previously to integrate expression data profiled by different microarray platforms . for individual assays, it is likely that one of these alternative models that preserve more of the continuous input data would prove more effective than the logistic model that we present. however, using different models on each data type presents other difficulties. in order to integrate the data from multiple assays, it becomes necessary to specify the joint distributions, which could result in an elaborate and unwieldy model. integirty resolves this issue by coding all of the data from all assays into binary. we believe that this simplification of the model provides further benefits by making the results more(d) expression is turned off in both tumor and normal samples due to hypermethylation. since there is little difference between tumor and normal, both methods suggest it is not altered interpretable, but only further research will determine if more complex models can produce better results.  
