systems biology amigo2, a toolbox for dynamic modeling, optimization and control in systems biology motivation: many problems of interest in dynamic modeling and control of biological systems can be posed as non-linear optimization problems subject to algebraic and dynamic constraints. in the context of modeling, this is the case of, e.g. parameter estimation, optimal experimental design and dynamic flux balance analysis. in the context of control, model-based metabolic engineering or drug dose optimization problems can be formulated as (multi-objective) optimal control problems. finding a solution to those problems is a very challenging task which requires advanced numerical methods. results: this work presents the amigo2 toolbox: the first multiplatform software tool that automa-tizes the solution of all those problems, offering a suite of state-of-the-art (multi-objective) global optimizers and advanced simulation approaches. availability and implementation: the toolbox and its documentation are available at: sites.google. com/site/amigo2toolbox.optimization is at the core of many problems related to the modeling and design of biological systems . for example, model parametric identification involves two types of optimization problems : parameter estimation, to compute unknown parameters by data fitting and optimal experimental design, to design the best experimental dynamic scheme for model identification. the organization and behavior of biological systems can also be described based on optimality principles. this is the case in, e.g. (dynamic) flux balance analysis or in the analysis of activation of metabolic pathways . in this context, model-based dynamic optimization aims the computation of time-varying fluxes or enzyme concentrations and expression rates that minimize (or maximize) a given objective function (biomass production) or the best trade-off between various objectives . models can be used to confirm hypotheses, to draw predictions and to find those (time varying) stimulation conditions that result in a particular desired behavior via (multi-objective) optimal control. this is the case in, e.g. model-based metabolic engineering , pattern formation or drug dose optimization . all these problems can be stated asor transformed to(multiobjective) non-linear programming problems with algebraic and dynamic constraints. their solution requires the combination of the control vector parameterization approach, a simulation method and a global optimizer. amigo2 is the first multi-platform (matlab-based) environment that automatizes the solution of all these problems (seeand supplementary tables s1 and s2). it fully covers the iterative identification of dynamic models, it allows using optimality principles for predicting biological behavior and it deals with the optimal control of biological systems using constrained multiobjective dynamic optimization.  
