databases and ontologies integrating human and murine anatomical gene expression data for improved comparisons motivation: information concerning the gene expression pattern in four dimensions (species, genes, anatomy and developmental stage) is crucial for unraveling the roles of genes through time. there are a variety of anatomical gene expression databases, but extracting information from them can be hampered by their diversity and heterogeneity.different genes are expressed in various tissues at different developmental stages. knowledge concerning the precise spatial temporal transcript abundances of genes during development of an organism in normal as well as in diseased states provides a valuable tool for understanding the mechanisms underlying the susceptibility to complex disease. traditionally, gene expression has been measured using dna microarrays and in situ techniques. dna microarrays allow differential transcript levels for several genes to be measured at once (expression profiling), but information obtained from in situ gene expression is required for a detailed anatomical and histological snapshot of the identified genes . the constant increase in data and data concerning data (metadata), both from microarrays and in situ techniques, require organization into specialized databases. currently, a number of diverse databases exist containing information generated using microarray techniques and in situ techniques (emage,). it has become relatively common for databases to provide in situ information for the implementation of new methods that allow such data to become accessible to the user in a spatialtemporal way. for example, such tools allow a user to select an anatomical location by interacting with interfaces that present sections of the organism under study at the chosen developmental stage. the combination of a gene expression data base and a spatialtemporal device to retrieve information has been named a gene expression atlas. atlases for the most relevant model species have been built including zfin for zebrafish , bdgp and flybase for drosophila, mepd for medaka , emage and gxd for mouse, and hudsen and arrayexpress atlas for human . having well-structured gene expression information relating to model organisms organized into dedicated databases, it is necessary to integrate and make this diverse set of information accessible in a harmonized manner. several initiatives have emerged that investigate the possible correlation of global patterns among orthologous genes from different species , some of them including web platforms. however, problems related to the proper handling of developmental stage information and anatomy mapping are still pending. therefore, gene expression blending from various organisms requires a specific integration effort at three levels: orthologous genes finding, developmental stage mapping and anatomy mapping. the first level evolved alongside sequencing initiatives. however, the requirements for the second and third levels have recently been identified, with efforts oriented toward combining data fromthe usefulness of agem is discussed using a specific example related to a well-known pathology, illustrating in this way the type of analyses that agem provides. huntingtons disease (hd) is a rare neurodegenerative disorder of the central nervous system characterized by abnormal movements, behavioural and psychiatric disturbances, and dementia. a set of 41 genes related to hd extracted from ingenuity and panther databases have used as input for agemv3.1 . heatmaps for mouse at ts28 and human adult have been obtained and analysed by using the option of synchronization, where expression information regarding non-common human and mouse anatomic structures has been removed . synchronized heatmaps show gene expression information for a total of 22 common human and mouse structures and 14 genes. nosynchronized heatmaps can be found in the supplementary material. each position in the heatmap represents the expression strength of a gene in a specific structure. heatmaps are especially valuable in that they allow for an intuitive clustering representation of the variable depicted in them. consequently, in our heatmaps the clusters page: 401 397402highlight similarities in gene expression among genes (gene cluster) or among structures (structure cluster). a given structure cluster groups anatomical locations where similar expression patterns have been shown for the input genes. in much the same way, a given gene cluster groups those genes whose expression is comparable in all the studied structures. this fact is exemplified in, where it canbe seen, as an example, that casp8 and casp12 genes have similar expression patterns in the studied structures, both for human and for mouse, as an illustration of anatomical structure clustering, cerebral cortex and cerebellum belong to the same family in the structure cluster in mouse as well as in human. close examination of the synchronized mouse and human heatmaps obtained from the agem platform shows expression in three anatomical structures belonging to the central nervous system: cerebral cortex, cerebellum and hippocampus, belonging the two firsts to the same cluster. however, the pattern of gene expression observed in the heatmaps is not restricted to central nervous system structures; for example, expression can be observed in the endocrine system (e.g. pancreas, adrenal gland, thyroid, placenta); exocrine system (salivary gland); haemolymphoid system (bone marrow and lymph node); reproductive system (ovary, uterus, testis); digestive system (stomach, small intestine); renal system (kidney); skeletal muscle; cardiovascular system (heart); and respiratory system (lung) . while some of these structures have a clear role in some hd-associated pathologies (weight loss, heart failure, skeletal muscle wasting, pneumonia, impaired glucose tolerance and testicular atrophy), others could not be clearly related. cross heatmaps provided by agem display the global patterns of tissue-specific expression of orthologous genes, allowing matches or mismatches between patterns in human and mouse to be easily identified . in this case, the colors in the heatmap do not denote expression strength, but differences in this variable between mouse and human: green means same expression for mouse and human, blue implies a high expression in mouse than in human and red indicates a high expression in human than in mouse. as an illustration, hip1 gene expression is clearly greater in human than in mouse in all the common structures excepting salivary gland. as it was commented before, the structure and gene clusters summarize the heatmap information by highlighting set of structures or genes with similar expression difference patterns between mouse and human. in the example shown, differences in the expression of pacsin1 and cltc genes are well conserved between mouse and human for the studied set of anatomical structures.  
