systems biology amigo, a toolbox for advanced model identification in systems biology using global optimization motivation: mathematical models of complex biological systems usually consist of sets of differential equations which depend on several parameters which are not accessible to experimentation. these parameters must be estimated by fitting the model to experimental data. this estimation problem is very challenging due to the non-linear character of the dynamics, the large number of parameters and the frequently poor information content of the experimental data (poor practical identifiability). the design of optimal (more informative) experiments is an associated problem of the highest interest. results: this work presents amigo, a toolbox which facilitates parametric identification by means of advanced numerical techniques which cover the full iterative identification procedure putting especial emphasis on robust methods for parameter estimation and practical identifiability analyses, plus flexible capabilities for optimal experimental design. availability: the toolbox and the corresponding documentation may be downloaded from: http://www.iim.dynamic modeling and simulation are becoming standard approaches to understand complex biological systems. model identification is at the core of model building, and involves the computation of unknown non-measurable parameters by means of experimental data fitting . however, parametric identification is a bottleneck in the modeling process due to, mainly, the frequently ill-possed and multimodal nature of the associated optimization problems, and the poor practical identifiability due to lack of information in the available experimental data. the use of suitable optimization methods to avoid local solutions has been illustrated during the last decade by many authors, and some of these methods have been incorporated in software tools such as: copasi , sbtoolbox2 , potterswheel or senssb (rodriguez). these software packages allow the dynamic simulation and analysis of systems biology models, including methods for sensitivity analysis and to whom correspondence should be addressed. parameter estimation and, in some cases, some basic facilities for experimental planning. here, we present the result of our research efforts in the development of procedures to improve practical identifiability and to help in the design of informative experiments. the underlying idea is to help the system biologist on how to stimulate and observe the system for the purpose of model identification.  
