integrative analysis for identifying joint modular patterns of gene-expression and drug-response data motivation: the underlying relationship between genomic factors and the response of diverse cancer drugs still remains unclear. a number of studies showed that the heterogeneous responses to anticancer treatments of patients were partly associated with their specific changes in gene expression and somatic alterations. the emerging large-scale pharmacogenomic data provide us valuable opportunities to improve existing therapies or to guide early-phase clinical trials of compounds under development. however, how to identify the underlying combinatorial patterns among pharmacogenomics data are still a challenging issue. results: in this study, we adopted a sparse network-regularized partial least square (snpls) method to identify joint modular patterns using large-scale pairwise gene-expression and drug-response data. we incorporated a molecular network to the (sparse) partial least square model to improve the module accuracy via a network-based penalty. we first demonstrated the effectiveness of snpls using a set of simulation data and compared it with two typical methods. further, we applied it to gene expression profiles for 13 321 genes and pharmacological profiles for 98 anti-cancer drugs across 641 cancer cell lines consisting of diverse types of human cancers. we identified 20 gene-drug co-modules, each of which consists of 30 cell lines, 137 genes and 2 drugs on average. the majority of identified co-modules have significantly functional implications and coordinated gene-drug associations. the modular analysis here provided us new insights into the molecular mechanisms of how drugs act and suggested new drug targets for therapy of certain types of cancers. availability and implementation: a matlab package of snpls is available at http://page.amss.ac. cn/shihua.zhang/the increasing amount of available high-throughput data sets at both levels of genomic data and drug response data provide us the opportunities for large-scale integrative analysis by computational methods . this situation also enables us to study the underlying mechanisms of drug actions from the perspective of gene regulation. in general, drugs function in human body by binding to their targets or altering their targets activity to perturb biological systems . previous studies suggested that one-drugone-target therapies cannot effectively treat complex diseases likecancers which are caused by complex biological processes . in other words, drug molecules often interact with multiple targets, known as polypharmacology . additionally, the same mechanism of action or target is shared by more than one drug . actually, in clinical practice, some drug combinations were adopted as valuable and promising therapies, such as thiazide diuretics and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors for hypertension , glyburide and metformin for type 2 diabetes , saracatinib and trastuzumab for breast cancer . the multiple-tomultiple relationships between drugs and their targets imply that it is valuable to discover combinatorial gene-drug patterns to gain novel insights into molecular mechanisms and examine new drug targets for therapy. the nci-60 project employed an ensemble of 60 human cancer cell lines to screen over 100 000 chemical compounds and natural products, which greatly facilitated the pharmacological studies . however, this project only used 60 cell lines, which limited further deep exploration. fortunately, two large-scale pharmacogenomic studies-cancer cell line encyclopedia and cancer genome project (cgp) , published diverse types of genomic data such as gene expression, chromosomal copy number variation, mutation and pharmacological data across hundreds of cell lines, which provided valuable resources to reveal gene-drug associations. both studies adopted a multivariate variable selection technique, the elastic net method, to systematically discover genomic markers of drug sensitivity in cancer cell lines. however, they only focused on uncovering genomic predictors of each drug independently and failed to determine coherent gene-drug patterns. in recent years, a number of integrative methods were developed for identifying combinatorial patterns in multiple data sets for different purpose. for example,proposed singular value decomposition-based statistical models to study the regulatory relationship between multi-dimensional predictors and responses.developed a joint non-negative matrix factorization (nmf) framework andintroduced a sparse multi-block partial least squares (smbpls) regression method to simultaneously analyze multiple types of genomic data to identify multi-dimensional regulatory modules. in addition, network structure such as pathways and gene-gene interactions with respect to input variables plays a complementary role in the integrative analysis . for example,) developed a network-constrained regularization procedure to analyze genomic data; ma and kosorok (2009) anddrew more attention towards pathway-based methods to identify differential gene pathways;) adapted a network-regularized joint nmf method to discover mirna-gene regulatory modules;designed a sparse group laplacian shrinkage method to integrate multiple cancer prognosis data sets to select gene markers. particularly,developed the ping-pong algorithm (ppa) to identify gene-drug co-modules by combining the gene-expression and drug-response data from nci-60. however, this method tends to identify co-modules relating to a very limited number of cell lines (e.g. about 800 of all 859 identified co-modules only cover one or two cell lines), which is unreasonable and inconsistent with the definition of a co-module. in addition, the sizes of these co-modules are very large, majority of which contain thousands of genes and hundreds of drugs. this makes these co-modules impractical in clinical trials and leads to vast amounts of redundant information. moreover, prior knowledge on gene interactions was not considered in this study, which could provide valuable combinational signals to improve the module discovery accuracy. in this study, we adopted a sparse network-regularized partial least square (snpls) method to identify combinatorial gene-drug co-modules by integrating gene expression and drug response data across a set of cell lines as well as a gene interaction network . the standard partial least square (pls) is a class of methods for investigating the relations between two sets of observed variables by means of maximizing the covariance between their corresponding latent variables. however, it doesnt perform variable selection for high-dimensional phamacogenomic data which makes the results lack of biological interpretability. hence, a few types of sparse pls (spls) methods were applied to the genomic data. to our knowledge, there was yet no study to incorporate network structure into the spls framework. here, we first proposed a snpls model to incorporate a gene interaction network. moreover, we obtained the next co-module by subtracting the signals of a former one from the data matrices which can overcome the redundancy problem of ppa to some extent. to demonstrate its effectiveness, we applied snpls to a set of simulated data and compared it with two typical methods: spls and ppa. the results showed that snpls performed significantly better than spls and ppa in terms of specificity and sensitivity. we also applied snpls to a biological data set consisting of gene expression profiles of 13 321 genes and drug response data of 98 anticancer drugs across 641 cell lines derived from cgp . we identified 20 gene-drug co-modules and majority of them are significantly related to known functions, cancers, and coordinated gene-drug. overview of the snpls for identifying gene-drug co-modules. a comodule is a subset of genes and drugs exhibiting similar profiles across a subset of samples determined by the weight variables g and d of snpls applied in pairwise gene expression data x and drug response data y. a gene interaction network g is incorporated to enhance the modular characteristics integrative analysis for identifying joint modular patternsassociations. these gene-drug patterns provide us insights into potential drug targets and drug combinations for cancer therapy.deciphering the multiple-to-multiple relationships between drugs and their targets is crucial for studying the mechanisms of drug actions and developing effective treatment for patients. meanwhile, the dramatic accumulation of large-scale genomic data and drug response data from the same cell lines provides us the unprecedented opportunities to identify gene-drug joint modular patterns to decode these relationships from the perspective of gene regulation. in this study, we developed a method snpls to integrate these two data as well as a gene interaction network to identify gene-drug co-modules. when compared with spls, snpls employs the network structure as prior knowledge such that genes in each co-module tend to be closely connected in the network, which makes such a co-module more biologically interpretable. we applied snpls to a pairwise gene-expression and drug-response data from 641 cell lines covering a wide range of tumor types and identified 20 gene-drug co-modules. most of these co-modules displayed significant functional connections from functional interpretation of gene, drug and cell line views. for drug members of the same co-module, they often have the same related targets, or have effects on the same biological processes and pathways in some related diseases. these observations suggested that the co-modules can help us to find new drug combinations or similarities for treatment of certain cancer or provide new drug target candidates. we may study the following aspects to extend snpls in future studies. first, we used a coordinate descend algorithm to solve the objective function, which may be improved with more computationally efficient algorithms. second, besides using a gene interaction network, we can also incorporate drug-drug similarities or interactions to improve the accuracy of module discovery. third, snpls may be further adapted to consider the potential negative correlation of two genes in the network-regularized term, i.e. taking the sign of weight variable g into account. finally, with the accumulation of abundant data in biology and pharmacology, we can extend this method to similar pairwise biological data for joint modular analysis.. comparison of all the enriched go biological processes of gene modules detected by snpls and spls. for each go biological process, we computed enrichment scores (log10(q-value) with benjamini-corrected q-values) and the highest scores among all modules were taken as the final score of this go biological process for each method. the scores for snpls were plotted against those of spls. dash lines along the horizontal and vertical directions both indicate the significance threshold. the points in the top-left part represent the significantly enriched go biological process exclusively by snpls co-modules, whereas the points in the bottom-right part are ones exclusively by spls co-modules. a set of representative terms are shown. points above the central diagonal line represent terms that are more significantly enriched using snpls than spls, indicating that snpls can identify more biological relevant gene modules than spls by incorporating the prior gene network  
