integrative classification and analysis of multiple arraycgh datasets with probe alignment motivation: array comparative genomic hybridization (arraycgh) is widely used to measure dna copy numbers in cancer research. arraycgh data report log-ratio intensities of thousands of probes sampled along the chromosomes. typically, the choices of the locations and the lengths of the probes vary in different experiments. this discrepancy in choosing probes poses a challenge in integrated classification or analysis across multiple arraycgh datasets. we propose an alignment-based framework to integrate arraycgh samples generated from different probe sets. the alignment framework seeks an optimal alignment between the probe series of one arraycgh sample and the probe series of another sample, intended to find the maximum possible overlap of dna copy number variations between the two measured chromosomes. an alignment kernel is introduced for integrative patient sample classification and a multiple alignment algorithm is also introduced for identifying common regions with copy number aberrations. results: the probe alignment kernel and the mpa algorithm were experimented to integrate three bladder cancer datasets as well as artificial datasets. in the experiments, by integrating arraycgh samples from multiple datasets, the probe alignment kernel used with support vector machines significantly improved patient sample classification accuracy over other baseline kernels. the experiments also demonstrated that the multiple probe alignment (mpa) algorithm can find common dna aberrations that cannot be identified with the standard interpolation method. furthermore, the mpa algorithm also identified many known bladder cancer dna aberrations containing four known bladder cancer genes, three of which cannot be detected by interpolation.it has been confirmed in many recent studies that aberrations in chromosome copy number, rearrangement and structures have association with the disease . among these chromosomal aberrations, dna copy number variations (cnvs), the events of amplification or deletion of a large dna segment on chromosomes, are believed to play an important role in to whom correspondence should be addressed. tumorigenesis . chromosome cnvs can be measured by comparative genomic hybridization (cgh), which compares the copy number of a differentially labeled case sample with a reference dna from a normal individual. arraycgh technology based on dna microarray can currently allow genome-wide identification of regions with cnvs at different resolutions . the arraycgh data was used to discriminate healthy patients from cancer patients and classify patients of different cancer subtypes. thus, arraycgh data is considered as a new source of biomarkers that provide important information of candidate cancer loci for the classification of patients and discovery of molecular mechanisms of cancers . arraycgh allows rapid mapping of dna cnvs of a tumor sample by a locus-by-locus measure. in an arraycgh experiment, probes (short dna segments on chromosomes) of different lengths and locations are chosen for comparative genomic hybridization. the cnv information at a probe location is reported by the log-ratio of the probe intensity between a case and a reference. the sizes and the number of the probe determines the resolution of an arraycgh experiment. the length of the dna probes used by current platforms ranges from 100 bp to 5 kb, and in a typical study, the number of probes ranges from several hundreds to tens of thousands. for example, a human array 2.0 chromium surface array can consist of only 2464 probes at 1.5 mb resolution, whereas a high-resolution tiling array provides measurements of 36 288 probes. the large difference in the sizes and numbers of probes makes integration of multiple arraycgh datasets used for similar studies, a challenging problem. from a data analysis perspective, the arraycgh data are series of real values labeled by their chromosomal positions. the traditional approach is an interpolation between the two series of probe locations from two platforms. as described in, in an interpolation probe locations on one platform are added (interpolated) to the target platform and the corresponding cnv intensities are guessed by intensities of the most nearby probes in the target platform. however, when the two platforms have large variations in the number of probes, the interpolation is not an appropriate way to integrate the two series of probes. specifically, when the two series are both sparse, the interpolated points might give misleading or wrong information. for example, in, some of the probes are interpolated to locations close to probes with opposite cnv. when the probes are sparsely located, this might introduce false positives. moreover, some of the interpolated probes are far from other probes. in these cases (i.e. the interpolated probes marked by ? in the figure), it is ambiguous to decide the cnv for the interpolated new probes.. a hypothetical example of interpolation and probe alignment. interpolation and probe alignment are applied to compare the same two chromosomes. the probe locations are marked with vertically striped blocks (amplifications) or horizontally striped blocks (deletions). the interpolation interpolates each probe to its corresponding position on the chromosome and add a new probe in the other series. the cnv value of the new probe is guessed by checking the neighboring probes in the same series. the probe alignment aligns nearby probe pairs in the two series with similar cnvs. the matched probe pairs are connected by arrows in the alignment. the interpolated probes marked with ? are possibly wrongly labeled in the interpolation.  
