gene expression a model for the expression of gap genes based on the jeffreys-type equation motivation: we propose the third-order model equation of the jeffreys type for concentrations of gap gene proteins in order to take into account particle inertia. gap genes are responsible for formation of body segments in drosophila melanogaster embryo during its early development. usually the expression of the genes is described by the model of protein transport based on conventional diffusion equation. however, the model is known to govern the brownian (non-inertial) motion of particles; hence, it is hardly applicable to the description of protein transport. results: analysis of the jeffreys-type equation results in the necessary condition for the problem to be well-posed. application of the jeffreys-type equation with non-linear terms to description of the dynamics of gap gene network demonstrates better fitting to experimental data than the conventional model. availability and implementation: implementation of solver algorithms and the software are freely available from: https://github.com/wswgg/solver-for-the-jeffreys-type-equations-system contact:segmentation genes play crucial role in early development of drosophila melanogaster, being responsible for formation and positioning of body segments (nusslein). the segmentation genes are divided into four classes: maternal genes, gap genes, pair-rule genes and segment polarity genesaccording to their mutant phenotype (for details, see nusslein). at present, gap genes have become popular investigation object, in particular, for system biologists due to the following reasons . first, the gap gene system is the most upstream regulatory layer among zygotic genes, controlling d. melanogaster embryogenesis and determining both the position and the identities of body segments. second, availability of big amount of experimental data on gene expression enable to model mathematically and reconstruct the gap gene network in silico . usually the gene expression is described by means of conventional model based on the parabolic reaction diffusion equation, written for an unknown protein concentration function u(x, t) as: u t d u xx rx; t; ux; t;where x is space coordinate, t is time, d is the diffusion coefficient and rx; t; ux; t is a reaction term representing protein production and its degradation. equation (1.1) was proposed in for description of the dynamics of internal state of nuclei in blastoderm of d. melanogaster embryo and originally contained the diffusion term in discrete form. the model took into account three major processes essential for embryo development: synthesis of proteins, their) to explain the dynamics of the bicoid maternal protein in d. melanogaster embryo. it is known as the synthesis-diffusion-degradation model . the model equation (1.1) with diffusion term in continuous or in discrete form have been widely used in the last two decades for description of diffusive transport of proteins, e.g., synthesized by maternal gene bicoid or gap genes in d. melanogaster embryo blastoderm during early embryogenesis . however, (1.1) has a crucial drawback: it is based on the phenomenological fick law for mass flux, which was formulated for brownian motion of non-inertial particles, and, therefore, it is applicable only for description of light particles motion, for example, in an ideal gas. proteins are heavy complex organic molecules, and for this reason, the classical approach is hardly applicable for modelling of protein transfer. mathematically, non-inertial description of inertial particle transport leads to an infinite velocity of disturbances propagation defined by (1.1). for example, when rx; t 0 and with initial condition ux; 0 dx, where dx is the dirac delta function, the fundamental solution to (1.1) has the form:and it is positive for any finite values of x, therefore a sudden change of a substance concentration somewhere will immediately transfer to any arbitrary point. the profile of (1.2) at certain time moment is shown in(see, e.g.), and we call this phenomenon of an infinite velocity as the diffusion paradox for brevity. immediate disturbances propagation contradicts with experiments, in which proteins move in an embryo very slow, with the velocities about 15 mm/s (see). in 1948, cattaneo proposed the telegraph equation, containing additional relaxation time and, therefore, free from the diffusion paradox, to model mass (heat) transfer. the fundamental solution to the equation describes propagation of disturbances with finite velocity, but due to the wave-like behaviour it may reach negative values inappropriate from biological viewpoint. furthermore, the fundamental solution to the telegraph equation with the dirac delta function as an initial condition contains two discontinuous wave fronts, propagating in opposite directions. in 1989, joseph and preziosi proposed the description of heat transfer based on the refined model for flux of rheological fluid in the earth crust introduced in 1929 by h. jeffreys. similarly, one can obtain an equation for determination of mass transfer via elimination of the flux function from the mass balance equation: u t x; t j x x; t rx; t; ux; t;and the jeffreys refined formula for flux:jx; t s j t x; t d d 1 u x x; t s d 1 u xt x; t:the resulting jeffreys-type equation: s u tt u t sd 1 u xxt d d 1 u xx rx; t s r t x; t; (1.5) contains two additional parameters, as compared with (1.1), namely, the relaxation time s and the second diffusion coefficient d 1 , thus taking into account the particle inertia. the particular solution to (1.5) at certain time moment under the assumptions rx; t 0; ux; 0 dx; u t x; 0 0 is shown in. it can be seen that a small amount of particles occurs at infinity, and the diffusion paradox for the dirac delta function as an initial condition is not completely eliminated by the proposed model. however, even in this case the jeffreystype equation describes formation of a smooth wave front from an initial sharp discontinuity, that is always positive, and its propagation with finite velocity. applications of the jeffreys-type equation to different physical problems can be found in (joseph and preziosi 1989a,b;). due to similarity between heat and mass transfer both the telegraph equation and the jeffreys-type equation are of interest for description of protein transport in biological systems. nevertheless, the maternal and gap genes expression in d. melanogaster embryo is often modelled by means of the parabolic reaction diffusion equation, which limited applicability has been widely discussed (see). the conventional model is still popular due to simplicity and similarity at large time scales of the fundamental solutions to all parabolic, the telegraph and the jeffreys-type equations, as shown in. in this article, we apply the mathematical model consisting of the coupled jeffreys-type equations with non-linear reaction terms to study the dynamics of protein concentrations in gene network of four gap genes. the equations are solved numerically, and the results will be compared with experimental data and with numerical solution to the model based on the conventional diffusion equation (1.1).we compared the results of numerical simulation in the framework of the new model based on the coupled jeffreys-type equations (2.3.2) with the experimental data from the flyex database in the bounded region (from 47 to 92 of el) along the anteriorposterior (ap) axis. the model parameters were obtained via fitting the numerical solution to data. the value of residual mean square (rms):moments, therefore the other boundary values required for the numerical scheme with the dirichlet boundary conditions were obtained by linear interpolation. these modifications resulted in decrease the value of rms, and lowest value is rms 7.317. results of modified numerical simulations are presented in. the values of the regulation matrix coefficients are presented inel with boundary conditions of the dirichlet type. the lowest rms 7.317 demonstrates substantially better fit to experimental data in comparison to the neumann boundary conditions, therefore we conclude that the dirichlet boundary conditions provide better results for modelling the gap genes expression than the conditions of the neumann type. the values of the regulation matrix coefficients, presented in, are also in good agreement with experiments and with results for conventional model, as well as for the model with the neumann boundary conditions. from the graphs init can be seen that the modelled concentration profiles are similar to those for the model with the neumann boundary conditions in. nevertheless is should be noted that the usage of the dirichlet boundary conditions allows us to predict the expression of all genes very close to the experimental data near the computational domain boundaries for both genotypes. however, the narrower expression domain of gt protein, its sharp maximum and the shifted hb expression maximum in kr mutant require further study.  
