gene expression interactional and functional centrality in transcriptional co-expression networks motivation: the noisy nature of transcriptomic data hinders the biological relevance of conventional network centrality measures, often used to select gene candidates in co-expression networks. therefore, new tools and methods are required to improve the prediction of mechanistically important transcriptional targets. results: we propose an original network centrality measure, called annotation transcriptional centrality (atc) computed by integrating gene expression profiles from microarray experiments with biological knowledge extracted from public genomic databases. atc computation algorithm delimits representative functional domains in the co-expression network and then relies on this information to find key nodes that modulate propagation of functional influences within the network. we demonstrate atc ability to predict important genes in several experimental models and provide improved biological relevance over conventional topological network centrality measures. availability: atc computational routine is implemented in a publicly available tool named funnet (www.funnet.info)in complex cellular environments, biological functions are emerging properties that cannot be understood without taking into consideration the system as a whole. molecular interactions allow for cellular components to function and for cells to live and perform their tasks within the organism. it is through chemical and physical interactions that molecules influence one another and carry out biological functions. since some of these influences may have a greater impact than others, a hierarchical characterization of their relative importance can be very useful in exploring the functional architecture of the cellular environments. the concept of interactional centrality is borrowed from social sciences where it is used to estimate the relative importance of individuals within societies . biological processes, viewed as to whom correspondence should be addressed. associations of molecules whose relations to each other assure a particular function , have a strong interactional nature. understanding interaction patterns is therefore crucial in untangling the functional architecture of cellular environments. network analysis plays an increasingly important role in the exploration of complex interactional systems in numerous domains. in biology, they are used to study regulation of the transcriptome, proteome, metabolome, methylome and other cell systems . key properties of biological networks are shared with other complex interaction systems, such as the scale-free distribution of node connectivity or the small-world aspect of their fast synchronization . others, like the existence of a hierarchical architecture of modules formed by functionally related components (i.e. genes, enzymes and metabolites) , or the presence of various types of hubs (i.e. highly connected or central nodes), which modulate key interactions at distinct levels in the cell, are thought to have a particular relevance in biology. the existence of strong relationships between the biological roles of molecules and the modular organization of their interactions was demonstrated through analyses of integrating gene expression patterns with information on phylogenetic variability, sharing of common transcriptional binding sites, results from mutagenesis experiments and available knowledge on genes biological roles . hub molecules with important biological properties are identified in these networks through topological interactional centrality measures. relying on results from mutagenesis experiments,showed that highly connected hub proteins that occupy central positions in the network architecture of yeast proteinprotein interactions are three times more likely to be biologically essential than those with only a small number of links in the network. several other studies have shown that proteins with high betweenness centrality scores (i.e. measure of total number of shortest paths that connect each two nodes in the network passing through a given one) are more likely to be functionally essential . others have demonstrated strong correlations of network topological centrality indices with specific patterns of phylogenetic variability . microarray technology has been very successful in biomedical research over the past decade. the study of gene expressionour assessment shows that conventional topological centrality indexes are not equally useful in predicting essential genes in yeast cell-cycle co-expression networks. indeed, degree centrality appeared to perform better than betweenness in spotting essential genes. this finding contradicts previous data published by, which showed that node betweenness centrality is a better indicator of functional essentiality than degree in regulatory and other directed networks. however, as suggested by, in yeast protein interaction networks essential proteins tend to participate in biological processes that are densely interconnected, and which are therefore more likely to be hubs (i.e. highly connected nodes). in our context, the advantage of degree centrality over betweenness could be explained by an increased sensitivity of the later to the high amount of noise, which is often wired in the structure of the co-expression networks. this observation is also supported by our assessment, which associates the highest sensitivity to artificial random noise with betweenness centrality (see supplementary tables s1 and s2). on the other hand, atc predicts essentiality better than both betweenness and degree centrality in the transcriptional co-expression network built from cell-cycle data. our assessment indicated also that atc is significantly more robust to experimental noise than topological measures. this advantage may be related to the fact that atc computation relies not only on the topology of the co-expression network but also on its functional architecture. furthermore, no significant difference between atc distributions computed with the three annotation systems (gocc, gobp and kegg) was observed . this finding suggests an equal usefulness of the available annotation systems, despite the fragmentary character of the background knowledge on which they rely. it is expected that annotation coverage and its biological precision will continue to increase in the future and thus further improve atc prediction abilities.  
