data and text mining interaction-based feature selection and classification for high-dimensional biological data motivation: epistasis or genegene interaction has gained increasing attention in studies of complex diseases. its presence as an ubiquitous component of genetic architecture of common human diseases has been contemplated. however, the detection of genegene interaction is difficult due to combinatorial explosion. results: we present a novel feature selection method incorporating variable interaction. three gene expression datasets are analyzed to illustrate our method, although it can also be applied to other types of high-dimensional data. the quality of variables selected is evaluated in two ways: first by classification error rates, then by functional relevance assessed using biological knowledge. we show that the classification error rates can be significantly reduced by considering interactions. secondly, a sizable portion of genes identified by our method for breast cancer metastasis overlaps with those reported in gene-to-system breast cancer (g2sbc) database as disease associated and some of them have interesting biological implication. in summary, interaction-based methods may lead to substantial gain in biological insights as well as more accurate prediction.recent high-throughput biological studies successfully identified thousands of risk factors associated with common human diseases. most of these studies used single-variable method and each variable is analyzed individually. the risk factors so identified account for a small portion of disease heritability. nowadays, there is a growing body of evidence suggesting genegene interactions as a possible reason for the missing heritability . recent reviews of methods for genegene interaction are given by and . the main difficulty in detecting genegene interaction is typical for many high-dimensional data analysis problems, only worse. with only tens or hundreds of observations available normally, one needs to deal with thousands or more genes. what is more challenging is that genegene interaction compels the consideration of variables defined by combining genes, which makes the massive number of variables even larger. thus, feature selection is particularly crucial for effective data analysis. an important and widely adopted approach to feature selection is to first assume that the data follow a statistical model. the effects of the explanatory variables x fx 1 , , x p g on the response variable y are then estimated by the corresponding coefficients when fitting the data to the model. those variables with larger estimated effects are selected. for instance, assume the data follows a linear regression modelto improve the prediction accuracy and interpretability of ordinary least squares (ols), lasso of adds an l 1-norm penalty to ols to continuously shrink some coefficients to zero and automatically select a subset of variables. the aforesaid approach works well when the number of variables is not very large. to detect genegene interaction, however, it must include additional variables defined by products of original variables and thus the number of variables p is exponentially larger than n, the number of observations. that is, p expon for some 40. when p is exponentially larger than n, estimating the coefficient vector 1 , , p accurately is hard. this is because the noise level may be larger than some absolute coefficients j i j and achieving the ideal risk up to the logarithmic factor log p in oracle inequalities may be too large for practical purposes . these difficulties are caused by that the approach estimates the effects of all variables simultaneously. hence proposed a feature selection method, sure independence screening (sis), to first screen variables separately using marginal correlation. after screening, accurate estimation for selected variables can then be done by using methods well-suited for low or moderate dimensional data. sis improves substantially the performance of lasso and related methods when variables only have marginal effects on y. however, genegene interaction often comes with module effects . that is, the effect of some variables can be detected only when considered jointly with other variables of the same module. when there is module effect, sis is not expected to attain the goal of effective feature selection. to generate useful knowledge on genetic architecture of complex diseases where interactions among genetic, biological, biochemical and environmental factors work together to produce the response, current high-dimensional statistical methods are facing a few major challenges. first, to detect the effect of a to whom correspondence should be addressed. gene, it may be necessary to consider the gene jointly with others in the same functional module such as a pathway. secondly, the genes may interact with each other in influencing the response. thirdly, the effect of genes on the response may be highly nonlinear. to address these challenges, the proposed method extracts different types of information from the data in several stages. in the first stage, we select variables with high potential to form influential variable modules when combining with other variables. in the second stage, we generate highly influential variable modules from variables selected in the first stage so that each variable interacts with others in the same module to produce a strong effect on the response y. the third stage combines classifiers, each constructed from one module, to form the classification rule. the overarching idea is that since the feature selection problem involving module, interaction and nonlinearity is too complicated to be reduced to one single optimization problem based on a model equation, we break the problem into smaller ones. as the nonlinearity, interaction and module effects can be adequately accommodated within a smaller problem, we then solve each smaller problem and put the solutions together to form the final one. our method provides a flexible framework to analyze high-dimensional data for classification purposes. it is model-free and considers variable interaction explicitly, which aligns well with the systems-oriented biological paradigm. lasso related methods were developed for grouped variables . comprehensive reviews of feature selection methods are available from machine learning literature and bioinformatics .  
