sequence analysis interactive exploration of rna22 microrna target predictions microrna (mirna) target prediction is an important problem. given an mirna sequence the task is to determine the identity of the messenger rnas targeted by it, the locations within them where the interactions happen and the specifics of the formed heterodu-plexes. here, we describe a web-based application, rna22-gui, which we have designed and implemented for the interactive exploration and in-context visualization of predictions by rna22, one of the popular mirna target prediction algorithms. central to our design has been the requirement to provide informative and comprehensive visu-alization that is integrated with interactive search capabilities and permits one to selectively isolate and focus on relevant information that is distilled on-the-fly from a large repository of pre-compiled predictions. rna22-gui is currently available for homo sapiens, mus musculus, drosophila melanogaster and caenorhabditis elegans.microrna (mirnas) are non-coding rnas, 22 nucleotides in length, that regulate messenger rna (mrna) expression in a sequence-dependent manner . efforts during the past decade have shown the importance of mirna-based regulation in diverse contexts and in health and disease . thus, the ability to predict mirna targets has attracted a lot of attention and several algorithms have been proposed (for a review, see). despite progress, the problem of mirna target prediction has proven to be a vexing one and improved solutions continue to be sought . rna22 differs from other algorithms in several ways: it is trained with known mirnas, not with experimentally validated heteroduplexes; it permits combinations of g:u wobbles and bulges in the seed region of a heteroduplex; and, it neither relies on nor requires a targets conservation across genomes. rna22 has successfully predicted non-canonical targets as well as targets beyond the 3 0-untranslated region (3 0-utr) . also, independent studies have shown that rna22 exhibits a high signal-to-noise ratio. to facilitate work with rna22 targets, we implemented a pre-populated link to facta allows the generation of term associations for the genes function. other links allow one to view the 500 most accessed transcripts and to submit questions/comments through email.  
