sequence analysis interactive software tool to comprehend the calculation of optimal sequence alignments with dynamic programming dynamic programming (dp) is a general optimization strategy that is successfully used across various disciplines of science. in bioinformatics, it is widely applied in calculating the optimal alignment between pairs of protein or dna sequences. these alignments form the basis of new, verifiable biological hypothesis. despite its importance, there are no interactive tools available for training and education on understanding the dp algorithm. here, we introduce an interactive computer application with a graphical interface, for the purpose of educating students about dp. the program displays the dp scoring matrix and the resulting optimal alignment(s), while allowing the user to modify key parameters such as the values in the similarity matrix, the sequence alignment algorithm version and the gap opening/extension penalties. we hope that this software will be useful to teachers and students of bioinformatics courses, as well as researchers who implement the dp algorithm for diverse applications. availability and implementation: the software is freely available at: http:/melolab.org/sat. the software is written in the java computer language, thus it runs on all major platforms and operating systems including windows, mac os x and linux. contact: all inquiries or comments about this software should be directed to francisco melo at fmelo@bio.puc.cldynamic programming (dp) algorithm was first formalized by the mathematician richard bellman in the early 1950s . since then, dp has been adapted to solve many optimization problems in different areas of science . dp, in various forms, constitutes the core of bioinformatics. it is central to several software applications, such as those comparing sequences and structures of proteins, rna and dna . the pivotal role of dp algorithm in bioinformatics has led it to be considered as an essential topic of any undergraduate and graduate course in bioinformatics. despite the simplicity of its formulation, dp algorithm is a subject that is not easy for the students to learn. extensive practice is essential for students to fully appreciate it workings. given its importance, and its mandatory presence in bioinformatics courses, there are not interactive computer to whom correspondence should be addressed. tools designed to help students to understand the specific details of the dp algorithm. we have addressed this need by developing sequence alignment teacher (sat), a simple software application, which interactively calculates the dp matrix in real time. sat also visually illustrates the consequences of tweaking the various parameters of the algorithm. we hope this simple software tool will not only be useful for teachers and students of bioinformatics courses but also to future bioinformatics developers as an error check tool when they start implementing this algorithm for the first time.  
