structural bioinformatics interevscore: a novel coarse-grained interface scoring function using a multi-body statistical potential coupled to evolution motivation: structural prediction of protein interactions currently remains a challenging but fundamental goal. in particular, progress in scoring functions is critical for the efficient discrimination of near-native interfaces among large sets of decoys. many functions have been developed using knowledge-based potentials, but few make use of multi-body interactions or evolutionary information, although multi-residue interactions are crucial for proteinprotein binding and protein interfaces undergo significant selection pressure to maintain their interactions. results: this article presents interevscore, a novel scoring function using a coarse-grained statistical potential including two-and three-body interactions, which provides each residue with the opportunity to contribute in its most favorable local structural environment. combination of this potential with evolutionary information considerably improves scoring results on the 54 test cases from the widely used protein docking benchmark for which evolutionary information can be collected. we analyze how our way to include evolutionary information gradually increases the discriminative power of interevscore. comparison with several previously published scoring functions (zdock, zrank and spider) shows the significant progress brought by interevscore.proteinprotein interactions play a pivotal role in virtually all cellular processes . despite the growing number of available 3d structures for protein complexes in the protein data bank , computational prediction of protein interfaces turns out as an important tool for the exploration of interactomes . a large variety of methods have been developed in the past years to improve the success rate of computational proteinprotein docking, and the combination of various methods can improve the accuracy of docking results . docking methods can be classified in two broad and complementary categories: template-based (homology) docking based on the availability of 3d complex structures similar to the complex of interest and template-free docking. in the present work, we focus on the second type of approach. classically, the template-free docking procedure can be divided in two steps . the first step consists in sampling a large number of candidate interfaces (also called decoys). this sampling is often performed using a rigid-body method, which allows for fast search in the large decoy conformational space; in particular, fast fourier transform-based algorithms are highly efficient . the most recent strategies often succeed in generating several near-native conformations; however, the second step of the docking process, which involves scoring and ranking the many decoys that have been generated, often fails to distinguish these near-native conformations from incorrect models, and there is still room for improvement of the scoring functions used in proteinprotein docking . scoring functions can be divided in three categories: physicsbased functions, which provide an estimate of the free energy of binding using physico-chemical principles, knowledge-based (empirical) potentials relying on statistics and hybrid potentials combining the two. those methods are embodied in the programs of the most successful participants in the critical assessment of prediction of interactions (capri) docking and scoring experiments . among the successful programs, some rely mainly on physico-chemical scoring functions such as haddock , attract , zdock , pydock or firedock , whereas others such as itscorepp rely on an iterative knowledge-based scoring function . hybrid approaches were also implemented in scoring functions such as zrank or piper and in the switch from low to high resolution scoring functions in the rosetta program . an ideal scoring function would describe the energetics of the protein interface in atomic detail. however, in a context where low-resolution approaches are needed, given the highly combinatorial nature of protein docking, rigid-body sampling is largely favored as a first step. coarse-grained knowledge-based potentials, less sensitive to atomic details such as side-chain to whom correspondence should be addressed. positioning, seem appropriate for discriminating false interfaces from rigid-body near-native decoys and have been shown in several occasions to retain most of the useful information contained in all-atom potentials . a limitation of most statistical potentials developed so far is the decomposition of interface contacts into pairs, leaving out multi-body interactions, which are known to be important for binding. a few statistical potentials developed for protein structure prediction take into account three-body and four-body interactions . most recently, the spider scoring function has been developed for protein interface scoring based on multi-residue patterns with no theoretical size limitation . one of the major difficulties toward the development of multi-body docking potentials is the scarcity of interface contact statistics. we recently designed the interevol database to explore the structure and evolution of protein complexes . this database contains418 000 non-redundant interfaces, including41500 non-obligate heteromeric interfaces, which form a large and robust basis for the extraction of reliable two-and three-body interaction statistics. a complementary source of information about protein interfaces comes from the conservation of quaternary structures and binding modes, which is observed above 30 sequence identity . to predict the location of binding sites and the structure of complexes, different types of evolutionary information were used. they consist either in the analysis of correlated mutations, in the mapping of evolutionary rates or in the detection of residue contact complementarities. the use of correlated mutations, successful in some cases , was found to have strong limitations , and sophisticated statistical treatments together with a large number of sequences were found beneficial to reach high precision . scores integrating conservation profiles or residue contacts likelihood extracted from multiple sequence alignments (msas) were found to improve the prediction of binding sites at protein surfaces. as for docking, scoring functions have also been developed that bias interface detection toward evolutionarily conserved residues . the development of the scotch method highlighted a remarkable plasticity in the way interface physicochemical complementarities are maintained through evolution. moreover, in a recent study of 41000 pairs of homologous heteromeric interfaces, we showed that although interface contacts are highly versatile, some contact conservation signal can be extracted, in particular when considering specific interface descriptors . in the present article, we introduce interevscore, a novel scoring function for protein docking, which combines a multi-body statistical potential with evolutionary information derived from coupled msas for each partner in the complex and from our previous observations on the evolution of homologous interfaces . to our knowledge, interevscore is the first scoring function for docking applications relying on both two-and three-body statistical potentials combined with the scoring of interface contacts inferred from msas. this way of integrating evolutionary information was found significantly superior to solely accounting for conserved positions. we also show that interevscore achieves significant improvement compared with several scoring functions, namely, zdock, zrank and spider, in the detection of near-native conformations among large sets of decoys from the widely used proteinprotein docking benchmark . interevscore is freely available as a standalone python program and can be run using different modes to take advantage of available structural and evolutionary information.  
