databases and ontologies intermine: a flexible data warehouse system for the integration and analysis of heterogeneous biological data intermine is an open-source data warehouse system that facilitates the building of databases with complex data integration requirements and a need for a fast customizable query facility. using intermine, large biological databases can be created from a range of heterogeneous data sources, and the extensible data model allows for easy integration of new data types. the analysis tools include a flexible query builder, genomic region search and a library of widgets performing various statistical analyses. the results can be exported in many commonly used formats. intermine is a fully extensible framework where developers can add new tools and functionality. additionally, there is a comprehensive set of web services, for which client libraries are provided in five commonly used programming languages.integrative analysis exploiting diverse datasets is a powerful approach in modern biology, but it can also be complex and time consuming. there are huge quantities of data available in a range of different formats, and a high level of computational expertise is often required for performing analysis, even once the data have been successfully integrated into a single database [for a general review of biological data integration, see triplet and. intermine is a data warehouse framework initially developed for flymine to address these issues for the drosophila community . it is being adopted by a number of major model organism databases including budding yeast, rat, zebrafish, mouse and nematode worm , and is in use by the modencode projecta large-scale international initiative to characterize functional elements in the fly and worm genomes , as well as for drug target discovery , drosophila transcription factors and mitochondrial proteomics . many features of the intermine system have been designed to lower the effort required for the setup and maintenance of large-scale biological databases, and these are outlined later in the text and discussed in more detail in the supplementary material.  
