interproscan 5: genome-scale protein function classification trust genome campus, hinxton cb10 1sd and 2 wellcome trust sanger institute, wellcome trust genome campus, hinxton cb10 1sa, uk motivation: robust large-scale sequence analysis is a major challenge in modern genomic science, where biologists are frequently trying to characterize many millions of sequences. here, we describe a new java-based architecture for the widely used protein function prediction software package interproscan. developments include improvements and additions to the outputs of the software and the complete reimplementation of the software framework, resulting in a flexible and stable system that is able to use both multiprocessor machines and/or conventional clusters to achieve scalable distributed data analysis. interproscan is freely available for download from the embl-ebi ftp site and the open source code is hosted at google code. availability and implementation: interproscan is distributed via ftp at ftpthe interproscan software is extensively used both by genome sequencing projectsand the uniprot knowledgebase (uniprotkb) to obtain a first-pass profile of protein sequences potential functions. it does this by combining together search applications that predict protein family membership and the presence of functional domains and sites, summarizing their outputs. before describing the architecture used by the new version of interproscan, it is necessary to explain how these analysis applications work in a general sense, as it has influenced the overall design of the system. search applications have two main modalities: the simplest [tmhmm , signalp , phobius (have single algorithms that are used to give a likelihood that a particular feature exists. other applications), tigrfams , smart , pirsf , panther , hamap , prosite , prodom , prints , cathgene3d and superfamily (de limaare more complex, searching a sequence against multiple models, using a variety of algorithms [e.g. hmmer , blast (and post-processing the raw output of the search algorithm before a final result is produced (see). frequently, the algorithms used are computationally expensive and some kind of parallelization is necessary for large numbers of sequences to be analyzed in a reasonable amount of time. once the search results are obtained, the interproscan in-memory database is queried to find corresponding interpro entries (i.e. the entries associated with a particular set of hmms, etc) and additional database annotations, such as gene ontology (the gene) terms, are associated with the results accordingly. it is imperative that the framework built for managing the interproscan analyses is highly configurable, so that the heterogeneous nature of the different applications can be represented appropriately, and the software can run in a multitude of computing environments. previous versions of interproscan (4.x and earlier) were difficult for users to install and configure, did not scale appropriately for the analysis of large numbers of sequences and the functionality of the software was difficult to extend. this reimplementation of interproscan addresses the previous versions weaknesses and adds new features to the software.  
