genetics and population analysis interrogating local population structure for fine mapping in genome-wide association studies motivation: adjustment for population structure is necessary to avoid bias in genetic association studies of susceptibility variants for complex diseases. population structure may differ from one genomic region to another due to the variability of individual ancestry associated with migration, random genetic drift or natural selection. current association methods for correcting population stratification usually involve adjustment of global ancestry between study subjects. results: we suggest interrogating local population structure for fine mapping to more accurately locate true casual genes by better adjusting the confounding effect due to local ancestry. by extensive simulations on genome-wide datasets, we show that adjusting global ancestry may lead to false positives when local population structure is an important confounding factor. in contrast, adjusting local ancestry can effectively prevent false positives due to local population structure and thus can improve fine mapping for disease gene localization. we applied the local and global adjustments to the analysis of datasets from three genome-wide association studies, including european americans, african americans and nigerians. both european americans and african americans demonstrate greater variability in local ancestry than nigerians. adjusting local ancestry successfully eliminated the known spurious association between snps in the lct gene and height due to the population structure existed in european americans.unrecognized population structure can potentially lead to both false positive and false negative findings in genetic association studies . current statistical method used to adjust population to whom correspondence should be addressed. stratification in genetic association studies often focus on adjusting global population structure, which is mainly caused by recent migration and genetic random drift. global population structure can be characterized as an individuals global ancestry calculated as the proportion of the individuals genome inherited from a given ancestral population. in contrast, local population structure can be characterized in a similar way but in local genomic region or at a locus. a popular procedure to eliminate the effect of population structure is the genomic control (gc) approach , which assumes that the variance inflation factor of a test statistic is a constant across the genome. however, variance inflation can also be due to locus-specific attributes. for example, the imprint of natural selection has recently been identified in many regions across the genome , and can create substantial variation in f st which in turn affects the degree of variance inflation for specific loci . thus, the gc approach will eliminate the effect due to the global population structure, but may not be effective in eliminating the effect due to local population structure. an alternative method to correct population structure is based on the principal components (pcs) of the genotypes, in which the pcs of the genotype score matrix of many markers across the entire genome (referred to as global pcs hereafter) are used to represent individual ancestry background and used as covariates in association analysis . various studies have shown that the global pcs can effectively represent human demographic history (cavalli). however, local genomic regions harboring functional variants may be subject to subtle forms of population structure not only as a result of demographic history but natural selection and local random fluctuations of admixture . in genome-wide association studies, numerous markers are usually tested one at a time. the test of a non-causal maker locus, which is dependent of a causal gene, may be confounded by a pathway leading through both global and local ancestries . the dependence between a non-causal marker and a causal gene may due to short range or long-range ld. short-range ld may exist when two loci are nearby. long-range ld might exist between two genes in different chromosomes, i.e. due to co-evolution .page: 2962 29612968. the pathways which confound the relationship between a non-causative marker g and phenotype y. a single-arrowed line indicates correlation which is possibly directive (i.e. d to y ), and a double-arrowed line indicates correlation only. population history determines local ancestries g , d and their correlation, i.e. g and d can be correlated if markers g and d are close to each other, population admixture or co-evolution occurred on both regions; local ancestries impact the variations of and the allele frequencies of g and d; and d and directly impact phenotypic variation. therefore, both global and local ancestries may confound gy relationship. g may impact phenotypic variation either indirectly (a) due to correlation or directly (b) due to natural selection. adjusting g can effectively control the type i error due to the confounding by both g and. adjusting alone may not well control type i error, especially when g directly confounds the gy association.  
