gene expression inter-species pathway perturbation prediction via data-driven detection of functional homology motivation: experiments in animal models are often conducted to infer how humans will respond to stimuli by assuming that the same biological pathways will be affected in both organisms. the limitations of this assumption were tested in the improver species translation challenge, where 52 stimuli were applied to both human and rat cells and perturbed pathways were identified. in the inter-species pathway perturbation prediction sub-challenge, multiple teams proposed methods to use rat transcription data from 26 stimuli to predict human gene set and pathway activity under the same perturbations. submissions were evaluated using three performance metrics on data from the remaining 26 stimuli. results: we present two approaches, ranked second in this challenge , that do not rely on sequence-based orthology between rat and human genes to translate pathway perturbation state but instead identify transcriptional response orthologs across a set of training conditions. the translation from rat to human accomplished by these so-called direct methods is not dependent on the particular analysis method used to identify perturbed gene sets. in contrast, machine learning-based methods require performing a pathway analysis initially and then mapping the pathway activity between organisms. unlike most machine learning approaches, direct methods can be used to predict the activation of a human pathway for a new (test) stimuli, even when that pathway was never activated by a training stimuli. availability: gene expression data are available from arrayexpress (accession e-mtab-2091), while software implementations are available fromthe fundamental assumption that underpins the use of animal models for the study of human disease is that there is conservation in the nature of the responses to injury and therapy. however, work reported by the inflammation and host response to injury, large-scale collaborative research program (published in 2013) compared the transcriptional responses in peripheral blood with inflammatory injuries, such as burns, blunt force trauma, as well as to endotoxin in human patients and in mice, with startling and unexpected results . humans had similar transcriptional responses to burns, trauma and endotoxemia. the murine model showed little correlation either to each other or to the human response (among genes that changed significantly in humans, the murine orthologs were close to random to their human counterparts with r 2 values ranging between 0.0 and 0.1). these observations as well as earlier ones have elicited considerable interest and debate. investigators have noted that candidate agents developed in animals to block the inflammatory response tested in 4150 clinical trials have all failed when tested in humans . a major criticism has been that there is no systematic study of how well murine clinical models mimic human inflammatory diseases. to address this question, an international crowdsourcing competition was convened in 2013 (improver species translation challenge, improver stc) addressing the translatability of findings between rat and human model systems in four subchallenges: (i) intra-and (ii) inter-species protein phosphorylation prediction, (iii) inter-species pathway perturbation prediction and (iv) species-specific network inference. the work presented here is based on submissions to the third sub-challenge (sc3) by team49 (a. l. tarca, r. romero) and team133 (c. hafemeister, r. bonneau). for a set of test stimuli, sc3 asked participants to predict the perturbation state of gene sets representing pathways/biological processes in human cells given corresponding data in rat. the required submission was an ordering of the gene sets based on the enrichment in genes that are differentially expressed between stimuli treated and controls. participants could tune their models on a set of training stimuli for which data for both rat and human were made available, as illustrated in. details of the experimental settings, generation, processing and quality control analysis of the dataset can be found in, and the raw data to whom correspondence should be addressed. have been submitted to the arrayexpress database and are available with the accession number e-mtab-2091 (https://www.ebi. ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/e-mtab-2091/). the gene sets were selected from the msigdb database and included biological pathways such as those available in kegg and reactome , but also custom functionally related groups of genes (supplementary). in the remainder of the article, we will use the term pathway to refer both biological pathways and gene sets for both simplicity reasons and to be consistent with the name of the sub-challenge: inter-species pathway perturbation prediction. among the submissions to sc3, there were two main classes of methods: the first category of methods was based on machine learning applications in which the training was performed at the pathway level only (, panel c), i.e. the input was the pathway perturbation states in rat and human for a set of stimuli, and dependencies between them were exploited/modeled. our methods represent the second category, which we call direct methods. these methods trained on the differential expression (de) state of all individual genes across the different stimuli to identify a response homology between rat and human genes. based on this homology, gene de metrics in human are either borrowed (team49) or estimated (team133) from those in rat for the same stimuli. gene de metrics are then used to infer pathway perturbation (, panel a). this article describes in detail the approach of team49 (a.l.t. and r.r.) and team133 (c.h. and r.b.) who were tied for second place in this challenge. we describe commonalities and differences between these two direct methods and the machine learning-based approaches. the criteria used to discuss these methods include (i) prediction performance (overall and for the most challenging scenarios) using metrics estimated as in the official team ranking but also in alternative ways, (ii) applicability of the methods to instances when a given pathway was activated by few or no stimuli in the training set and (iii) the dependence of the rat to human pathway activity translation on the particular gene set analysis method used.both approaches rely on moderated t-tests, capturing the significance and direction of change of rat and human genes for the same stimuli in the training dataset, to find one rat gene as a predictor for each human gene (ortholog pairs). (b) team49s method finds the rat gene that is ranked similarly across all training stimuli when compared with a given human gene. the rat data in the test set are then used to impute the needed human expression data. team133s method fits a simple linear model with one coefficient and intercept per ortholog pair, and predicts t-values directly. (c) machine learning methods bypass gene expression and de tests altogether, and map rat pathway activity (nes or fdr values) to human pathway activitythe systems biology verification improver pathway perturbation prediction challenge verified methods and concepts of interspecies translation of pathway activity based on gene expression data. in this work, we focused on the solutions of team49 and team133, and put them in context of other submissions with the goal of investigating their advantages and limitations. given the training data, both methods assigned one rat gene to each human gene based on a similar response pattern across the training stimuli. this orthology mapping is used to impute the missing human gene expression values (team49) or to predict the t-values of de tests in human from rat (team133). these two approaches are different in nature from another category of methods used by other teams in this challenge, namely, machine learning methods. these two categories of methods (direct methods versus machine learning methods) can be seen as a different sequence of two basic steps: gene set analysis and inference from rat data to human data. the machine learning-based methods require that a gene set analysis method is applied first and then inference of the pathway activation status from rat to human is learned. in contrast, direct methods that are the subject of this article perform the rat to human inference first and then apply the gene set analysis step. therefore, one can see that mapping pathway activity from rat to human accomplished by the machine learning methods is dependent on the particular pathway analysis method used. this might be problematic because a given pathway may or may not appear to be activated by a given stimulus depending on the sensitivity and specificity of the gene set analysis method that was applied. in contrast, the rat-to-human inferences made by the direct methods are independent of the particular gene set analysis method that is involved, and they produce a correspondence between human and rat genes. this correspondence identifies rat genes thought to be under similar regulatory control in humans for the given type of cells and stimuli used in the experiments. the data-driven orthologs found by the direct methods predicted inter-species differential gene expression better than sequence-based orthologs and were significantly overlapping between the two methods; yet, they were divergent from sequence-based orthologs extracted from hgnc database. based on the three performance metrics (aupr, pearson correlation and bac) computed by pooling predictions and gold standard over all pathways and stimuli, the top three teams would be team111_alt1, team50 and team49_alt1, all machine learning methods. one could argue that this pooling of predictions favors methods that do not deal with the most difficult scenarios, i.e. with pathway activation inference for those pathways that were seldom or never activated in the training dataset, and simply predict these pathways as non-activated. an alternative would be to compute the performance metrics per pathway and then average over the 246 pathways; however, this is not feasible for aupr and the correlation coefficient but is for bac. therefore, we compared the rankings of the machine learning methods with the ones of the direct methods based on the bac alone computed as in the official challenge (pooled) and also per pathway and then averaged (mbac). the pooled bac was consistently higher for top three machine learning methods than for our direct methods. however, on average, our direct methods have a higher mbac than the top three machine learning methods. the inability of machine learning methods to predict the activation status of pathways that were never activated in the training dataset is reflected in the sensitivity of analysis restricted to those pathways. none of the top three methods, all machine learning based, produced a single true positive for these pathways. however, the direct method of team133 achieved a sensitivity of 0.29 at specificity 0.99, (bac = 0.64) and team49 achieved a sensitivity of 0.29 at specificity 0.96 (bac = 0.62). machine learning methods define a stimuli effect on a given pathway into classes (activation versus non-activation), and hence require one or more instances of activations to work. an alternative machine learning approach around this issue is to transform the classification problem into a regression problem, as team52 did, and use a continuous form of the pathway activity evidence (combination of nes scores and fdr values) in a regression model that can be fit regardless of the number of activation cases for a given pathway. team52 had the highest mbac statistics computed over all pathways, yet this method did not find any true positive for the zero activation pathways in the training dataset. a second alternative discussed in this issue by team50 would be to cluster pathways into groups and hence borrow activation information across pathways. however, from the outset, such an approach did not appear to be outperforming the methodology used by team50 for their official submission in this challenge. the task of using transcriptomics data in rat to infer pathway activity in human for a given stimuli proved to be challenging regardless of the approach that was used to tackle this problem. compared with the task of predicting protein phosphorylation status in human based on gene expression and phosphorylation data in rat (sub-challenge sc2), the prediction of pathway activity (sub-challenge sc3) was much more difficult, with the best pooled bac in sc2 being 0.77 compared with 0.56 in sc3. there may be several reasons for this, one of which being the fact that in the human training data only few outcomes are positives (6  
