structural bioinformatics introducing drugster: a comprehensive and fully integrated drug design, lead and structure optimization toolkit drugster is a fully interactive pipeline designed to break the command line barrier and introduce a new user-friendly environment to perform drug design, lead and structure optimization experiments through an efficient combination of the pdb2pqr, ligbuilder, gromacs and dock suites. our platform features a novel workflow that guides the user through each logical step of the iterative 3d structural optimization setup and drug design process, by providing a seamless interface to all incorporated packages. availability: drugster can be freely downloaded via our dedicated server system at http://www.bioacademy.gr/bioinformatics/drugster/. contact: dvlachakis@bioacademy.gr.drugster is a fully integrated, perl/tcl-tk based, interactive platform combining in a rational pipeline the algorithms of pdb2pqr v.1.8 , ligbuilder v.1.2 and v.2.0 , gromacs v.4.5.5 and dock v.6.5 . all previously mentioned algorithms remain a native set of numerous unix-based modules, lacking a comprehensive and objectoriented graphical user interface (gui). therefore, drugster was developed to ease and automate the full task of setting up drug design, lead and structure optimization experiments. all major 3d molecular viewers can be used for visualization purposes. in this study, we used pymol as molecular viewer. in the beginning, drugster addresses all common problems associated with pdb file formatting and partial charges. subsequently, the receptor will be structurally optimized by energy minimization using a variety of different force fields as implemented into gromacs. upon structural optimization, the ligbuilder algorithm is used to generate novel molecules for the given site or to improve an existing lead compound. dock is used to verify and evaluate the potential of each newly designed ligand, as it is used to re-score all candidate compounds and search for better docking interactions. finally, the receptor ligand complex is energetically minimized, to reduce any residual geometrical strains, and subsequently subjected to molecular dynamics simulations (mds), allowing full degrees of freedom to both the ligand and the receptor. there is an option for a final energy minimization step after the mds. of the scaffolding, common core structures that will be later generated and analysed. then the user has the choice of either the growing or the linking algorithms of ligbuilder. the combination of molecular fragments starts automatically as soon as the user has completed the parameters setup section (i.e. molecular weight, number of donors/acceptors, logp and other chemical properties). the third phase is the compound screening function, where the elite molecules are selected for the next step.(4) ligand optimization and re-scoring. all ligand candidate molecules prepared in the previous step are subjected to docking simulations using dock, which are followed by energy minimizations (em) within the receptor. the ligand molecules are then re-scored and re-ranked. notably at this stage, em is performed allowing full degrees of freedom for both the ligand and the receptor. this way a certain degree of receptor flexibility is allowed to the iterative drug design process. the re-scoring approach is based on free energy perturbation and compoundreceptor interaction analysis. the scoring functions included in dock are fast and versatile, offering a reliable set of tools for scoring and re-ranking our candidate compounds. finally, ligand topologies can be either automatically assigned or manually using freely available dedicated software .(5) complex optimization. the final step of the drugster pipeline is the automatic error-prone feeding of the top scoring candidate compounds to the docks molecular dynamics engine. here options include a force field selector, generator for the coordinate and topology files, the setup of a periodic system, solvation and the actual molecular dynamics simu  
