systems biology inverse perturbation for optimal intervention in gene regulatory networks motivation: analysis and intervention in the dynamics of gene regulatory networks is at the heart of emerging efforts in the development of modern treatment of numerous ailments including cancer. the ultimate goal is to develop methods to intervene in the function of living organisms in order to drive cells away from a malignant state into a benign form. a serious limitation of much of the previous work in cancer network analysis is the use of external control, which requires intervention at each time step, for an indefinite time interval. this is in sharp contrast to the proposed approach, which relies on the solution of an inverse perturbation problem to introduce a one-time intervention in the structure of regulatory networks. this isolated intervention transforms the steady-state distribution of the dynamic system to the desired steady-state distribution. results: we formulate the optimal intervention problem in gene regulatory networks as a minimal perturbation of the network in order to force it to converge to a desired steady-state distribution of gene regulation. we cast optimal intervention in gene regulation as a convex optimization problem, thus providing a globally optimal solution which can be efficiently computed using standard toolboxes for convex optimization. the criteria adopted for optimality is chosen to minimize potential adverse effects as a consequence of the intervention strategy. we consider a perturbation that minimizes (i) the overall energy of change between the original and controlled networks and (ii) the time needed to reach the desired steady-state distribution of gene regulation. furthermore, we show that there is an inherent trade-off between minimizing the energy of the perturbation and the convergence rate to the desired distribution. we apply the proposed control to the human melanoma gene regulatory network. availability: the matlab code for optimal intervention in gene regulatory networks can be found online: http://syen.ualr.edu/ nxbouaynaya/bioinformatics2010.html.the cell maintains its function via an elaborate network of interconnecting positive and negative feedback loops of genes and proteins that send different signals to a large number of pathways and molecules. understanding the dynamic behavior of gene regulatory networks is essential to advance our knowledge of disease, develop modern therapeutic methods and identify targets in the cell needed to reach a desired goal. in classical biological experiments, cell function is ascertained based on rough phenotypical and genetic behavior. on the other hand, the use of dynamical system models allows one to analytically explore biological hypotheses. within this context, investigators have sought to discover preferable stationary states, the effect of distinct perturbations on gene dynamics and the dynamical function of genes . the complexity of biological systems and the noisy nature of the sampled data suggest the use of probabilistic methods for system modeling, analysis and intervention. markov chain models have been shown to accurately emulate the dynamics of gene regulatory networks . in particular, the dynamics of probabilistic boolean networks (pbns) and dynamic bayesian networks can be studied using markov chains. the long-run behavior of a dynamic network is characterized by the steady-state distributions of the corresponding markov chain. it has been argued that steadystate distributions determine the phenotype or the state of the cell development, such as cell proliferation and apoptosis . the long-run dynamic properties of pbns and their sensitivity with respect to network perturbations were investigated in several manuscripts . the ultimate objective of gene regulatory network modeling and analysis is to use the network to design effective intervention strategies for affecting the network dynamics in such a way as to avoid undesirable cellular states. as futuristic gene therapeutic interventions, various control strategies have been proposed to alter gene regulatory network dynamics in a desirable way. biologically, such alterations may be possible by the introduction of a factor or drug that alters the extant behavior of the cell. current control strategies can be grouped into three main approaches : (i) reboot the network by resetting its initial condition , (ii) introduce external control variablesin this article, we introduced a novel method for optimal intervention in gene regulatory networks posed as an inverse perturbation problem. the optimal perturbation has been derived such that theconverge toward the desired steady-state distribution d , whereas q(s) converges toward d only for s = 1.(a) and (b). the parameterized family of perturbed matrices p(s) in equation (15) results in a faster convergence toward the desired steady-state d at the expense of a higher norm (energy) of the perturbation matrix. on the other hand, the family of perturbed matrices q(s) in equation (20) leads to a perturbation matrix with norm (energy) as small as desired, but at the expense of not converging toward the desired steady state for small s. the distance between the steady state of q(s) and the desired steady state as a function of s is shown in (c).  
