gene expression amplicon identification using sparse representation of multiplex pyrosequencing signal (adviser-m-pyro): application to bacterial resistance genotyping motivation: pyrosequencing is a cost-effective dna sequencing technology that has many applications, including rapid genotyping of a broad spectrum of bacteria. when molecular typing requires to genotype multiple dna stretches, several pyrosequencing primers could be used simultaneously but this would create overlapping primer-specific signals, which are visually uninterpretable. accordingly, the objective was to develop a new method for signal processing (adviser-m-pyro) to automatically analyze and interpret multiplex pyrosequen-cing signals. in parallel, the nucleotide dispensation order was improved by developing the senator (selecting the nucleotide dispensation order) algorithm. results: inthis proof-of-concept study,quintuplex pyrosequencingwas applied on eight bacterial dna and targeted genetic alterations underlying resistance to-lactam antibiotics. using senator-driven dispen-sation order, all genetic variants (31 of 31; 100) were correctly identified with adviser-m-pyro. among nine expected negative results, there was only one false positive that was tagged with an unsafe label. availability and implementation: senator and adviser-m-pyro are implemented in the adviser-m-pyro r package (http://sites. uclouvain.be/md-ctma/index.php/softwares) and can be used to improve the dispensation order and to analyze multiplex pyrosequencing signals generated in a broad range of typing applications.pyrosequencing is a dna sequencing technology based on pyrophosphate release during nucleotide incorporation. the four possible nucleotides are sequentially dispensed in a pre-determined order. the first chemiluminescent signal produced during nucleotide incorporation is detected in the pyrosequencer and displayed as a pyrosequencing signal (also known as pyrogram tm ). the number of incorporated nucleotides at each position is computed from the corresponding peak height in the pyrosequencing signal. it has to be emphasized that the current pyrosequencing method should not be confused with high-throughput sequencing platforms, which also use pyrosequencing reactions. this article is clearly restricted to the analysis of pyrosequencing signals obtained with the pyrosequencing pyromark technology commercialized by qiagen (hilden, germany). pyrosequencing has many applications, including rapid genotyping of a broad spectrum of bacteria and human single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) genotyping . despite the increased use of next-generation sequencing for studying genomic diversity, pyrosequencing as defined here remains a costeffective solution for genotyping short dna stretches within bacterial genomes. this has previously been demonstrated by detecting snps associated with quinolone resistance and clustered in short dna sequences known as quinolone resistancedetermining region . considering that antibiotic resistance mechanisms are often linked to several hotspots located a small distance apart in the nucleotide sequence of a single gene as well as in several distinct genes , extended dna-based identification of antibiotic resistance requires therefore analyzing successively, or at best, in parallel, resistance determinants spread at different locations. anyway, pyrosequencing reactions have to be conducted one by one, a procedure which substantially increases analytical expenses and technician workload. the alternative is to use several pyrosequencing primers simultaneously . however, the unavoidable consequence of this solution is that overlapping primer-specific signals are created, which are not visually interpretable. another complementary issue is the need to select the nucleotide dispensation order for taking maximum advantage of all nucleotide sequence differences between the respective genetic targets. regarding the first issue related to multiplex signal interpretation, it is worth stating that complementary mpsqed and the to whom correspondence should be addressed.multipsq softwares were recently developed to help researchers designing and analyzing multiplex pyrosequencing assays . the mpsqed software is used to define pyrosequencing primers, which generate unique uniplex pyrosequencing fingerprints and prevent the occurrence of competing signals from snps at different locations. the multipsq software enables the analysis of multiplex pyrogram tm originating from various pyrosequencing primers. multipsq computes the similarity between multiplex pyrosequencing raw data and fingerprints resulting from any combination of theoretical uniplex pyrosequencing signals generated from a known sequence. the goal is to select the combination leading to the highest similarity. while multipsq was claimed to suit the analysis of multiplex pyrosequencing signals generated by an unrestricted number of sequencing primers for identifying an unlimited number of polymorphisms, the application was practically validated on duplex signals (i.e. pyrosequencing reactions performed with two pyrosequencing primers). in this study, the new senator method was developed to improve the nucleotide dispensation order to be used all along the multiplex pyrosequencing experiment. irrespective of the location of the pyrosequencing primer, the dispensation order is a crucial feature for avoiding similarities between uniplex pyrosequencing signals. the senator function considers all unique nucleotide sequences (uns) expected to be found within each genomic region of interest, hence improving the selection of a dispensation order that produces uncorrelated uniplex pyrosequencing signals. the global multiplex pyrosequencing signal is then interpreted using a new signal processing method based on a sparse representation of the pyrosequencing signal. the problem solved by sparse representation consists in creating a compact signal representation in terms of a linear combination of signals in an over-complete dictionary [i.e. a dictionary including a number of signals (p) that exceeds the dimension of the signal space (n)]. sparse representation was recently used to develop adviserpyro, a new method dedicated to the analysis of low pyrosequencing signal intensities and complex signals from several target amplicons . while used for rapidly identifying mycobacterial species-specific signals after pyrosequencing, adviser-pyro showed high prediction performances. in this article, adviser-m-pyro is used as a modified and updated version of original adviser-pyro. adviserm-pyro is designed to enable the analysis and interpretation of multiplex pyrosequencing signals. considering the steady increase of extended spectrum beta-lactamase producing bacteria (esbl) worldwide and the occurrence of large esbl-related outbreaks, a specific, high-throughput and multiplex dnabased identification methods would have outstanding clinical relevance. this new analytical application was therefore selected as a proof-of-concept for senator and adviser-m-pyro. in this study, adviser-m-pyro was used to interpret pyrosequencing signals generated during quintuplex pyrosequencing experiments (i.e. pyrosequencing reactions performed with five specific pyrosequencing primers) to genotype snps within blatem and blashv beta-lactamase resistance genes. to the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that quintuplex pyrosequencing signals are produced and reliably translated in sequences corresponding to each of their five respective targets.pyrosequencing is a cost-effective dna sequencing technology that can be used for genotyping short dna stretches within bacterial genomes. when the genotyping application requires analyzing multiple dna stretches for diagnostic relevance, each pyrosequencing reaction must be carried out successively or in parallel, which increases reagent costs and technician work load. an alternative would consist in performing multiplex pcr followed by a multiplex use of pyrosequencing primers but visual interpretation of the resulting multiplex signals is tedious, time-consuming and mostly unreliable. in this study, adviser-m-pyro was, therefore, developed and used to test the feasibility of analyzing and automatically interpreting signals resulting from quintuplex pyrosequencing of snps located within blatem and blashv beta-lactamase resistance genes, all being first amplified by multiplex pcr. the huge (n = 5250) number of possible genetic profiles characterizing each bacterial strain made this case study highly challenging. nonetheless, it enabled us to demonstrate the feasibility and strengths of the new analytical approach while also clarifying its potential limitations. dealing with a huge number of potential genetic profiles creates the possibility that any new mutation, being by definition not yet included in the original dictionary, produces a multiplex pyrosequencing signal, which may coincidentally match an irrelevant combination of uns signals already present in the library (as illustrated in bottom panels of). this would unavoidably lead to misleading interpretation of the pyrogram tm , resulting in genetic sequences assigned to wrong resistance determinants. moreover, the high correlation coefficient between the recorded signal and model predictions would prevent the operator from detecting such misinterpretation, but would also lead to overlooking this yet unidentified mutation. occurrence ofthose issues is, however, less probable when the multiplex pyrosequencing application targets a limited number of well-defined, highly stable and reproducible genetic alterations, such as these found in human multiple snp genotyping. in other applications, a regular update of the dictionary is compulsory for integrating newly discovered unss. in the current application, the dictionary was therefore updated to reflect exactly the state of the art, as for today. defining the upper threshold for the number of various genetic profiles minimizing the risk of misinterpretation would be highly valuable and extremely useful when designing new multiplex applications. this is unfortunately hardly achievable, except on a caseby-case basis, as too many factors influence directly the quality of genotyping results, among which the quality of the pyrogram tm (i.e. the signal-to-noise ratio), the number of genomic regions targeted in the application, the length of the signals (i.e. the length of the target sequence that determines the number of dispensed nucleotides), and the pairwise correlation between uniplex pyrosequencing signals referenced in the dictionary. the same factors also influence the optimal number of genomic regions to be considered in the updated dictionary for ensuring a reliable multiplex identification of snps. including more than five genomic regions in a multiplex application is perfectly feasible but with an increased risk of unsafe results. the respective contribution of each genomic region in sparse representation of the multiplex result decreases when additional genomic regions are included. likewise, the latter would increase the total number of unss, hence the probability of finding unss that are so similar that they cannot reliably be discriminated from one another, irrespective of the selected dispensation order. in addition to its regular update on the basis of new data from the literature, the dictionary needs also to integrate experimental uniplex pyrosequencing signals generated by the analysis of genuine target samples. in the present study, using a dictionary only based on theoretical signals, decreased significantly the performances of adviser-m-pyro. to be able to include experimental pyrosequencing signals appears therefore to be a clear and significant benefit of adviser-m-pyro, compared with the multipsq software. moreover, the sct parameter of adviser-m-pyro enables to discard less contributing uns, hence avoiding false-positive results, which can not be prevented by multipsq. in summary, an essential prerequisite of adviser-m-pyro is to build an over-complete dictionary based on a list of all unss expected to characterize the genotyping application, and to update it regularly if necessary. when a compiled overcomplete dictionary is available, multiplex pyrosequencing produces highly reliable results, as shown in the current proofof-concept study. most unss were correctly identified and tagged with a safe label, enabling to reduce substantially the total number of pyrosequencing reactions from 40 to 11. this novel multiplex pyrosequencing approach, which integrates the selection of the nucleotide dispensation order with senator and the signals interpretation with adviser-m-pyro reading software, enables therefore to lower the global turnaround time of genotyping and to decrease substantially analytical reagent costs while providing reliable target-specific results.note. for each genomic region, the first column corresponds to the identified uns, while the second column corresponds to the contribution of this uns to the global multiplex pyrosequencing signal. uns contributions lower than two were tagged as unsafe.  
