systems biology invex—a web-based tool for integrative visualization of expression data gene expression or metabolomics data generated from clinical settings are often associated with multiple metadata (i.e. diagnosis , genotype, gender, etc.). it is of great interest to analyze and to visualize the data in these contexts. here, we introduce invexa novel web-based tool that integrates the server-side capabilities for data analysis with the browse-based technology for data visualization. invex has two key features: (i) flexible differential expression analysis for a wide variety of experimental designs; and (ii) interactive visual-ization within the context of metadata and biological annotations. invex has built-in support for gene/metabolite annotation and a fully functional heatmap builder. availability and implementation: freely available at http://www. invex.ca. contact:omics technologies such as microarrays, next-generation sequencing and metabolomics are increasingly used in clinical studies. in many cases, a single dataset will be associated with multiple clinical parameters (metadata) such as diagnosis, genotype, gender and so forth. it is of great interest to analyze and to visualize the data within these contexts as well as biological annotations to enable one to capture dynamic changes that correlate with clinical factors. linear models have proven to be a powerful and flexible approach for analysis of gene expression experiments . however, users need to have a deep understanding of statistical concepts and r language to use this approach properly. heatmaps have proven to be useful in visualizing expression data. heatmaps coupled with clustering have become hallmarks for the presentation of gene expression data. however, most web-based tools provide only static images with limited support for user interactions. interactive visualization is mostly limited to stand-alone tools or java applet plugin . the rapid development of information technology, especially html5 and javascript, has presented new opportunities to overcome this limitation . here, we present invex (integrative visualization of expression data)an intuitive web-based tool that seamlessly integrates server-side capabilities for data analysis and annotation with the browse-based technology for data visualization. invex allows researchers to perform flexible data analysis and to visually explore the results as interactive heatmaps within the context of associated metadata and biological annotations.  
