systems biology ipeap: integrating multiple omics and genetic data for pathway enrichment analysis a challenge in biodata analysis is to understand the underlying phenomena among many interactions in signaling pathways. such study is formulated as the pathway enrichment analysis, which identifies relevant pathways functional enriched in high-throughput data. the question faced here is how to analyze different data types in a unified and integrative way by characterizing pathways that these data simultaneously reveal. to this end, we developed integrative pathway enrichment analysis platform, ipeap, which handles transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and gwas data under a unified aggregation schema. ipeap emphasizes on the ability to aggregate various pathway enrichment results generated in different high-throughput experiments, as well as the quantitative measurements of different ranking results, thus providing the first benchmark platform for integration, comparison and evaluation of multiple types of data and enrichment methods. availability and implementation: ipeap is freely available atas the advent of post-genomic era, omics science and highthroughput technology have generated massive data. quantitative methods are developed to better relate the underline pattern of the data to biologic concepts, like gene ontology terms, biological functions or pathways and so forth. among them, biochemical pathways are the primary focus, and they are extensively used to interpret biological data in a network viewpoint . in particular, pathway overrepresentation and enrichment analyses have become important approaches for the interpretation of data from various high-throughput experiments, which aim at projecting a set of genes, proteins or metabolites onto predefined groups, calculating significance of correlation for each group and then ranking them according to the statistic. correlation statistics can be defined in many ways, and various pathway enrichment analysis algorithms were proposed, like overrepresentation analysis , gene set enrichment analysis , network topology-based approaches spia , deap and so forth. with rapid accumulation of massive and various types of omic and genetic data, the major challenge for pathway analysis now becomes how to analyze different types of data for a given experiment in a unified way and interactively mining the underline functions under these data simultaneously. for a given set of samples, multiple types of high-throughput data, such as the transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and genome-wide association study (gwas) data can be generated at the same time. these data describe the samples from different perspectives, and each of them can be complementary to each other to obtain the unbiased enrichment pathway list. there are a few works existed on the integrative pathway analysis like integrative gwas and gene expression analysis in prostate cancer , impala , mape and so forth. but traditionally only one pathway enrichment algorithm or one specific integration method was provided. to the best of our knowledge, integrative benchmark platforms allowing multiple enrichment and integration algorithms to handle multiple omic and genetic data, together with easy-to-use user interface, are absent. to tackle the multiple data integration problem, we presented a software ipeap, namely integrative pathway enrichment analysis platform, to perform integrative pathway enrichment analysis. it is a java based, user-friendly, graphical tool with the aim of integrating transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and gwas data for pathway level analysis. furthermore, various state-of-art pathway enrichment analysis algorithms for the single data type as well as the quantitative evaluation measurements and tools for pathway ranking were incorporated into ipeap, which are useful for the access, evaluation and comparison of different approaches in one platform.  
