gene expression ipqf: a new peptide-to-protein summarization method using peptide spectra characteristics to improve protein quantification motivation: isobaric labelling techniques such as itraq and tmt are popular methods for relative protein abundance estimation in proteomic studies. however, measurements are assessed at the peptide spectrum level and exhibit substantial heterogeneity per protein. hence, clever summariza-tion strategies are required to infer protein ratios. so far, current methods rely exclusively on quantitative values, while additional information on peptides is available, yet it is not considered in these methods. methods: we present ipqf (isobaric protein quantification based on features) as a novel peptide-to-protein summarization method, which integrates peptide spectra characteristics as well as quantitative values for protein ratio estimation. we investigate diverse features characterizing spectra reliability and reveal significant correlations to ratio accuracy in spectra. as a result, we developed a feature-based weighting of peptide spectra. results: a performance evaluation of ipqf in comparison to nine different protein ratio inference methods is conducted on five published ms2 and ms3 datasets with predefined ground truth. we demonstrate the benefit of using peptide feature information to improve protein ratio estimation. compared to purely quantitative approaches, our proposed strategy achieves increased accuracy by addressing peptide spectra reliability. availability and implementation: the ipqf algorithm is available within the established r/bioconductor package msnbasemass spectrometry based proteomics has evolved as the method of choice for identification and quantification of proteins , and major advances were achieved in the development of new quantification techniques. isobaric labelling techniques such as itraq and tmt have gained much popularity, allowing for simultaneous absolute and relative protein quantification in different samples within a single run . this enables the investigation of changes in protein abundance across various conditions, which is crucial for the study of regulation processes, diagnostics research and biomarker studies. thereby, accuracy in protein ratio estimates plays an essential role. however, accuracy problems in itraq and tmt data have been demonstrated by different studies and reliable protein ratio estimation remains a challenging task. several steps are involved in the quantification process. first, peptides are identified and quantified by itraq or tmt reporter ions in the ms/ms spectra. factors contributing directly to the variability of peptide quantitative estimates include: efficiency of protein v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com digestion and labeling, co-eluting peptides, reporter ion peak detection, intensity assessment, label interference and a limited dynamic range of the instrument . a frequently reported bias is the underestimation of ratios and its compression towards one, which is supposed to arise from co-eluting peptides . several approaches address these issues by proposing specific sample preparations , intensity calculation methods and correction strategies . further ms3 data acquisition is considered as a new promising strategy to reduce and potentially eliminate the peptide interference effect . the next major step in this process is the inference from peptides to proteins. measurements of label intensities are assessed at the spectra level and subsequently a summarization strategy is needed to estimate the corresponding protein ratios. generally, all peptide spectra assigned to a protein are assumed to share the same expression profile. indeed substantial variance heterogeneity is observed due to random and systematic biases . the question arises how a peptide-to-protein summarization method can appropriately address this existing variance heterogeneity. different studies demonstrated that the coefficient of variance is dependent on the absolute signal intensity, suffering from higher variation in low-intensity than in high-intensity data . therefore different summarization methods were developed to account for these intensity-dependent effects by filtering for low intensity peptides , weighting peptides according to their absolute intensities or by applying a variance stabilization method . other approaches examine the error structure and the underlying ratio distributions and develop noise models accordingly . further, standard statistical concepts, such as averaging by mean or median, are still one of the most commonly used methods to find protein ratio estimates from a range of peptide quantities. multiple tools and comprehensive itraq quantification pipelines either offer or are exclusively based on simple median or weighted mean calculations for protein ratio inference . additionally, strategies for filtering outlying peptide ratios are frequently proposed, including methods like grubbs and dixons test . a different category of approaches requires the integration of replicate samples or spike-in proteins to enable an assessment of the internal experimental variation . all these summarization methods have in common that they only focus on quantitative peptide information in order to infer protein quantities. so far, the main feature, which is extensively studied and related to the reliability of peptide quantities, is the absolute intensity signal. however, there are several additional characteristics of peptides available, which are known to have an impact on the overall reliability of a specific peptide and its measurements. in this work, we identify and investigate the impact of diverse peptide spectra features such as charge state, sequence length, identification score, mass and a distance metric within uniquely and redundantly measured spectra. we examine how these features correlate with the variance heterogeneity and to which extent they are related to quantification accuracy in spectra. our aim is to find a combination of feature criteria that allows inferring ratio reliability by using the complementary strength of the features. as a result, we developed ipqf which integrates the information of peptide spectra characteristics with given quantitative values. we show the added value of peptide spectra feature information to improve protein ratio estimation. the proposed algorithm can be combined with any purely quantitative approach. in addition, a fundamental intention was not to disregard any information, but rather to keep peptide spectrum matches and down weight unreliable spectra according to the features instead of losing information by filtering. further, no internal replicates or specific sample setup in the design of itraq and tmt experiments is required which may restrict applicability. finally, we evaluate the performance of our approach on five different published itraq and tmt datasets providing a ground truth of known peptide and protein quantities. thereby, we consider three ms2 datasets with minimal amount of biases, one ms2 dataset showing a high peptide interference effect as well as one ms3 dataset. a comparison study with nine commonly used peptide-to-protein summarization methods is conducted. to our knowledge, this is also the most comprehensive comparison study of summarization methods.inference of protein ratios based on heterogeneous peptide spectra measurements remains a crucial issue, which receives little consideration in most quantification pipelines. in this work, we present a new summarization strategy ipqf, which integrates spectra characteristics with quantitative values for protein ratio estimation. we investigate different peptide spectra features and reveal significant correlations between features and quantification accuracy. as a result, we are able to show the added value of feature information to achieve improved protein ratio accuracy. peptide spectra features contain valuable information in addition to pure quantitative information. since no individual feature shows near-perfect correlation to quantification error, the combination of features can be crucial to compensate for failures of individual features and to make use of their diverse strengths. overall, it is unlikely that a peptide spectrum is mischaracterized by a large set of features at the same time. in particular, proteins with a high diversity of underlying feature values profit from the approach, while feature uniformity naturally reduces the impact by giving similar weights to spectra. this is primarily relevant for proteins holding a small to medium number of peptide spectrum matches exhibiting ratio variation. here particularly, benefit of the ipqf approach is shown. in cases of large numbers of peptide spectra the feature impact is decreased and approaches using the mean already perform considerably well. another prerequisite for successful protein ratio estimation is that peptide ratio measurements are spread around the true protein ratio value. the best protein quantification method still remains dependent on given peptide quantities, and cannot work if peptide values coherently and systematically diverge from the ground truth. feature and quantification error correlation will also not necessarily be sufficiently strong in these divergent cases as the error is strongly biased. a major issue in itraq and tmt datasets is the peptide interference effect which causes the underestimation of ratios and its compression towards one. ms3 data acquisition has proven to significantly reduce the interference effect. evaluation of ipqf approaches also confirms the applicability in ms3 data settings and still shows a robust performance under interference impact compared to other methods. the flexible design of the algorithm enables further extensions. one option is to join results of a purely quantitative method with estimations obtained by ipqf to benefit from both strategies. here, we provide a combination of ipqf with medianpolish and show significant improvements over both individual methods in our results. the advantage of a joined approach is that in case of few peptide spectra per protein additional feature knowledge can compensate for the sparse information in the quantitative setup, while more sophisticated summarization strategies can be applied with rich quantitative information available. further, a different option is to exclusively employ the spectra feature-based reliability measure provided by ipqf and integrate it in existing summarization approaches. beyond this, new and relevant features of interest can be easily added to the implemented feature framework. generally, the idea of a feature-based spectra weighting is transferable beyond itraq data. while our studies only focus on feature-error-correlations in itraq and tmt data, similar findings are expected for silac as well as label-free data. algorithmic steps of ipqf are technically applicable to quantitative proteomic methods requiring peptide summarization, but careful evaluation in the context of the specific experiment is necessary. moreover our proposed approach is independent of using replicate samples or spike-in proteins, independent of the instrument, and the selected multiplex. further, in contrast to modelling approaches mostly requiring larger numbers of peptide spectra, ipqf is also applicable in small settings. also no assumption concerning underlying ratio distributions or specific data criteria is required. hence, we also chose replicate independent summarization methods and use corresponding settings in tools, such as isobar , for evaluation comparison. in addition, a fundamental intention was to keep peptide spectra by applying a feature based weighting instead of losing information by filtering. filtering of low-intensity spectra or outlier ratios is commonly performed; however this significantly reduces the protein coverage as few peptide readings per protein typically dominate the datasets . further, defining a cutoff for outlier filtering is a critical issue as important information is potentially discarded. overall, we provide a broad performance comparison of nine different protein ratio inference methods on five published datasets with predefined ground truth. to the best of our knowledge, an overall benchmark study of current methods assessing diverse biases and impact on protein ratio accuracy in itraq/tmt data is missing. here, we also provide a basis for future comparison of summarization methods.the goal of the protein quantification process is the inference of protein quantities based on peptide quantities. however, peptide ratios assigned to a protein exhibit substantial heterogeneity and require clever summarization strategies. we present ipqf, which integrates peptide spectra characteristics as well as quantitative values for protein ratio estimation. the novelty of the algorithm is to weight spectra according to their feature reliability. comprehensive evaluation of ipqf in comparison to other summarization methods yields a superior and robust performance. as a result, the benefit of feature information to achieve improved protein ratio accuracy is shown.  
