sequence analysis iptm-mlys: identifying multiple lysine ptm sites and their different types motivation: post-translational modification, abbreviated as ptm, refers to the change of the amino acid side chains of a protein after its biosynthesis. owing to its significance for in-depth understanding various biological processes and developing effective drugs, prediction of ptm sites in proteins have currently become a hot topic in bioinformatics. although many computational methods were established to identify various single-label ptm types and their occurrence sites in proteins , no method has ever been developed for multi-label ptm types. as one of the most frequently observed ptms, the k-ptm, namely, the modification occurring at lysine (k), can be usually accommodated with many different types, such as acetylation, crotonylation, methylation and succi-nylation. now we are facing an interesting challenge: given an uncharacterized protein sequence containing many k residues, which ones can accommodate two or more types of ptm, which ones only one, and which ones none? results: to address this problem, a multi-label predictor called iptm-mlys has been developed. it represents the first multi-label ptm predictor ever established. the novel predictor is featured by incorporating the sequence-coupled effects into the general pseaac, and by fusing an array of basic random forest classifiers into an ensemble system. rigorous cross-validations via a set of multi-label metrics indicate that the first multi-label ptm predictor is very promising and encouraging. availability and implementation: for the convenience of most experimental scientists, a user-friendly web-server for iptm-mlys has been established at http://www.jci-bioinfo.cn/iptm-mlys, by which users can easily obtain their desired results without the need to go through the complicated mathematical equations involved.post-translational modification (ptm or ptlm) means the change of the amino acid side chains of a protein after its biosynthesis. since the importance of ptm to basic research and drug development, identification of ptm sites in proteins has become a very hot topic in bioinformatics . among the 20 native amino acid residues, the modification at lysine (k), the so-called k-ptm, is one of the most frequently observed ptms. furthermore, some lys residues in proteins can undergo sequential or cascades of covalent modifications; i.e. they can be targeted by various different k-ptm types, such as acetylation, biotinylation, butyrylation, crotonylation, methylation, propionylation, succinylation, ubiquitination and ubiquitin-like modifications. meanwhile, various computational methods have been developed to predict the modification sites in proteins for different k-ptm types . but to our best knowledge, so far no computational tool whatsoever can be used to deal with the system that simultaneously contains several different k-ptm types or multiplex lys residues. actually, this kind of multiplex lys residues in proteins may have some exceptional functions worthy of our special notice for both basic research and drug development. in view of this, the present study was initiated in an attempt to fill such an empty field by establishing a novel method that can be used to predict the multiple k-type modifications in proteins. according to the chous five-step guidelines and followed by many investigators in a series of recent publications (, b, c, d, e;), for developing a new prediction method that can be widely used by broad users, we should consider the following five points: (i) how to construct or select a valid benchmark dataset to train and test the predictor; (ii) how to formulate the biological sequence samples with an effective mathematical expression that can truly reflect their essential correlation with the target concerned; (iii) how to introduce or develop a powerful algorithm (or engine) to run the prediction; (iv) how to properly conduct cross-validation tests to objectively evaluate the anticipated accuracy; (v) how to provide a web-server and user guide to make people very easily to get their desired results. in the rest of this article, we are to address these point by point.there are many existing computational predictors for identifying the ptm sites in proteins; all of them are for the single-label ptm systems but not for the multi-label ones. the iptm-mlys presented in this paper represents the first web-server ever established that can be use to deal with both single-and multi-label ptm systems. it has not escaped our notice that, similar to the current multi-label kptm, the other ptm systems such as c-ptm, r-ptm and s-ptm do also have their corresponding multi-label ptm sites at cys, arg and ser residues, respectively. likewise, the approach and formulations proposed in this article can be used to analyze them as well. to maximize the users convenience, a step-by-step guide has been provided, by which users can easily get their desired results without the need to go through the complicated mathematical equations. although the current iptm-mlys predictor is limited to analyze the multi-label systems of four different k-ptm types, with more experimental data available in future, we will update it with a new version to cover more types as well, such as biotinylation, butyrylation, propionylation and ubiquitination. by that time, an announcement will be given in the website http://www.jci-bioinfo. cn/iptm-mlys.  
