data and text mining irootlab: a free and open-source matlab toolbox for vibrational biospectroscopy data analysis irootlab is a free and open-source matlab toolbox for vibrational biospectroscopy (vbs) data analysis. it offers an object-oriented programming class library, graphical user interfaces (guis) and automatic matlab code generation. the class library contains a large number of methods, concepts and visualizations for vbs data analysis, some of which are introduced in the toolbox. the guis provide an interface to the class library, including a module to merge several spectral files into a dataset. automatic code allows developers to quickly write vbs data analysis scripts and is a unique resource among tools for vbs. documentation includes a manual, tutorials, doxygen-generated reference and a demonstration showcase. irootlab can handle some of the most popular file formats used in vbs. license: gnu-lgpl. availability: official website: http://irootlab.vibrational biospectroscopy (vbs) is the application of infrared and raman spectroscopy to biological studies and biomedical applications . in the past decades, vibrational spectroscopy data processing was developed on the grounds of signal processing, statistics and pattern recognition, resulting in a large number of computational methods that are routinely applied in the field. however, the field needs further development and establishment of data analysis strategies, partially owing to a continuous push from instrumental advancements, but also motivated by challenges in pre-processing, biomarker extraction and standardization of inter-experimental datasets, and inspired by the increasing power of computers . vbs data analysis is largely carried out by commercial softwares such as cytospec (www.cytospec.com), neurodeveloper (www.neurodeveloper.com), unscrambler (www.camo.com), pirouette (www.infometrix.com), opus (www.bruker.com) and wire (www.renishaw.com). popularly used commercial matlab toolboxes include the neural network and the bioinformatics toolbox. others are free to use, but closed-source, such as prtools and ga_ors . while these are all high-quality software, the use of closed-source software contradicts the multidisciplinary aspect of the field, as researchers looking for new analysis strategies remain dependant from the software manufacturers. on the other hand, open-source softwares available are largely restricted to a given task, such as libsvm , functional data analysis toolbox and various other resources available online. irootlab is a free/libre and open-source (foss) matlab toolbox created to fulfil the need for foss software encompassing every stage of vbs data analysis. it is a highly modular software that was created based on existing theory of data analysis , and as such, applied to vbs , bringing together families of methods such as outlier removal, pre-processing, feature extraction, feature selection, feature construction, classification, classifier aggregation, clustering; concepts such as cross-validation, random sub-sampling, peak detection, biomarker identification; a set of unique visualization options (supplementary) and a matlab code generator. the basic modular design is simple, which makes irootlab a flexible and intuitive resource for vibrational spectroscopy data analysis developers.  
