databases and ontologies irview: a database and viewer for protein interacting regions proteinprotein interactions (ppis) are mediated through specific regions on proteins. some proteins have two or more protein interacting regions (irs) and some irs are competitively used for interactions with different proteins. irview currently contains data for 3417 irs in human and mouse proteins. the data were obtained from different sources and combined with annotated region data from interpro. information on non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism sites and variable regions owing to alternative mrna splicing is also included. the irview web interface displays all ir data, including user-uploaded data, on reference sequences so that the positional relationship between irs can be easily understood. irview should be useful for analyzing underlying relationships between the proteins behind the ppi networks. availability: irview is publicly available on the web atproteinprotein interactions (ppis) and their networks play central roles in governing cellular processes. recently, much effort has been put in to collecting binary interaction data (e.g.) to dissect ppi networks. these interaction data have been compiled in public biomolecular interaction databases. for example, biogrid and intact are major molecular interaction databases of ppis. these databases primarily contain ppi data at the protein level, namely pairs of protein names. two recent articles, one of them from our group, have reported large-scale experimental data on region-or domain-based protein interactions determined by high-throughput methods in human and in caenorhabditis elegans . usually, proteins interact with other proteins through regions (the interacting regions, irs) that are specific to each interaction; therefore, simultaneous interactions with multiple proteins are possible . furthermore, some irs are competitively involved in interactions with different proteins. to whom correspondence should be addressed.to comprehend the complicated relations underlying ppis in more detail, further refined interaction data are required. in this article, we describe irview, a database and viewer for irs of proteins, which focuses on the regions required for ppis. irview contains, as a primary data source, irs that were determined using the in vitro virus (ivv) method (human data:) and the yeast two-hybrid (y2h) method. domino is a database of domain domain interactions that is similar in scope to irview. domino stores data on irs described in the scientific literature and applies the existing domain/motif names from the interpro database to each of the irs. the ir data in irview include interpro domain/motif regions but are not restricted to the interpro annotations. users can also compare irs with variable sites susceptible to non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nssnps) and variable regions arising from alternative mrna splicing. irview also supports a viewer that allows users to compare the positional relationships of irs in protein reference sequences and in 3d structures (when available). irview should be useful for investigating the hidden relationships between the proteins behind protein interaction networks.  
