data and text mining isocor: correcting ms data in isotope labeling experiments mass spectrometry (ms) is widely used for isotopic labeling studies of metabolism and other biological processes. quantitative applicationse.g. metabolic flux analysisrequire tools to correct the raw ms data for the contribution of all naturally abundant isotopes. isocor is a software that allows such correction to be applied to any chemical species. hence it can be used to exploit any isotopic tracer, from well-known (13 c, 15 n, 18 o, etc) to unusual (57 fe, 77 se, etc) isotopes. it also provides new featurese.g. correction for the isotopic purity of the tracerto improve the accuracy of quantitative isotopic studies, and implements an efficient algorithm to process large datasets. its user-friendly interface makes isotope labeling experiments more accessible to a wider biological community. availability: isocor is distributed under opensource license atmass spectrometry (ms) is extensively used for stable isotopic studies of metabolism. during the last decade, quantitative approachessuch as 13 c metabolic flux analysishave been increasingly used in the fields of systems biology and biotechnology to provide novel biological insights and improve industrial processes . in such experiments, the different labeled formsor isotopologuesof metabolites are quantified by the fine exploitation of isotopic clusters in ms spectra . these clusters also contain information on all other isotopes that occur naturally in the molecules. to extract meaningful labeling informationi.e. isotopologue distributionthe contribution of naturally occurring isotopes first has to be subtracted. this can be achieved using publicly available software such as mscorr developed under matlab or the algorithm developed in perl by . however, the former software is only applicable to 13 c-labeling experiments and the latter is restricted to the correction of ultra-high resolution ms data for natural abundance of 13 c or 15 n. here, we present a novel software to correct ms data, isocor, which includes the following features:). for molecules containing a high number of atoms, the number of possible combinations to be calculated is high which can cause a bottleneck in the correction process. in probability theory, the probability distribution of the sum of independent variables is the convolution of their individual distributions. therefore, the calculation can be performed faster by iteratively convolving the isotopic vectors v a = [p(a(1)),,p(a(x))] of all the atomsexcept those of the label tracerwhere p(a(x)) denotes the natural abundance of the x-th isotope of the atom a. finally, the contribution of the tracer is added by convolving the previous isotopic cluster i-1 times by the purity vector of the tracer (e.g. [0.01, 0.99] for a purity of 99), and n-i times by its natural abundance (e.g. [0.9893, 0.0107] in a 13 c-labeling experiment) when it has to be corrected.  
