a multiobjective memetic algorithm for ppi network alignment motivation: there recently has been great interest in aligning proteinprotein interaction (ppi) networks to identify potentially orthologous proteins between species. it is thought that the topo-logical information contained in these networks will yield better orthology predictions than sequence similarity alone. recent work has found that existing aligners have difficulty making use of both topological and sequence similarity when aligning, with either one or the other being better matched. this can be at least partially attributed to the fact that existing aligners try to combine these two potentially conflicting objectives into a single objective. results: we present optnetalign, a multiobjective memetic algorithm for the problem of ppi network alignment that uses extremely efficient swap-based local search, mutation and crossover operations to create a population of alignments. this algorithm optimizes the conflicting goals of topological and sequence similarity using the concept of pareto dominance, exploring the tradeoff between the two objectives as it runs. this allows us to produce many high-quality candidate alignments in a single run. our algorithm produces alignments that are much better compromises between topological and biological match quality than previous work, while better characterizing the diversity of possible good alignments between two networks. our aligners results have several interesting implications for future research on alignment evaluation, the design of network alignment objectives and the interpretation of alignment results. availability and implementation: the c source code to our program, along with compilation and usage instructions, is available at httpsas the sizes of known proteinprotein interaction (ppi) networks grow, so does interest in analyzing them. one of the more ambitious efforts in this area is aligning the ppi networks of two different species, with the goal of identifying orthologous proteins as well as shared pathways and complexes that hint at the ppi network of a common ancestor. there has already been a good deal of progress in this area, with past work reporting success in finding large shared subnetworks between saccharomyces cerevisiae and homo sapiens, as well as success in reconstructing phylogeny based on network overlap discovered by an aligner . despite these successes, ppi network alignment is a young research area. the incomplete, noisy nature of existing ppi networks makes alignment difficult, with existing aligners performing dramatically better on noise-free synthetic networks compared with noisy real-world networks . furthermore, it has been found that the two objectives of biological and topological fit that these aligners optimize conflict to a larger extent than previously realized. different aligners construct alignments that are dramatically different, with some optimizing topological fit at the v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com 1988doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv063 advance access publication date: 9 february 2015 original paper expense of sequence similarity, while others do the opposite. while some of these aligners provide a user-controlled parameter for adjusting between optimizing one objective over the other, even when this parameter is adjusted as widely as possible, existing aligners only output alignments in small, non-overlapping regions of objective space that are often quite distant from each other . lastly, these aligners tend to produce very different alignments, sometimes agreeing on as few as 5 of their total aligned pairs , which makes it necessary for the user to run many different aligners to get an idea of the many alignments possible. the difficulties with the conflict between topological and biological fit, and the disparate results of existing aligners, show that the problem of ppi network alignment is far from solved. to this end, we introduce a multiobjective memetic algorithm, optnetalign (optimizing network aligner), for performing network alignment. unlike most existing aligners which use custom-built estimators of node similarity which dont always have a clear connection to final alignment quality, we use a multiobjective memetic algorithm , which can produce a large number of diverse, high quality alignments in a single run. our approach is able to better optimize both the topological and sequence similarity of the proteins aligned, and instead of arbitrarily emitting a single alignment at one point in objective space, optnetalign produces a pareto front of alignments that characterize the wide variety of possible tradeoffs between the conflicting objectives of network alignment. this tends to produce a wider variety of alignments than using all previously created aligners together, and these alignments tend to be comparable to or of better quality than those produced by previous aligners.  
