isoform-level ribosome occupancy estimation guided by transcript abundance with ribomap ribosome profiling is a recently developed high-throughput sequencing technique that captures approximately 30 bp long ribosome-protected mrna fragments during translation. because of alternative splicing and repetitive sequences, a ribosome-protected read may map to many places in the transcriptome, leading to discarded or arbitrary mappings when standard approaches are used. we present a technique and software that addresses this problem by assigning reads to potential origins proportional to estimated transcript abundance. this yields a more accurate estimate of ribosome profiles compared with a na ve mapping. availability and implementation: ribomap is available as open source atribosome profiling (ribo-seq) provides snapshots of the positions of translating ribosomes by sequencing ribosome-protected fragments . the distribution of ribo-seq footprints along a transcript, called the ribosome profile, can be used to analyze translational regulation and discover alternative initiation , alternative translation and frameshifting , and may eventually lead to a better understanding of the regulation of cell growth, the progression of aging and the development of diseases . different environmental conditions such as stress or starvation alter the ribosome profile patterns , indicating possible changes in translational regulation. in higher eukaryotes, alternative transcription initiation, premrna splicing, and 3 0 end formation result in the production of multiple isoforms for most genes. the resulting isoforms can have dramatically different effects on mrna stability and translation regulation . however, to date ribosome profiling analyses have been conducted at the gene, rather than isoform, level using either a single rate of ribomap is 50 compared to 7 if only uniquely mapped reads are used. estimation of mrna isoform abundance from rna-seq has also had to deal with ambiguous mappings . however, unlike in rnaseq, coverage in ribo-seq is highly non-uniform regardless of sequencing bias since ribosomes move along mrnas at non-uniform rates, and it is in fact the non-uniformities that are of interest . further, ambiguous mappings are much worse for ribo-seq data since the read length cannot exceed the ribosome size (approximately 30 bp), while paired-end and longer reads can be generated from rna-seq experiments to reduce the problem of ambiguous mappings. methods developed for transcript abundance are therefore not applicable to assigning ribo-seq reads. by observing that ambiguous mappings are mainly caused by multiple isoforms (supplementary), ribomap assigns riboseq reads to locations using estimated transcript abundance of the candidate locations. on synthetic data, our approach yields a more precise estimation of ribosome profiles compared with a pure mapping-based approach. further, the ribosome abundance derived using our method correlates better with the transcript abundance on real ribo-seq data.  
