data and text mining isomir bank: a research resource for tracking isomirs next-generation sequencing (ngs) technology has revealed that micrornas (mirnas) are capable of exhibiting frequent differences from their corresponding mature reference sequences , generating multiple variants: the isoforms of mirnas (isomirs). these isomirs mainly originate via the imprecise and alternative cleavage during the pre-mirna processing and post-transcriptional modifications that influence mirna stability, their sub-cellular localization and target selection. although several tools for the identification of isomir have been reported, no bio-informatics resource dedicated to gather isomirs from public ngs data and to provide functional analysis of these isomirs is available to date. thus, a free online database, isomir bank has been created to integrate isomirs detected by our previously published algorithm cpss. in total, 2727 samples (small rna ngs data downloaded from arrayexpress) from eight species (arabidopsis thaliana, drosophila melanogaster, danio rerio, homo sapiens, mus musculus, oryza sativa, solanum lycopersicum and zea mays) are analyzed. at present, 308 919 isomirs from 4706 mature mirnas are collected into isomir bank. in addition, isomir bank provides target prediction and enrichment analysis to evaluate the effects of isomirs on target selection. availability and implementation: isomir bank is implemented in php/perl mysql r format and can be freely accessed atmicrornas (mirnas), with average length of 22 nucleotides, are ubiquitously expressed and regulate many essential biological processes mainly via post-transcriptional silencing of genes through mrna decay and/or translational repression . during this process, the primary mirna transcripts (pri-mirnas) are mainly cleaved by). previously, mirnas were only annotated as the canonical sequences. however, extensive application of highthroughput sequencing technology to detect expression profile of mirna has revealed that mirnas can frequently exhibit differences from their corresponding canonical mature sequences, generating multiple variants known as isoforms of mirnas (isomirs) . generally, the reference mirbase mirna (having the canonical sequence) often differs from the most abundant isomir . there are two main processes that lead to the production of isomirs. these isomirs mainly originate via the imprecise and alternative cleavage (not completely random) during the pre-mirna processing and post-transcriptional modifications that have influence on mirna stability, their sub-cellular localization and target selection . on the other hand, mirna editing is the process that generates isomirs by post-transcriptional enzymatic editing of the mirna genome . it has also been reported recently that isomirs can significantly affect the half-life of mirna, as well as their sub-cellular localization and their target specification . here, we have established a database, isomir bank, to support and facilitate the ongoing isomirs research. our database contains 308 919 isomirs detected from 2727 samples (small rna ngs data downloaded from arrayexpress database) of eight species (arabidopsis thaliana, drosophila melanogaster, danio rerio, homo sapiens, mus musculus, oryza sativa, solanum lycopersicum and zea mays) with manually curated metadata for each sample (organism, sex, tissue, development stage, age, experiment condition, treatment and sequencing platform). isomir bank also has a user-friendly web interface allowing researchers to quickly find and navigate the isomirs of their interest and related annotation along with the functional analysis that can help in evaluating the effects of isomir on target selection and downstream pathways. our database is not only a collection of isomirs from ngs data but also a tool to find out the candidate functional isomirs for further experimental studies. range from 1 to 1850, and other statistical analysis for isomirs in isomir bank are provided in supplementary information). we analyzed a number of isomirs shared between any two species among the eight species in the database. interestingly, many isomirs are conserved in animals or plants, but a specific isomir of animals could not be found in plants and vice versa (supplementary). this observation is consistent with previous studies showing few mirnas were known to be structurally or functionally conserved between plants and animals . moreover, we observed that more conserved isomirs could be found within two species having closer genetic/evolutionary relationship (supplementary  
