bioinformatics discovery note sequence analysis isomirid: a framework to identify microrna isoforms micrornas (mirnas) have been extensively studied owing to their important regulatory roles in genic expression. an increasingly number of reports are performing extensive data mining in small rna sequencing libraries to detect mirnas isoforms and also 5 0 and 3 0 post-transcriptional nucleotide additions, as well as edited mirnas sequences. a ready to use pipeline, isomirid, was developed to standardize and automatize the search for mirnas isoforms in high-throughput small rna sequencing libraries. availability: isomirid is a command line python script available atseveral high-throughput small rna (srna) sequencing projects have increased the discovery and number of small non-coding rnas related to gene expression regulation. micrornas (mirnas) are endogenous srnas with 1924 nt in length . to regulate protein-coding genes, mature mirna binds in the mrna target sites leading to their degradation or repression of translation . recently, reports have demonstrated the existence of isomirs . the isomir classification relies in three major categories: 5 0 , 3 0 and polymorphic isomirs, with the sub classification of 5 0 and 3 0 isomirs into templated or non-templated modifications, according to the mirna precursor sequence . furthermore, efforts have been made to identify and understand the biological processes where non-templated nucleotides are added in the 3 0 end of mature mirnas, altering the mirna stability and efficiency . nucleotide additions at the 5 0 end have also been reported altering the mirna seed region and consequently its functionality . several isomir variants have been discovered with deep sequencing technologies. some of these variations may have biological origin and functions, once the modifications were seen repeatedly at the same sites with higher frequencies than random errors . to improve and automate the search for isomirs in srna sequenced libraries, we developed a simplified workflow. isomirid allows the identification of 5 0 , 3 0 and polymorphic isomirs based on the canonical mirna known sequence and also from other regions on the same mirna precursor. additionally, the program can also identify non-templated 5 0 or 3 0 end variations by mapping the srnas in the known premirnas. this framework is a simple method to identify and compare isomirs abundance in different sequencing libraries, providing an initial view for biological relevant isomirs. we also highlight that this pipeline could be applied to study isomirs from plants, animals or any other living organisms. was tested on linux and mac osx environment and settled in a simple and standardized text file (see supplementary file 1). with the use of this configuration file, it is possible to set more than one input srna sequencing file to be analyzed and compared. sequence files can be in fastq or fasta format. the filtering process using reference genome or transcriptome is optional, as well as the abundance cutoff, which can be applied for more than one value (e.g. 10, 50 and 100) corresponding to the reads sum in all libraries analyzed.  
