is-rsnp: a novel technique for in silico regulatory snp detection motivation: determining the functional impact of non-coding disease-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) identified by genome-wide association studies (gwas) is challenging. many of these snps are likely to be regulatory snps (rsnps): variations which affect the ability of a transcription factor (tf) to bind to dna. however, experimental procedures for identifying rsnps are expensive and labour intensive. therefore, in silico methods are required for rsnp prediction. by scoring two alleles with a tf position weight matrix (pwm), it can be determined which snps are likely rsnps. however, predictions in this manner are noisy and no method exists that determines the statistical significance of a nucleotide variation on a pwm score. results: we have designed an algorithm for in silico rsnp detection called is-rsnp. we employ novel convolution methods to determine the complete distributions of pwm scores and ratios between allele scores, facilitating assignment of statistical significance to rsnp effects. we have tested our method on 41 experimentally verified rsnps, correctly predicting the disrupted tf in 28 cases. we also analysed 146 disease-associated snps with no known functional impact in an attempt to identify candidate rsnps. of the 11 significantly predicted disrupted tfs, 9 had previous evidence of being associated with the disease in the literature. these results demonstrate that is-rsnp is suitable for high-throughput screening of snps for potential regulatory function. this is a useful and important tool in the interpretation of gwas. availability: is-rsnp software is available for use at: www.genomics .genome-wide association studies (gwas) aim to find single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) that are linked to a particular disease or trait phenotype. disease-associated snps residing in coding regions, specifically non-synonymous mutations, are generally easy to interpret in terms of their likely functional impact. however, unravelling the functional impact of snps residing outside coding regions is more challenging. one appealing functional role for non-coding disease associated snps is that they are regulatory snps (rsnps). that is, they alter the binding affinity of a transcription factor (tf) to the dna, which in turn alters the expression of certain genes, consequently contributing to the to whom correspondence should be addressed. disease phenotype. finding these rsnps is difficult, since they can be obscured by the potentially large number of snps present in a linkage-disequilibrium block, and the experimental procedures involved can be expensive and labour intensive. therefore, in silico approaches for identifying candidate rsnps are required to improve the efficiency of interpretation of non-coding disease-associated snps. previous attempts at finding rsnps have relied largely on prediction of tf binding sites that overlap snps . this approach typically produces large numbers of false positives, as many snps will not significantly alter the binding affinity of a tf given the degenerate nature of tf binding sites. an improvement to this approach looked at the difference in binding site score between two alleles using a position weight matrix (pwm;). the reasoning here is that snps generating larger pwm score differences are considered more likely to be rsnps than those generating smaller differences. however, the paper presenting this method demonstrated that without the use of additional information such as phylogenetic footprinting, discovery of rsnps was not possible considering only differences in binding score affinities using pwms . more recently, however, a method which looks at normalizing the score distributions of pwms was used so that observed changes were comparable between pwms . in this case the pwm scores are not used directly, but a modified affinity score is used to represent the binding affinity. a fourier transform is used to calculate the complete distribution of affinity scores, consequently allowing the computation of a p-value for observed scores. the ratio of p-values of affinity scores between two alleles can then be used to determine if the tf binding site is likely to be disrupted. this approach is shown to be successful through comparison against a set of known rsnps. the output of this approach, however, is a large list of pwms ranked by the log ratio of the score p-values. unfortunately in this case, there is no clear way of an appropriate cutoff point to distinguish true and false prediction. this makes interpretation of results difficult, especially when screening large numbers of snps. in this article, we propose a new technique for in silico rsnp detection (called is-rsnp). while our approach is similar to that of, there are some essential differences. notably, our approach yields predictions with statistical significance, facilitating interpretable screening across and comparison between large numbers of snps. rather than an affinity score , we use scores generated from the pwm directly. this facilitates a simple and efficient approach for calculating the distribution pwm scores via direct computation of convolution. this method also allows the computation of distributions of p-valuepage: i525 i524i530we evaluated the performance of is-rsnp on two types of data. first, we compiled a set of 41 known rsnps [4 from the literature and 37 from oreganno (for which there was empirical evidence showing the impact of the allelic variation on the binding of a functionally critical tf. we ran is-rsnp on each of these snps to see if the correct tf was identified. we also analysed the same data using strap and compared the output with is-rsnp. secondly, we extracted 146 disease-associated snps from the published catalogue of gwass that had been classified as intergenic, and screened them for potential rsnps. the goal here was to see if the tf predicted by is-rsnp as being disrupted had prior evidence of being associated with the disease. if this association was present, it would suggest that our predicted rsnps are likely to have a functional impact on the disease via a disease-associated tf. note: a comparison with strap was not done using this data as the lack of statistical significance associated with predictions output by strap makes it unsuitable for this type of analysis.shows the results of applying is-rsnp to four different rsnps. each of these rsnps has previous empirical evidence to show that the nucleotide variation disrupts the binding of a particular tf. is-rsnp was used to screen each snp with all human pwms in the transfac database. this resulted in a ranked list of pwms that have a significant change in pwm score between the alleles. for each rsnp, the predictions were thresholded at bh corrected p 0.05 and are reported in. in each of four cases there is a match between the predicted disrupted tf and the tf reported to be disrupted in the original studies (highlighted in bold). in the case of the fetal growth disorder rsnp , and the blood pressure regulation rsnp , the most significant hit matches the reported tf. an interesting point to note is that there are multiple positive hits for oct1, ap2 and e2f. this is due to the fact that many matrices are similar for the same tf family. these multiple matrices provide additional evidence for a bona fide binding site. in addition to these four rsnps, we also analysed 37 known rsnps extracted from oreganno . out of those 41 (= 4+37), 28 snps had the matching tf bound (pwm score p 0.001 bh corrected) to one of the alleles, and in each of these cases a significant i527isrsnp (n=28)personalized medicine aspires to develop a panel of targeted drugs that can correct imbalances in biochemical and cell biological processes that lead to disease states. for example, cancers that arise from brca1 mutations are specifically prone to parp inhibitors. to exploit disease-associated snps to derive novel drug targets, insight to the mechanistic link between the allelic variation and the disease is required. this link is particularly difficult to derive when a snp is positioned between genes. also attenuating progress in the field is the immense difficulty to functionally validate the biological impact of single base substitution in a regulatory element in the genome, as knock-in experiments are very expensive and labour intensive. thus, identifying in silico means to assess the likelihood of allelic variation to impact the function of a given tf on a specific target gene could accelerate the progress from gwas to personalized medicine. this work offers to capitalize on the central dogma of transcription regulation, and identify novel links between targetable tfs and disease states, if their cognate binding to critical targets in the genome is affected by the dna sequence variation. we show here that it is possible with high degree of confidence to identify novel tf-disease links through the comparison of the allelic variation with the sequence constraints of all known tfs. beyond reproducing 28 validated cases, we further identify 11 such links (there are multiple matrices for a single tf, the same tf may be reported for the same snp. these snps show particularly strong evidence for altering the tfbs. b when the risk is allele is not known, the variation is ordered by frequency: common/rare.only results that show a significant (bh corrected p 0.01) change in tf binding affinity between the alleles are included. columns 1 and 2 provide information about the disease and associated snp. columns 3 and 4 state the base change between normal and disease state and whether this results in a loss or gain in binding site. columns 57 outline the tf predicted to be disrupted by the allele and the p-value associated with the change. column 8, if present, contains a reference to prior evidence that the predicted tf is known to be associated with the disease. the final column provides the p-value of the enrichment of tf binding sites around genes shown to be differentially expressed in the disease, significant values (bh corrected p 0.05) are highlighted in bold. 146 published disease-associated snps, 8 for which the disrupted tf is reported to be associated with the disease in the literature. following on from these significant predictions, further rsnps for the same disease and same tf can be identified (yy1:aids/hiv, oct1:asthma, supplementary, threshold p 0.05). this is a proof of principle that the aim of is-rsnp is achievable, however, we envisage a few improvements to is-rsnp that would increase its value significantly. only 5 of the 11 snps inshowed both forms of evidence of the predicted disrupted tf being associated with the disease. this is not unexpected as most of the gwas studies use bulk  
