sequence analysis java bioinformatics analysis web services for multiple sequence alignment—jabaws:msa jabaws is a web services framework that simplifies the deployment of web services for bioinformatics. jabaws:msa provides services for five multiple sequence alignment (msa) methods (probcons, t-coffee, muscle, mafft and clustalw), and is the system employed by the jalview multiple sequence analysis workbench since version 2.6. a fully functional, easy to set up server is provided as a virtual appliance (va), which can be run on most operating systems that support a virtualization environment such as vmware or oracle virtualbox. jabaws is also distributed as a web application archive (war) and can be configured to run on a single computer and/or a cluster managed by grid engine, lsf or other queuing systems that support drmaa. jabaws:msa provides clients full access to each applications parameters, allows administrators to specify named parameter preset combinations and execution limits for each application through simple configuration files. the jabaws command-line client allows integration of jabaws services into conventional scripts. availability and implementation: jabaws is made freely available under the apache 2 license and can be obtained from:the explosion in biological data volume, diversity and complexity, has been paralleled by the development of computational methods to aid data analysis. locally installed copies of programs give full access to their capabilities, and the ability to run long cpu or memory intensive jobs. however, configuring software to install easily on a range of operating systems is challenging. instead, many developers make their techniques available through a custom web page, or increasingly as a web service, which provides a flexible, programmable and scriptable middle ground between installing software locally and accessing via a web browser. there is now a rich ecosystem of public web services , but they do not always meet the needs of users. their interfaces may have limited functionality and even the biggest service providers, such as ebi and ncbi, limit the computational resources (memory/cpu) available to an individual so that total demand can be met. web services at the university of dundee were created in 2005 as part of the jalview project to provide its users access to clustalw ,a collection of portable web services, initially for multiple sequence alignment, has been developed. it is designed to interact with other software or services and be deployed easily on a variety of computing infrastructures, either directly or through the use of virtualization. jabaws:msa provides an in-house web services solution that is limited only by locally available computing resources. furthermore, its client provides fault tolerance by allowing access to multiple server instances, while the service interface gives a high level of control over individual tasks. comprehensive metadata provided by each service enables their integration with jalview, to allow novices and experts alike to utilize their local compute resources efficiently. finally, although jabaws:msa is focused on multiple alignment, the jabaws framework is flexible, and will soon be extended to include analytical methods such as secondary structure and disorder prediction.  
