jdet: interactive calculation and visualization of function-related conservation patterns in multiple sequence alignments and structures we have implemented in a single package all the features required for extracting, visualizing and manipulating fully conserved positions as well as those with a family-dependent conservation pattern in multiple sequence alignments. the program allows, among other things, to run different methods for extracting these positions, combine the results and visualize them in protein 3d structures and sequence spaces. availability and implementation: jdet is a multiplatform application written in java. it is freely available, including the source code, at http://csbg.cnb.csic.es/jdet. the package includes two of our recently developed programs for detecting functional positions in protein alignments (xdet and s3det), and support for other methods can be added as plug-ins. a help file and a guided tutorial for jdet are also available.sequence-based protein functional analysis has become a fundamental part of a number of studies. multiple sequence alignments (msas) of protein families are valuable sources of structural and functional information . these msas can be obtained from the vast amounts of genomic information coming from high-throughput sequencing initiatives, and there are many resources with automatically pre-compiled alignments for thousands of families. msas can be used to assess the importance of the different residues for a given protein . the most obvious important positions are those not allowed to change (fully conserved). conserved positions were the first indicators of functionality and consequently many methods were developed for detecting them . most protein families can be subdivided into subfamilies with different functional specificities, a division which is reflected in the to whom correspondence should be addressed. present address: bioprocess engineering, max planck institute for dynamics of complex technical systems, magdeburg, germany. structure of the msa . this division is related to a class of positions with a subfamily-dependent conservation pattern (i.e. the conserved amino acid is different for the different subfamilies). these positions are intuitively related to sites with some importance for defining the functional specificity of the different subfamilies within the msa and, for that reason, they are commonly known as specificity-determining positions (sdps). a plethora of methods have been developed which, based on different concepts, try to detect these positions. the presence of sdps in protein regions related to functional and interaction specificity has been recently shown to be a widespread phenomenon . moreover, the role of sdps (automatically extracted from msas) in controlling the functional specificity of the family has been, in many cases, experimentally demonstrated by mutating the corresponding residues [see for example. working with sdps usually involves running different programs for extracting them from msas, interactively visualizing and combining their results, and mapping them onto protein structures when available. since no single package implemented all these capabilities, we developed jdet, a user-friendly program which contains all the features we consider practical and indispensable for the daily work with sdps and conserved positions.based on our own experience working with subfamilies and sdps, we have implemented in jdet all the features we consider useful for that activity. previously, these operations had to be done manually or by integrating diverse software. although some of these features are individually present in existing resources oriented to sdps [e.g. treedet server (or to msas in general [e.g. jalview (, no single package integrates all of them. for this reason, we think this software would be really useful for people working in extracting functional features from msas.  
