a multiple network learning approach to capture system-wide condition-specific responses motivation: condition-specific networks capture system-wide behavior under varying conditions such as environmental stresses, cell types or tissues. these networks frequently comprise parts that are unique to each condition, and parts that are shared among related conditions. existing approaches for learning condition-specific networks typically identify either only differences or only similarities across conditions. most of these approaches first learn networks per condition independently, and then identify similarities and differences in a post-learning step. such approaches do not exploit the shared information across conditions during network learning. results: we describe an approach for learning condition-specific networks that identifies the shared and unique subgraphs during network learning simultaneously, rather than as a post-processing step. our approach learns networks across condition sets, shares data from different conditions and produces high-quality networks that capture biologically meaningful information. on simulated data, our approach outperformed an existing approach that learns networks independently for each condition, especially for small training datasets. on microarray data of hundreds of deletion mutants in two, yeast stationary-phase cell populations, the inferred network structure identified several common and population-specific effects of these deletion mutants and several high-confidence cases of double-deletion pairs, which can be experimentally tested. our results are consistent with and extend the existing knowledge base of differentiated cell populations in yeast stationary phase. availability and implementation: c++ code can be accessed fromall cells on earth have the potential to sense and respond to different extracellular conditions defined by different environmental stresses, growth factors or cellular differentiation signals. response to different conditions or condition-specific response is orchestrated to whom correspondence should be addressed. by changes in the concentration of cellular components (mrnas, proteins and metabolites) as well as the interactions among these components. condition-specific networks capture the interactions among cellular components under different conditions, providing a system-wide view of condition-specific behavior. understanding these networks can provide important insight into how organisms function, adapt and evolve. although technological advances are allowing us to capture the concentrations of the system components, our ability to quantify the condition-specific interactions is still limited. fortunately, network inference algorithms based on probabilistic graphical models that have been used successfully to infer a functional network from one gene expression (mrna concentration) dataset , provide a starting point for inferring conditionspecific networks. in principle, a probabilistic network for each condition could be inferred separately from each condition. in practice, however, such an approach is limited because it fails to recognize an important aspect of condition-specific network learning: this is a multiple-network learning problem, where the networks for each condition are related (with both shared and unique subnetworks). to extend existing network inference methods to infer conditionspecific networks, it is important to explicitly capture and exploit the shared information during network learning. in this article, we develop a novel approach, network inference with pooling data (nipd), based on probabilistic graphical models that explicitly incorporates the shared information across conditions by simultaneously learning multiple, high-quality networks across a small number of conditions. nipd treats the condition as an additional random variable, different values of which induce different network structures . edges in nipd are statistical dependencies that abstract the true condition-specific, physical network (proteinprotein, proteindna interactions) and are inferred from condition-specific mrna concentrations. modeling the condition variable within the learning framework allows the condition information to directly influence which edges occur in the final inferred networks, and also the condition-specific roles of the edges. existing network-based approaches for condition-specific responses can be grouped into module-centric and gene-centric approaches. module-centric approaches identify transcription modules (set of transcription factors regulating a set of target genes) that are coexpressed in a condition-specific manner (kimconditions, a and b. c represents conditions in nipd. nipd learns dependencies that are shared between a and b, as well as those unique to a or to). however, these approaches assume identical behavior for all genes within a module, and do not provide fine-grained interaction structure that explains the condition-specific behavior of individual genes. further, condition-specific patterns are identified via a post-learning gene set enrichment analysis. gene-centric approaches identify the set of condition-specific edges on a per-gene basis. such approaches have been developed for capturing condition-specific behavior in diseases , in yeast stress responses and also in different species . however, these approaches are not probabilistic in nature , often rely on the network being known and are restricted to pairwise coexpression relationships rather than general statistical dependencies . most of these approaches infer a network for each condition separately, and then compare the networks from different conditions to identify the edges unique or shared across conditions. the approach indoes integrate context more directly within a bayesian network, but relies on an initial training set to learn model parameters . other approaches such as differential dependency networks and mixture of subgraphs construct probabilistic models, but focus on differences rather than both differences and similarities. the nipd approach is a gene-centric approach with the following benefits: (i) infers general statistical dependencies including pairwise and higher order dependencies (dependencies among more than two genes); (ii) does not rely on the network being known; (iii) is probabilistic in nature, providing a system-wide description of the condition-specific behavior as a probabilistic network; (iv) simultaneously learns networks across multiple conditions allowing the learning procedure to be informed by the shared information across conditions; and (v) does not bias the networks toward only differences or similarities, thus identifying both conserved and unique aspects of condition-specific responses. results on simulated data from known ground truth networks suggested that networks inferred by nipd were of significantly higher quality than networks learned separately for each condition. results on microarray compendia from two yeast cell populations, quiescent and non-quiescent, both under glucose stress , demonstrated that nipd identified dependencies capturing shared processes (respiration) that agree with the global starvation stress experienced by these cells, as well as populationspecific processes (chromatin modeling in quiescent), that are consistent with the physiological state of these cells. finally, nipd networks were used to extract candidates of double deletion experiments, that can lead to insight into this important stage in the life cycle of yeast, and for processes such as cancer and aging .the goals of our experiments were as follows: (i) to compare our approach against independent network learning approaches, on simulated data from known ground-truth networks and (ii) to assess the value of our approach on real microarray data. for (i) we used two independent learners, indep with a markov blanket search algorithm and genenet . experiments on simulated data allowed us to systematically compare the quality of the inferred networks and, therefore, assess the benefit of pooling data and sharing information across conditions versus learning networks independently. to address (ii) we applied nipd and indep on microarray data from two yeast cell populations isolated from glucose-starved stationary phase cultures . these data are good case studies for condition-specific network learning (hundreds of samples per condition), and the inferred quiescent and non-quiescent networks can provide potentially new insight into stationary phase, a process known to be intricately related to cancer and aging.  
