systems biology jnmfma: a joint non-negative matrix factorization meta-analysis of transcriptomics data motivation: tremendous amount of omics data being accumulated poses a pressing challenge of meta-analyzing the heterogeneous data for mining new biological knowledge. most existing methods deal with each gene independently, thus often resulting in high false positive rates in detecting differentially expressed genes (deg). to our knowledge , no or little effort has been devoted to methods that consider dependence structures underlying transcriptomics data for deg identification in meta-analysis context. results: this article proposes a new meta-analysis method for identification of degs based on joint non-negative matrix factorization (jnmfma). we mathematically extend non-negative matrix factoriza-tion (nmf) to a joint version (jnmf), which is used to simultaneously decompose multiple transcriptomics data matrices into one common submatrix plus multiple individual submatrices. by the jnmf, the dependence structures underlying transcriptomics data can be interrogated and utilized, while the high-dimensional transcriptomics data are mapped into a low-dimensional space spanned by metagenes that represent hidden biological signals. jnmfma finally identifies degs as genes that are associated with differentially expressed metagenes. the ability of extracting dependence structures makes jnmfma more efficient and robust to identify degs in meta-analysis context. furthermore, jnmfma is also flexible to identify degs that are consistent among various types of omics data, e.g. gene expression and dna methylation. experimental results on both simulation data and real-world cancer data demonstrate the effectiveness of jnmfma and its superior performance over other popular approaches. availability and implementation: r code for jnmfma is available for non-commercial use via http://micblab.iim.ac.cn/download/.as high throughput biotechnologies have become routine tools in biological and biomedical researches, tremendous amounts of omics data have been generated that provide great opportunity for deciphering molecular mechanisms of cancer or other diseases . two famous public gene expression databases, geo (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) and arrayexpress (www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/), have deposited transcriptomic data with more than a million assays from more than 30 000 studies. another valuable resource, the tcga project (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/), has released various types of omics data for nearly 10 000 cancer patient samples. reusing the flood of transcriptomics data with meta-analysis can reduce sample bias and increase statistical power, and thus allow for indepth understanding of pathology of cancer or other diseases at molecular level . however, the key issue of meta-analysis, i.e. capturing consistent but subtle patterns of gene activity across multiple transcriptomics datasets, still remains challenging both theoretically and practically. differentially expressed genes (deg) across studies could reflect subtle but consistent biological effects and might be false negatives in individual analysis . to efficiently identify degs, meta-analysis methods need to overcome a variety of biological or non-biological variations introduced by distinct protocols and data platforms used in individual studies . from the aspect of information to be combined, existing meta-analysis methods can be categorized into three classes: p-value-based, effect size-based and rank-based, which each deal with non-specific variations at different levels of data. among them, the p-valuebased method is statistically most intuitive but allows for standardization of topic-related associations from studies to the common scale of significance . however, the performance of p value-based methods heavily depends on the underlying method used for p value calculation in individual analysis . compared with p value-based methods, the effect size-based methods estimate and directly synthesize effect sizes across studies by using a t-statistic-like model. because the effect size quantity provides a direct measure of differential expression, effect size methods tend to be more efficient in detecting degs than the p value-based methods . there are two types of effect size models that can be used for meta-analysis of transcriptomics data: fixed-effect model (fem) and random effect model (rem), which differ in whether between-study variation is ignorable. generally, effect size-based methods suffer from unreliable error estimates due to improper distribution assumption to whom correspondence should be addressed. and large noise inherent in microarray data . comparatively, the rank-based methods combine the ranks of fold-change, instead of expression values as in effect size models and have an advantage of fewer or no assumptions about data structures . these two features make the rank-based methods more robust and outlierfree in ranking and assessing genes . a representative rank-based method is the rankprod method, proposed by, which has been extensively demonstrated to be more reliable and robust than many other methods, especially in low sample number and/or large noise settings . statistical hypothesis about variations of differential expression is another non-trivial factor in meta-analysis. two complementary hypotheses are generally assumed behind meta-analysis methods: one (hsa) assuming that degs are differentially expressed (de) in all the studies and the other (hsb) assuming that degs are de in one or more studies. the former is more desirable when all the studies are homogeneous, while the latter is more useful and efficient when heterogeneity is expected across datasets. to reconcile the two complementary hypotheses, song and tseng (2014) recently presented a new type of hypothesis, hsr, which allows users to specify in what fraction of studies genes are expected to be de. it is well-known that gene correlations are ubiquitous in transcriptomics data and can exert substantial impact on the performance of microarray data analysis . without exception, the dependence structures also considerably influence the meta-analysis of multiple transcriptomics datasets and need to be dealt with carefully . to our knowledge, no or little effort has been devoted to the data dependency issue in meta-analysis of transcriptomics data. generally, the dependency can be addressed by transforming the high-dimensional data into a low-dimensional space. in computer science, many dimensional reduction or projection methods can be used for the task. for example, l e cao et al. applied canonical correlation (cc) analysis to pursuit low-dimensional projections that maximize the associations between two omics variables (l e). other researchers proposed to use coinertia analyses to explore the relationships between two different types of omics datasets . non-negative matrix factorization (nmf) is a recently developed projection method, originally proposed for learning natural parts of faces or semantic features of text . under the constraint of non-negativity, nmf specifically factorizes data matrix to recover natural parts that are integral to the whole. it has been shown that nmf and its sparse versions perform well in microarray data analysis for pattern discovery and classification . in this study, we propose a joint nmf transcriptomics data meta-analysis method (jnmfma) for deg identification. biologically, a certain number of independent biological signals underlie a phenotype and collectively shape gene activities that are associated with the phenotype. relative to real gene entity, these biological signals can be referred to as metagenes. one metagene might dominate the expression of a group of genes and account for the dependence structures between these genes. in return, we can recover these metagenes from transcriptomics data and identify degs by associating them with metagenes that are responsible for the phenotype. following this, this article develops a joint nmf algorithm (jnmf) to simultaneously decompose multiple transcriptomics datasets into a low-dimensional space spanned by metagenes. then, we employ a regulation probability model to extract de metagenes and formulate a new metagene-based statistic for measuring differential expression of a gene in meta-analysis context. in summary, jnmfma can interrogate gene correlations in a joint-decomposition way for efficient meta-analysis of transcriptomics data. the use of metagenes as an intermediate step also makes jnmfma flexible in identifying various types of degs by confining metagenes. for example, jnmfma can be used to meta-analyze transcriptomics data and dna methylation data of a same or similar topic for identifying methylation-driven degs (as shown in results section). compared with other dimensional reduction methods, jnmfma, as an extension of nmf, derives a parts-based representation, favors a sparse matrix decomposition and thus is more suitable to analyze large-scale omics data that are sparse in nature. to evaluate the performance of jnmfma, we first applied it to simulation data, where jnmfma successfully identified degs with high accuracies. considering that lung cancer is one of the most malignant tumors worldwide, jnmfma was then employed to identify gene signatures for lung adenocarcinoma (luad) based on real-world gene expression and methylation data collected from geo database. in addition, we downloaded from tcga (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/) another two expression and methylation datasets of luad as independent evaluation datasets. the results on both simulation and real-world cancer data show that jnmfma is able to efficiently identify degs with biological significance and outperforms other popular approaches.  
