gene expression joint analysis of expression profiles from multiple cancers improves the identification of microrna–gene interactions motivation: micrornas (mirnas) play a crucial role in tumorigenesis and development through their effects on target genes. the characterization of mirnagene interactions will lead to a better understanding of cancer mechanisms. many computational methods have been developed to infer mirna targets with/without expression data.micrornas (mirnas) ($22 nt) are important non-coding small rnas regulating gene expression by repressing the translation or degrading target genes through complementary base pairing to 3 0 untranslated regions (3 0 utrs) of genes . they are involved in many cancer-related processes, such as cell growth and differentiation, through regulating their target gene expression (esquela). considering the importance of mirnas in cancers and that they regulate a large number of genes, deciphering mirna and gene interactions at the genome level can lead to a better understanding of tumorigenesis and development. in recent years, many computational approaches have been developed to predict mirna targets. sequence-based prediction algorithms build on specific binding rules, including sequence complementarity, secondary structure, energy, conservation and site accessibility, to predict mirnagene interactions. some representative methods include targetscans/targetscan , miranda and pictar . although these methods provide a list of potential target genes for each mirna, they suffer from a relatively high false-positive rate because of the complex nature of mirnagene interactions . in addition, the predictions are static and may not capture those interactions that are specific to certain diseases or conditions. to improve sequence-based prediction specificities and identify condition-specific interactions, efforts have been made to incorporate expression profiles to study mirna regulatory mechanisms. the basic principle of these methods is that genes regulated by a mirna should exhibit negative expression correlations with the mirna. these methods include those based on simple correlation analysis , simple/regularized regression models and bayesian inference . pearson correlation in the category of simple correlation analysis is the most straightforward way to study mirnagene interactions. however, the simplicity of this method usually results in relatively high false-positive results. lasso regression in the category of regression models deals with the high correlation among genes/ mirnas by providing a sparse solution with a relatively small set of significant mirnagene pairs. genmir , the first-developed and mostly cited method in the category of bayesian inference, uses a bayesian model with variational inference techniques to find putative pairs from expression data by incorporating the prior information (e.g. sequence features). other methods in the bayesian category to whom correspondence should be addressed. either provide a fast-solving algorithm for the bayesian model or assume different priors . the methods in all three categories have improved prediction specificity by combining expression profile data with sequencebased prediction . however, expression datasets are in general limited in size. to address this limitation, most existing methods concatenate expression profiles from multiple diseases into one single dataset for analysis (called simple aggregate analysis in the rest of this article). the advantages of this approach include the relatively large sample size achieved and the high variability of expression in genes and mirnas among samples because of sample heterogeneity among diseases (which is preferred in interaction studies) through aggregation. however, the presence of disease heterogeneity may dilute interaction signals if the association is only present in one disease, and there are also challenges in data processing and selection . overall, studies based on samples from one specific disease may be more preferred if sufficient samples are available. recent releases of the cancer genome atlas (tcga) expression datasets on multiple tumors, such as ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma , provide the opportunity to study mirnagene interactions individually in each cancer. large sample size (usually 4200 samples), heterogeneity among patient samples and high variability of gene/ mirna expression in these cancers may significantly improve statistical power to infer mirnagene interactions. the existing simple aggregate methods mentioned earlier in the text (e.g. pearson correlation, lasso and genmir) can be used to analyze mirnagene interactions in individual cancers in the tcga datasets. however, if a large number of mirnagene interactions are shared between different cancers, potentially useful information may be lost in cancer-specific analysis when interactions are weak in some of these cancers. the existing methods may suffer from signal dilution and non-specific prediction when used at aggregated datasets; on the other hand, these methods may miss interactions shared among diseases if applied to individual cancers. therefore, it is desirable to develop a method that can identify both disease-specific and common interacting mirnagene pairs through joint analysis of multiple cancers. in other areas of computational biology, statistical methods have been developed for joint analysis of multiple-related datasets. in the joint analysis of multiple chipchip datasets, datta and zhao (2008) proposed a log-linear model to infer cooperative binding among transcription factors.applied a quadratic regression model to jointly analyze multiple chip-seq libraries with consideration of the potential covariates in the data.developed a hierarchical hidden markov model to incorporate data from both chip-seq and chipchip data to improve the identifications of transcription factor binding sites.described a deterministic model-based method (mm-chip) to perform meta-analysis by integrating information from cross-platform and betweenlaboratory chipchip or chip-seq data.presented sparsely correlated hidden markov models to analyze multiple genome-wide location study datasets based on simultaneous hidden markov model (hmm) inference. in gene regulatory network studies,proposed a novel algorithm to infer interspecies disease networks based on the construction and training of intraspecies bayesian networks to enhance the inference of gene network. steele andapplied post-learning aggregation methods to study the regulatory networks by combining multiple microarray datasets with consensus or meta-analysis bayesian networks and to improve the inference compared with simple concatenation of datasets. several meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies have been performed to increase the power of disease-related variant detections . in this article, we developed a two-stage method (called mcmg, joint analysis of multiple cancers for microrna gene interactions) to identify mirnagene interactions that are either specific to a cancer type or common to several cancers by jointly analyzing expression profiles from multiple cancers. the probability of interactions is first inferred individually in each cancer from paired mirna and gene expression data and then jointly analyzed across cancers through an empirical bayes model. because of information sharing among different but related cancers, better characterization of mirnagene pairs can be achieved compared with single cancer analysis or simple aggregate analysis. through both simulation studies and the analyses of tcga datasets, we demonstrate the usefulness and power of our method. in addition, our method can also infer relationships among cancers and incorporate different data types shown in real data analysis.  
