joint sparse canonical correlation analysis for detecting differential imaging genetics modules motivation: imaging genetics combines brain imaging and genetic information to identify the relationships between genetic variants and brain activities. when the data samples belong to different classes (e.g. disease status), the relationships may exhibit class-specific patterns that can be used to facilitate the understanding of a disease. conventional approaches often perform separate analysis on each class and report the differences, but ignore important shared patterns. results: in this paper, we develop a multivariate method to analyze the differential dependency across multiple classes. we propose a joint sparse canonical correlation analysis method, which uses a generalized fused lasso penalty to jointly estimate multiple pairs of canonical vectors with both shared and class-specific patterns. using a data fusion approach, the method is able to detect differentially correlated modules effectively and efficiently. the results from simulation studies demonstrate its higher accuracy in discovering both common and differential canonical correlations compared to conventional sparse cca. using a schizophrenia dataset with 92 cases and 116 controls including a single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) array and functional magnetic resonance imaging data, the proposed method reveals a set of distinct snp-voxel interaction modules for the schizophrenia patients, which are verified to be both statistically and biologically significant.imaging genetics is an emerging field of study in brain research . it aims to discover genetic variants that explain brain activities, providing more comprehensive information that can hopefully inform the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders (e.g. schizophrenia). to date, imaging and genomic data are collected and both modalities include a large number of variables. however, how to combine the large amount of multi-modal data remains a challenging problem. canonical correlation analysis (cca) and partial least squares (pls) are common multivariate approaches to integrate two or more data types. the basic idea is to maximize the correlation (or covariances in pls) between linear combinations of variables from different data types to find the components that are associated with each other. kernel cca and deep cca are extensions to extract nonlinear correlation between two datasets. however, in genomic and brain imaging studies, the dimension of the data is usually much higher than the sample size. as a result, severe overfitting can occur when conventional cca methods are applied. to address this problem, penalized cca and related methods were introduced by employing sparse penalties to select a small number of features. examples include sparse cca , sparse pls (chun and keles, 2010) and sparse reduced rank regression , which have been demonstrated to be effective in detecting multivariate genomic and brain imaging associations . to incorporate biological prior knowledge and data structures to guide the search of associations, group scca and network-guided sparse reduced rank regression were proposed, which can further improve variable selection. in all the above methods, a common assumption is that the data are collected from the same distributions. however, in real imaging genetic studies, the data are collected from subjects corresponding to different disease statuses (e.g. the schizophrenia patients and healthy controls). a separate estimation will suffer a lack of power due to the limited size of each individual class, but a simple combination of the data may miss the identification of the heterogeneity of the interactions. therefore, it is desirable to discover both the common and class-specific interactions simultaneously by joint analysis of multi-class data. in , a statistical method was proposed to jointly study mirna-gene interactions from multiple cancers. however, this method is restricted to univariate inference that is not able to detect complex multivariate correlations. a challenge was also recognized in that the direct application of sparse multivariate methods may choose different sets of interaction pairs for each class. especially for sparse cca, similar patterns may appear in different orders, leading to the problem of mismatch during joint analysis across classes. in this paper, we propose a novel sparse cca method to jointly estimate multiple cca models corresponding to different classes. as illustrated inwith two types of data from k classes, the main idea is to find a common sparse linear combination of the variables from one type of data (for example the imaging data) and k joint sparse linear combinations from the other type (e.g. the genomic data) to maximize the summed correlation. in this way, the method can obtain the brain regions that are important for all classes and discover their differential interactions with the genetic variants. specifically, by restricting the imaging canonical variables to be common across classes, the method overcomes the problem of mismatch that can make full combination of the data from multiple classes (see). we also apply a fused lasso penalty on the k canonical vectors for genetic data to encourage them to share a similar (but not the same) structure. the fused lasso penalty is chosen because it has been successfully applied to jointly estimate multiple graphical models to find differential dependency networks . inspired by the optimization framework for penalized cca in , we design an efficient algorithm based on block coordinate descent for solving jscca. the jscca is featured as a multivariate method for joint interactions analysis, promising to detect complicated abnormal interaction modules between genomic variants and brain activities. we first apply the proposed method to the simulation data containing three classes. through a comprehensive comparison, we demonstrate the effectiveness of jscca in discovering both shared and class-specific correlations. next, we apply the jscca method to a schizophrenia dataset with 92 cases and 116 controls. the data include functional magnetic resonance imaging (fmri) and single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) data, collected by the mind clinical imaging consortium . we found a number of snp-voxel modules with significantly increased correlation for schizophrenia patients. the rest of the paper is organized as follows. section 2 introduces the joint sparse cca method. the performance of the proposed method is evaluated through both simulations and real data analysis in section 3, followed by some discussions and concluding remarks in the last section.the main contributions of the present paper can be summarized as follows. first, we propose a jscca method, which can discover relationship among data from observations corresponding to distinct classes to infer their common and different association patterns. second, we present an efficient algorithm to solve the model. third, we study the numerical performance of jscca via a series of simulations. our results show that an appropriate fusion of multiple data can improve the detection accuracy of both common and differential associations. finally, we applied the proposed method to the analysis of schizophrenia data. we discovered some novel abnormal interactions between a group of snps with some interesting brain regions. the differential interaction can infer some important information on how the dysfunction of genesbrain interactions can imply the risk of schizophrenia. the interpretation of these interactions should be further confirmed via replications and additional biological evidences, which needs further research.  
