jspeciesws: a web server for prokaryotic species circumscription based on pairwise genome comparison jspecies web server (jspeciesws) is a user-friendly online service for in silico calculating the extent of identity between two genomes, a parameter routinely used in the process of poly-phasic microbial species circumscription. the service measures the average nucleotide identity (ani) based on blast (anib) and mummer (anim), as well as correlation indexes of tetra-nucleotide signatures (tetra). in addition, it provides a tetra correlation search function, which allows to rapidly compare selected genomes against a continuously updated reference database with currently about 32 000 published whole and draft genome sequences. for comparison, own genomes can be uploaded and references can be selected from the jspeciesws reference database. the service indicates whether two genomes share genomic identities above or below the species embracing thresholds, and serves as a fast way to allocate unknown genomes in the frame of the hitherto sequenced species. availability and implementation: jspeciesws is available atdna-dna-hybridization (ddh) measures the degree of genomic similarity between two pools of dna molecules. despite that distinct ddh determination methods frequently lead to different results, since nearly 50 years it is considered as the gold standard for species delineation (rossell o-m ora and). in times of cost-efficient sequencing with scientists having easy access to thousands of publicly available genome sequences, the species delineation based on user friendly computational pairwise genome comparisons to determine overall genome relatedness indices)] has emerged. this approach has already been widely accepted by the scientific community and specialized tools like the stand-alone software jspecies (richter and rossell o-m ora, 2009) or similar solutions have proven to provide valuable ogri results. here we present the jspecies web server (jspeciesws) a webbased implementation of the core features of the original jspecies software for easy user-access and extended functionality. it represents the latest development of jspecies in terms of usability,recent studies have shown that electronic (in silico) pairwise ogri can replace standard laboratory-based ddh in order to simplify, and at the same time substantiate, this central aspect of prokaryotic species delineation. in addition, ogri allows taxonomists to quickly verify the species affiliation of any public genome sequence and to identify wrongly annotated submissions. jspeciesws will help to further propagate this approach by providing fast and easy access to the corresponding analyses and a comprehensive genomes reference database.  
