gene expression jsplice: a high-performance method for accurate prediction of alternative splicing events and its application to large-scale renal cancer transcriptome data motivation: alternative splicing represents a prime mechanism of post-transcriptional gene regulation whose misregulation is associated with a broad range of human diseases. despite the vast availability of transcriptome data from different cell types and diseases, bioinformatics-based surveys of alternative splicing patterns remain a major challenge due to limited availability of analytical tools that combine high accuracy and rapidity. results: we describe here a novel junction-centric method, jsplice, that enables de novo extraction of alternative splicing events from rna-sequencing data with high accuracy, reliability and speed. application to clear cell renal carcinoma (ccrcc) cell lines and 65 ccrcc patients revealed experimentally validatable alternative splicing changes and signatures able to prognosticate ccrcc outcome. in the aggregate, our results propose jsplice as a key analytic tool for the derivation of cell context-dependent alternative splicing patterns from large-scale rna-sequencing datasets. availability and implementation: jsplice is a standalone python application freely available atalternative splicing, a mechanism unknown more than 30 years ago, is now regarded a major contributor to transcriptome and proteome diversity . it is estimated that, in human, 95 of multi-exon genes undergo alternative splicing , underscoring the importance of this posttranscriptional mechanism in the regulation of gene expression. indeed, many key biological processes and disease states involve profound alternative splicing pattern changes . nowadays, technological advances in rna sequencing (rna-seq) are yielding data at an enormous scale and allow for genome-wide analysis of alternative splicing patterns from patient data. however, the availability of in silico tools able to reliably interrogate alternative splicing events from rna-seq data remains limited . for example, transcript-based approaches, such as cuffdiff , allow for reconstruction of the complete transcriptome but are limited in their accuracy of extracted events . exon-based approaches, such as dexseq , provide more reliable results but due to their focus on a subset of events, yield only partial information. in addition, both of these approaches suffer from scalability issues, hindering the analysis of large-scale datasets. hence, there is pressing need to expand methodologies for fast and accurate analysis of alternative splicing patterns.over the past few years, an increased ability to align split reads to the genome and greater sequencing depths raised the status of junction readsreads that span exonexon junctionsto an independent and reliable source of information. to the contrary of other reads, they permit a precise localization of exon boundaries and allow testing whether two exons exist consecutively within a transcript, an essential step for the detection of alternative splicing events. an increasing number of methods, such as diffsplice , miso , juncbase , or splicingcompass , are including junction reads in their analysis but only fewe.g. spanki and rmats consider them as the primary source of information. here we present jsplice, a junction-centric method to identify differentially expressed alternative splicing events at the exon level. unlike spanki and rmats, which rely on databases of splicing events, jsplice performs a de novo reconstruction of all possible alternative splicing events based on junction positions, allowing thus detection of simple and complex alternative splicing events even in poorly annotated genomes. distinctive to other currently applied methods, jsplice does not assess the statistical significance of the observed changes in expression between two groups of samples. rather it relies on a set of user-defined thresholds to select and rank alternative splicing changes by the amplitude. the performance of jsplice vis-a-vis other splicing analysis software tools was rigorously assessed on simulated and real datasets and shows a greatly enhanced sensitivity and specificity. also, application of jsplice to rna sequencing datasets derived from human clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccrcc) cell lines and patient tumors identified validatable alternative splicing events. our work suggests that jsplice is a highly reliable and accurate method with remarkably low execution times, making it greatly suitable for routine large-scale analysis of rna-seq data.recent studies concur that most if not all of human multi-exon genes yield multiple splice isoforms through alternative splicing. alternative splicing is also highly context-dependent and promotes an enormous diversification of gene function that dictates tissue differentiation, development and, when misregulated, disease development. with transcriptomes of different tissues and disease states becoming readily available through the application of high-throughput rna-sequencing, analytical methods to distinguish and quantify mrna isoforms hold the potential for an unbiased and thorough insight into alternative splicing. however, data analysis is not trivial and, as a result, the development of software for fast, reliable and ultimately routine detection of alternative splicing lags currently behind the sequencing capabilities. the development of jsplice described here provides an important advance as it provides a method of unmatched specificity, sensitivity and rapidity for the analysis of as events, key elements that currently hinder the comprehensive analysis of large-scale experiments. thus, jsplice is highly suitable for reliable analysis of alternative splicing events in largescale transcriptome data. application of jsplice on rna-seq datasets of renal carcinoma cells and human ccrcc tissues revealed novel, validatable vhl-and renal cancer-dependent alternative splicing events substantiating the value of jsplice as an analytical tool for genome-wide analysis of as events. jsplice relies on a novel junction-based definition of alternative splicing modules that allows for a rapid detection of alternative splicing events, simple or complex, without having to rely on a predefined set of transcripts such as implemented in rmats or miso. the concept of asms confers generality while keeping complexity at a low level but the associated software, diffsplice, suffers from high execution time and low accuracy. another key feature of jsplice is its entirely different method for the assessment of differential expression. that is, to focus on expression fold-change instead of modeling biological and technical variations. models of read count distribution are necessary to estimate transcript abundance for a given experiment and to assess the statistical significance of the change. however a simple fold-change threshold, as implemented in jsplice, seems, in practice, sufficient to detect large splicing changes in comparisons of experiments. supporting that argument,recently pointed out that a fold-change measurement is sufficient to identify differential expression of genes. of note, as the complexity of an asm increases, so does the number of pairwise comparisons, which increases the possibility of identifying a false positive. in this specific state, jsplice may potentially overreport complex asm. variability between replicates is inherent to biological experiments and, in the context of our simulations, affected all tested methods. nonetheless jsplice aims at ranking splicing events by the amplitude of the change in order to provide a list of validatable genes for experimental biologists. in that respect the larger changes are potentially the most relevant ones and jsplice showed a better accuracy than dexseq and rmats in detecting those. additionally, we demonstrated that the use of a different read aligner, different parameters, or a different rnasequencing setup did not impact jsplices high specificity. application of jsplice to detect alternative splicing events in renal carcinoma cells as a function of pvhl status identified alternative splicing events in myo6, dnmt3b, nedd4l and tmcc1. since loss of vhl represents a signature lesion in human ccrcc, it is attractive to consider that one or more of these changes in alternative splicing contribute, in part, to renal carcinogenesis. myosin vi (myo6), whose alternative splicing event was identified by jsplice in both cell lines experiment and tcga data, moves(d) events identified by jsplice are outlined in orange. splice graphs, with alternative exons in gray, were inferred from ucsc annotations jsplice and its application to renal cancertoward the minus end of actin filaments and is involved in the transport of vesicles and organelles . the three exons that we found alternatively spliced in renal carcinoma cells encode a fragment referred to as long insert located in the cargo binding tail of myosin vi . thus, the presence of the long insert may affect motor-cargo interactions. it may also confer preferential expression in polarized cells (such as kidney cells . as the long isoform of myosin vi is more abundant in pvhl-proficient renal carcinoma cells and in healthy tissue compared to tumor, it is conceivable that a myosin vi switch from the long to the short isoform may contribute to the loss of polarization of transformed kidney cells. dnmt3b is implicated in chromatin methylation and has been previously shown to be differentially spliced in multiple cancer types . also the alternative exon identified in this study has been previously shown to discriminate between pluripotent and differentiated cells (gopalakrishna-pillai and iverson, 2011). thus, pvhldependent changes in dnmt3b splicing may be added to the growing list of chromatin modifying enzymes functionally altered in human ccrcc. nedd4l has been shown to regulate tgf-beta signaling and its gene expression has been associated with several cancers . however the reported alternative splicing event has not been explored. tmcc1 is the least studied of the four genes identified in the jsplice analysis in renal carcinoma cells. in a recent study, it has been shown to anchor in the endoplasmic reticulum (er) to regulate er membrane organization and the attachment of ribosomes to the er . the short isoform identified in this study would encode only the c-terminal transmembrane domain and create a loss of function. it has been previously reported that splicing events are not necessarily specific to one cancer type, but rather that common splicing signatures exist . consistent with this notion, our jsplice analysis of rna-seq data from human ccrcc obtained from the tcga archive unveiled potentially generic alternative splicing events in syk (previously shown to occur in breast and ovarian cancer ), and mknk2 (found in breast, lung and colon cancers . in the case of mknk2, we observed a highly significant correlation between the relative expression of the mknk2 isoforms and patient outcome. given the very encouraging reports on the recent development of orally available small molecule splicing modifiers for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy , it will be exciting to explore the possibility of targeting mknk2 alternative splicing as a line of therapy in cancer. as analysis of large-scale patient data, such as provided by the tcga, is currently unachievable with other software such as dexseq or rmats . their long execution time or their inability to use read counts as inputs renders them impractical for large-scale analyses. in that respect, jsplice offers a convenient and fast solution. as a consequence, a pan-cancer analysis of alternative splicing in patient data is now feasible and may reveal potential splicing signatures suitable for diagnostic and therapeutic applications.  
