jumping across biomedical contexts using compressive data fusion motivation: the rapid growth of diverse biological data allows us to consider interactions between a variety of objects, such as genes, chemicals, molecular signatures, diseases, pathways and environmental exposures. often, any pair of objectssuch as a gene and a diseasecan be related in different ways, for example, directly via genedisease associations or indirectly via functional annotations, chemicals and pathways. different ways of relating these objects carry different semantic meanings. however, traditional methods disregard these semantics and thus cannot fully exploit their value in data modeling. results: we present medusa, an approach to detect size-k modules of objects that, taken together, appear most significant to another set of objects. medusa operates on large-scale collections of heterogeneous datasets and explicitly distinguishes between diverse data semantics. it advances research along two dimensions: it builds on collective matrix factorization to derive different semantics , and it formulates the growing of the modules as a submodular optimization program. medusa is flexible in choosing or combining semantic meanings and provides theoretical guarantees about detection quality. in a systematic study on 310 complex diseases, we show the effectiveness of medusa in associating genes with diseases and detecting disease modules. we demonstrate that in predicting genedisease associations medusa compares favorably to methods that ignore diverse semantic meanings. we find that the utility of different semantics depends on disease categories and that, overall, medusa recovers disease modules more accurately when combining different semantics. availability and implementation: source code is atin recent years, there is increasing evidence that genedisease association prediction and disease module detection can benefit from integrative data analysis . large-scale molecular biology data systems analyzed with integrative approaches are typically heterogeneous and contain objects of different types, such as genes, pathways, chemicals, disease symptoms and exposure measurements. these objects interconnect through multiple, most often pairwise, relations encoded in the data. consider an example of such a data system fromthat contains 16 datasets (solid edges) and objects of 13 different types (nodes). for example, dataset r 2;7 encodes the clinical manifestations of diseases, whereas dataset r 5;3 describes associations of chemicals with biological processes and molecular functions. the ubiquity of complex data systems of this kind presents many unique opportunities and challenges for uncovering genotypephenotype interactions, or, in general, interactions between any kind of objects. challenges in the joint consideration of systems of datasets, such as that in, include inferring accurate models to predict disease traits and outcomes, elucidating important disease genes and generating insight into the genetic underpinnings of complex diseases . we would like these models to collectively consider the breadth of available data, from whole-genome sequencing to transcriptomic, methylomic and metabolic data . a major barrier preventing existing methods from fully exploiting entire data collections is that individual datasets usually cannot be directly related to each other. for example, datasets r 5;3 (annotation of chemicals with gene ontology (go) terms) and r 2;7 (symptoms of diseases) inreside in completely different feature space. as we will learn in this manuscript, we can relate distant objects by chaining through the fusion graph, for example, we can relate molecular signatures with disease symptoms through genes, go terms, chemicals and diseases. but such chaining actually exacerbates the problem, as distant objects can be linked in many different ways. for example, another way to relate molecular signatures with disease symptoms is via genes, pathways, chemicals, go terms , exposure events and diseases. a priori, it is not obvious which of the two ways, or which of any existing ways of connecting the signatures with the symptoms, performs better and should thus be preferred when mining disease data. different ways of relating objects often carry different semantic meanings and can potentially generate different results. intuitively, different semantics imply different similarities. however, traditional methods that we review in the next section disregard the subtlety of different types of objects and links. these methods mix, discard or ignore different semantics, which might impede their performance and explanatory capabilities. in this work, we aim to fill this gap by developing an approach for disease module detection that can consider diverse semantics in a principled manner. we here introduce a novel approach, called medusa, for automatic detection of size-k significant modules from heterogeneous systems of biological data. unlike previous works in integrative data analysis, medusa explicitly takes different semantics into consideration during module detection by allowing a user to either choose a particular semantic or combine them. our goal is to answer association queries on possibly complex data systems, such as the one in. for example, given a small number of diseases, infer the most significant group (module) of genes of size k. or, given a list of genes, propose a group of k other genes that, taken together, will give the highest significance under a particular null hypothesis. or, given a selection of molecular pathways of interest, find which k chemicals have the largest collective impact on these pathways. to achieve this level of versatility, medusa builds upon a recent collective matrix factorization algorithm . in addition, medusa formulates a submodular optimization program, which provides theoretical guarantees about the significance of the detected modules . in a case study with datasets shown in, we applied medusa to find genedisease associations and infer disease modules. we demonstrate that medusa-inferred associations are more accurate than those of alternative approaches, which conflate distinct semantics that exist in the data system. importantly, we find that different semantics vary in their ability to make accurate predictions. we also show that the performance of different semantics depends on the disease category. finally, we observe that the overall best performance is achieved when medusa infers associations by combining distinct semantics.we here presented a novel and practical approach to infer connections between objects that are either close to each other or far away from each other in heterogeneous biological data domains. we introduced medusa, a module detection algorithm that, given a set of pivot objects, finds a size-k module of candidate objects that are jointly relevant to the pivots. importantly, this module achieves significance that is provably close to the maximum significance that could be achieved by any size-k set of the candidates. our experiments reveal the versatility of medusa to accurately detect disease modules and predict genedisease associations by either flexibly choosing or combining different semantic meanings. the distinct property of medusa to distinguish diverse semantics enabled medusa to compare favorably against several alternative methods. these findings put medusa on the path towards a biomedical data fusion search engine.  
