data and text mining a mutation profile for top-k patient search exploiting gene-ontology and orthogonal non-negative matrix factorization motivation: as the quantity of genomic mutation data increases, the likelihood of finding patients with similar genomic profiles, for various disease inferences, increases. however, so does the difficulty in identifying them. similarity search based on patient mutation profiles can solve various translational bioinformatics tasks, including prognostics and treatment efficacy predictions for better clinical decision making through large volume of data. however, this is a challenging problem due to heterogeneous and sparse characteristics of the mutation data as well as their high dimensionality. results: to solve this problem we introduce a compact representation and search strategy based on gene-ontology and orthogonal non-negative matrix factorization. statistical significance between the identified cancer subtypes and their clinical features are computed for validation; results show that our method can identify and characterize clinically meaningful tumor subtypes comparable or better in most datasets than the recently introduced network-based stratification method while enabling real-time search. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to simultaneously characterize and represent somatic mutational data for efficient search purposes.due to advancements of genome scale sequencing data of patients, sequencing will become a common practice in medicine . in the near future, the amount of patient records that include gene mutation data will be huge. as the quantity of genomic mutation data increases, the likelihood of finding patients with similar genomic profiles, for various disease inferences, increases. however, so does the difficulty in identifying them. even with the significance of the impact and need, genomic-based patient similarity searching has not yet been actively studied by the bioinformatics community.we proposed a compact representation for genome mutation. this representation is called the onmf mutation profile (onmf-mp); it is used for efficient search and characterization of patients genome data, and provides basic information for many data mining tasks in translational bioinformatics. the onmf-mp uses onmp to exploit the functional representation property of go and the ability to correlate go terms that are latent in a collection of genome mutation data. this representation solves the sparsity problem of mutation data and achieves reduced sensitivity to heterogeneous factors; it also enables genome-based real-time search for similar patients. we show experimentally that stratification results using the proposed representation have comparable or better correlations with clinical features than do those achieved using a recently introduced method. insufficient clinical information prevents us from using the all five cancer types for the two the validation test to make the validation complete. however, this is not an inherent charateristic of the data and we expect that more data accumulation will evidentially resolve this problem. we also show that the representation can search through millions of patients in milliseconds.. association between ucec cancer subtypes and histological clinical features. c1, (serous adenocarcinoma, high grade), c2, (other, high grade), c3, (endometrioid type, high grade), c4, (endometrioid type, low grade). only four features are presented and two features with low frequency ( 5) are omitted to increase the visibility  
