databases and ontologies kgvdb: a population-based genomic map of cnvs tagged by snps in koreans despite a growing interest in a correlation between copy number variations (cnvs) and flanking single nucleotide polymorph-isms, few databases provide such information. in particular, most information on cnv available so far was obtained in caucasian and yoruba populations, and little is known about cnv in asian populations. this article presents a database that provides cnv regions tagged by single nucleotide polymorphisms in about 4700 koreans, which were detected under strict quality control, manually curated and experimentally validated. availability: kgvdb is freely available for non-commercial use atto date, single-marker association analysis in genome-wide association studies (gwas) has identified a large number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) that are highly associated with complex diseases, but only a small portion of genetic heritability is explained by these variants. a copy number variation (cnv) is a physical change of genomic segment ranging from a kilobase to several megabases. cnv may influence disease susceptibility and has been proposed to be one potential source of missing heritability . a recent study also found a strong functional relevance of cnv with complex diseases . however, the extent to which cnv impacts disease susceptibility and underlies complex traits has yet to be fully determined. the cnv association study conducted by the wellcome trust case control consortium (wtccc) reported that common cnvs typed on existing platforms are unlikely to contribute to the genetic basis of common diseases (wellcome trust). however, only about 40 of the identified cnvs (3432 multi-class cnvs) were well separated enough to be genotyped. in contrast, 60 of the cnvs could not be tested for association (supplementary). moreover, well-defined polymorphic cnvs tagged by snps are more likely to affect multiple expression traits than frequency-matched variants . cnvs encompassing single genes or a set of genes may be more likely to be the causative variants of a given genetic disease than tagged snps. therefore, snps correlated with cnvs are a valuable resource for gwas. most cnv databases do not consider multi-copy number classes . the scan database is an exception in that it includes the latter, but it only contains data from caucasian and yoruban populations, and asian populations are completely absent. owing to the difference in cnvs between distinct ethnic groups, providing polymorphic cnvs and allele frequency of each genotype in asian populations will help investigate cnv association with diseases and ethnic differences. recently, we developed a database called korean genomic variant database (kgvdb), which provides multi-class cnv regions and well-tagged snp information. the data were obtained from 4694 individuals using two different genotyping platforms and publicly available cnv data. the large dataset of kgvdb will provide a rich public resource for the study of cnv and snp.we constructed a database called kgvdb, which provides polymorphic cnvs tagged with snps. the major features of kgvdb that are different from others include the following: (i) polymorphic cnv regions identified under strict quality controls and manual curation; (ii) cnv information from korean populations to supplement currently biased ethnic information; (iii) large dataset of cnvs tagged with snps from 4694 individuals using two different genotyping platforms (snp array and cgh array); (iv) rich information on tagging snps, including frequencies in hapmap populations; and (v) copy number states of the reference sample using log 2 ratios from two kinds of cgh data and the depth of coverage from whole-genome sequencing data. in conclusion, kgvdb is a rich resource of the genomic variants, which will complement the lack of asian cnv data. in particular, correlation data like rs12191877 tagging the  
