amyload: website dedicated to amyloidogenic protein fragments analyses of amyloidogenic sequence fragments are essential in studies of neurodegenerative diseases. however, there is no one internet dataset that collects all the sequences that have been investigated for their amyloidogenicity. therefore, we have created the amyload website which collects the amyloidogenic sequences from all major sources. the website allows for filtration of the fragments and provides detailed information about each of them. registered users can both personalize their work with the website and submit their own sequences into the database. to maintain database reliability, submitted sequences are reviewed before making them available to the public. finally, we re-implemented several amyloidogenic sequence predictors, thus the amyload website can be used as a sequence analysis tool. we encourage researchers working on amyloid proteins to contribute to our service. availability and implementation: the amyload website is freely available at http://comprec-lin.the mechanisms for development of amyloidogenic diseases such as the alzheimers or parkinsons diseases are still not completely known. it has been proved that for these diseases to occur, specific protein fragments must become exposed in the structures. these fragments are characterised by a high aggregation propensity, which leads to the formation of fibres with a sterric zipper form, soluble oligomers or amorphous aggregates . the amyloidogenic sequence fragments are essential to understand the development of amyloid diseases. several difficulties are encountered in studies of amyloidogenic fragments. first, there are a few internet data sources which contain such fragments. the most popular are amypdb , waltz-db , amylhex with amylfrag and zipperdb , or datasets used to validate analytical methods, such as tango or aggrescan . none of these sources contains all available data. the waltz-db, for instance, is designed for hexapeptides, while zipperdb collects amyloidogenic sequences obtained with computer modelling. amypdb, on the other hand, includes amino acid templates characteristic of specific amyloid protein families, rather than amyloidogenic fragments as such. secondly, most of the datasets do not provide a user-friendly way of data browsing and filtering. to the best of our knowledge, currently only waltz-db enables its users to filter data. finally, various computational methods have been developed to predict the occurrence of amyloidogenic fragments in protein sequence. most of these are based on empirical amino acid features, e.g. contact sites density or hydrogen bonding , machine learning methods or consensus methods , to mention only a few. as with the fragment data, these tools are not collected together in one place on the internet. therefore, if a sequence is analyzed with several different predictors, each method must be used separately. to address these difficulties, we present the amyload internet database which consolidates a great majority of the currently available amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic sequences, and several prediction methods. the amyload website allows a user to fully personalize their work with over 1300 unique sequence database entries and implementedprediction methods, and also to submit new data to the database. links to other yet not implemented amyloid predictors are also available in our service.  
