genome analysis knime4bio: a set of custom nodes for the interpretation of next-generation sequencing data with knime † analysing large amounts of data generated by next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies is difficult for researchers or clinicians without computational skills. they are often compelled to delegate this task to computer biologists working with command line utilities. the availability of easy-to-use tools will become essential with the generalization of ngs in research and diagnosis. it will enable investigators to handle much more of the analysis. here, we describe knime4bio, a set of custom nodes for the knime (the konstanz information miner) interactive graphical workbench, for the interpretation of large biological datasets. we demonstrate that this tool can be utilized to quickly retrieve previously published scientific findings.next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies have led to an explosion of the amount of data to be analysed. as an example, a vcf file (variant call formata standard specification for storing genomic variations in a text file) produced by the 1000 genomes project contains about 25 million single nucleotide variants (snv), [http://tinyurl.com/all2of4intersection (retrieved, making it difficult to extract relevant information using spreadsheet programs. while computer biologists are used to invoke common command line toolssuch as perl and rwhen analysing those data through unix pipelines, scientific investigators generally lack the technical skills necessary to handle these tools and need to delegate data manipulation to a third party. scientific workflow and data integration platforms aim to make those tasks more accessible to those research scientists. these tools are modular environments enabling an easy visual assembly and an interactive execution of an analysis pipeline (typically a directed graph) where a node defines a task to be executed on input data and an edge between two nodes represents a data flow. these applications provide an intuitive framework that can be used by to whom correspondence should be addressed. during the reviewing process of this article another solution based on knime but focusing on fastq data files was published by). the scientists themselves for building complex analyses. they allow data reproducibility and workflows sharing. galaxy , cyrille2 and mobyle are three web-based workflow engines that users have to install locally if computational needs on datasets are very large, or if absolute security is required. alternatively, softwares such as the knime workbench or taverna run on the users desktop and can interact with local resources. taverna focuses on web services and may require a large number of nodes even for a simple task. in contrast, knime provides the ability to modify the nodes without having to re-run the whole analysis. we have chosen this latest tool to develop knime4bio, a set of new nodes mostly dedicated to the filtering and manipulation of vcf files. although many standard nodes provided by knime can be used to perform such analysis, our nodes add new functionalities, some of which are described below.in practical terms, a computer biologist was close to our users to help them with the construction of a workflow. after this short tutorial, they were able to quickly play with the interface, add some nodes and modify the parameters without any further assistance, but the suggestion or the configuration of some specific nodes (for example, those who require a snippet of java code). at the time of writing, knime4bio contains 55 new nodes. we believe knime4bio is an efficient interactive tool for ngs analysis.  
