knowledge-driven geospatial location resolution for phylogeographic models of virus migration diseases caused by zoonotic viruses (viruses transmittable between humans and animals) are a major threat to public health throughout the world. by studying virus migration and mutation patterns, the field of phylogeography provides a valuable tool for improving their surveillance. a key component in phylogeographic analysis of zoonotic viruses involves identifying the specific locations of relevant viral sequences. this is usually accomplished by querying public databases such as genbank and examining the geospatial metadata in the record. when sufficient detail is not available, a logical next step is for the researcher to conduct a manual survey of the corresponding published articles. motivation: in this article, we present a system for detection and disambiguation of locations (topo-nym resolution) in full-text articles to automate the retrieval of sufficient metadata. our system has been tested on a manually annotated corpus of journal articles related to phylogeography using integrated heuristics for location disambiguation including a distance heuristic, a population heuristic and a novel heuristic utilizing knowledge obtained from genbank metadata (i.e. a metadata heuristic). results: for detecting and disambiguating locations, our system performed best using the meta-data heuristic (0.54 precision, 0.89 recall and 0.68 f-score). precision reaches 0.88 when examining only the disambiguation of location names. our error analysis showed that a noticeable increase in the accuracy of toponym resolution is possible by improving the geospatial location detection. by improving these fundamental automated tasks, our system can be a useful resource to phylogeog-raphers that rely on geospatial metadata of genbank sequences.zoonotic viruses are viruses that are transmittable between animals and humans. leading to the rise or the re-emergence of various diseases such as influenza, rabies and ebola, these viruses are an important threat to population health and are monitored by local, national and international health organizations. to ensure effective surveillance of these viruses, it is essential to understand their origins, mutations and their geospatial transmission patterns. in recent years, phylogeography, the science that studies the geospatial lineage of species , has been applied to virus genomes to model their evolution and their diffusion among human and animal hosts. phylogeography tracks the spread of these viruses by utilizing genetic sequence data and its corresponding metadata related to the time of sample collection and the location of the host. in particular, the geospatial metadata is vital to phylogeography since it is used to recreate the migration path of the virus. phylogeography often includes the use of secondary data that has been deposited in public databases by other researchers. a popular resource is the genbank database which is maintained by the national center for biotechnology information (ncbi). with more than 1.9 million virus sequences (as of, genbank provides abundant information on viral sequence data. however, previous work has suggested that geospatial metadata, when it is not simply missing, can be imprecise. in their article  
