structural bioinformatics kotai antibody builder: automated high-resolution structural modeling of antibodies motivation: kotai antibody builder is a web service for tertiary structural modeling of antibody variable regions. it consists of three main steps: hybrid template selection by sequence alignment and canonical rules, 3d rendering of alignments and cdr-h3 loop modeling. for the last step, in addition to rule-based heuristics used to build the initial model, a refinement option is available that uses fragment assembly followed by knowledge-based scoring. using targets from the second antibody modeling assessment, we demonstrate that kotai antibody builder generates models with an overall accuracy equal to that of the best-performing semi-automated predictors using expert knowledge. availability and implementation: kotai antibody builder is available atantibody variable regions constitute a unique protein module that has evolved to recognize virtually any biomolecular structure with high specificity and affinity. these properties have enabled the design of antibodies for use in the diagnosis and treatment of cancers and autoimmune and infectious diseases . in addition to their clinical value, antibodies are extremely important for routine assays used in basic research. computational modeling of antibody structure is a crucial step in engineering new antibody molecules, but there are few tools available to the general public, and accurately modeling loops in complementary determining regions (cdrs) remains an open problem. the pigs server was validated in the first blind antibody modeling assessment . however, prediction of the third heavy chain cdr (cdr-h3) remains difficult because of its structural diversity. recently, the second antibody modeling assessment (amaii) was held. ama-ii was divided into two stages: in stage 1, sequences were provided, and teams were assessed on the overall accuracy of their models. in stage 2, the crystal structures of the variable region lacking only cdr-h3 were provided, and groups were assessed on the accuracy of cdr-h3 loop prediction. in stage 1, the joint osaka university astellas (joa) team achieved the lowest average root-mean square deviation (rmsd) for cdr-h3 (2.3 a ) and generated the most accurate models for 4 of 11 targets. in stage 2, the joa team generated the most accurate models (with rmsds of 1 a or less) for 4 of 10 targets . however, the method used by the joa team required much manual intervention and expert knowledge. kotai antibody builder represents a fully automated but simplified implementation of the pipeline used by the joa team .to assess the accuracy of kotai antibody builder, we used targets 211 from ama-ii. in, we show the resulting c rmsds of rank-1 models submitted by the joa team alongside rank-1 initial and refined models from the web server. the overall rmsd was 1 a . the refinement option was much more successful in modeling cdr-h3 loops than the protocol used to generate initial models or by the pigs server . surprisingly, the cdr-h3 accuracy for the refined loops (2.3 a ) was equal to that of the stage-1 joa submitted models, the generation of which required careful manual inspection. there was a slight increase (0.1 a ) in the rmsd of the nonh3 cdr loops when the refinement option was used because of the fact that the other loops were not held rigid during the minimizations; however, we found that this slight flexibility in the non-h3 cdrs was necessary for proper modeling of the h3 loops.  
