sequence analysis ksnp3.0: snp detection and phylogenetic analysis of genomes without genome alignment or reference genome we announce the release of ksnp3.0, a program for snp identification and phylogenetic analysis without genome alignment or the requirement for reference genomes. ksnp3.0 is a significantly improved version of ksnp v2. availability and implementation: ksnp3.0 is implemented as a package of stand-alone executables for linux and mac os x under the open-source bsd license. the executable packages, source code and a full user guide are freely available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/ksnp/files/ contact:next-generation dna sequencing has led to an explosion in the number of sequenced genomes, especially microbial genomes. snp analysis of those genomes is important in forensic investigations, strain identification, outbreak tracking, phylogenetic analysis and identifying strain differences that are important to phenotypes such as virulence and antibiotic resistance . the availability of genome sequences of up to thousands of genomes of a single species requires tools that can handle very large datasets in reasonable times . because microbial genomes are subject to massive gene gains and losses, insertion, deletions and rearrangements, alignment of whole microbial genome sequences has proven to be computationally intensive and not applicable to datasets of hundreds or thousands of genomes. the increasing tendency to leave genome sequences at the assembly, or even raw unassembled reads stage has necessitated the development of genome analysis tools that do not require genome alignments, and that can be applied to genomes at all stages of completion. ksnp v2, released in 2013, is a tool that can identify snps in hundreds of microbial genomes without the requirement for genome alignment or a reference genome . if one or more annotated genomes are included, ksnp can automatically annotate the identified snps. ksnp v2 estimates phylogenetic trees by parsimony, neighbor-joining and maximum likelihood methods, and reports trees with a variety of node labels, including the number of snps unique to each node. ksnp can analyze finished (closed) genomes, draft genomes at the assembly stage, genomes at the raw reads stage, or any combination of those stages. ksnp v2 proved to be relatively fast, analyzing 288 genomes of the rhabdoviridae family in 2.5 h, and analyzing 119 escherichia coli-shigella genomes in 14.4h on a linux cluster or 20.3h on a desktop imac. ksnp v2 has been used for snp identification and phylogenetic analysis in several recent studies and has proven itself a valuable tool for identifying snps that predict phenotype . here we announce the release of ksnp3.0, a significantly improved version of ksnp v2. the ksnp3.0 package also includes a number of new tools and utilities that facilitate the downloading of genomes for ksnp3.0 analysis, preparation of input files, and a variety of post-ksnp run analyses of the output files.the input files. the genome sequence input file format of ksnp v2 resulted in annotation being limited to snps that were within the chromosome; thus snps in plasmids or other replicons were identified as not being in an annotated region. this was a particularly serious problem for genomes such as the vibrio genomes that consist of two chromosomes, in which case almost half of the snps would be unannotated, but a considerable amount of annotation was also lost in strains with multiple plasmids. ksnp3.0 now uses a different input format that provides annotation of all replicons.  
