genome analysis kvsnp: accurately predicting the effect of genetic variants in voltage-gated potassium channels motivation: non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nssnps) in voltage-gated potassium (kv) channels cause diseases with potentially fatal consequences in seemingly healthy individuals. identifying disease-causing genetic variation will aid presymptomatic diagnosis and treatment of such disorders. nssnp-effect predictors are hypothesized to perform best when developed for specific gene families. we, thus, created kvsnp: a method that assigns a disease-causing probability to kv-channel nssnps. results: kvsnp outperforms popular non gene-family-specific methods (snps&go, sift and polyphen) in predicting the disease potential of kv-channel variants, according to all tested metrics (accuracy, matthews correlation coefficient and area under receiver operator characteristic curve). most significantly, it increases the separation of the median predicted disease probabilities between benign and disease-causing snps by 26 on the next-best competitor. kvsnp has ranked 172 uncharacterized kv-channel nssnps by disease-causing probability.one in every 300 bases of human dna shows variation between individuals. these sites are called single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps;). distinguishing benign snps (bsnps) from those that cause disease (dcsnps) is a key premise for personalized medicine, but with a total of 10 million polymorphic loci within the genome it is no trivial feat. efforts are often focused on identifying snps responsible for specific diseases , or all dcsnps within certain genomic regions or genes ; for example, identifying dcsnps within the voltage-gated potassium (kv) channel genes, where genetic variation has been shown to cause, or be associated with, cardiac arrhythmogenesis, for which the first presenting symptom can be sudden cardiac death. genetic screening of a long qt syndrome (lqts) cohort of 262 patients revealed that 59 had at least 1 minor allele in a kv-channel gene . an additional concern with arrhythmogenesis is that individuals with certain genetic backgrounds (including kv-channel genotypes) can acquire it when administered with certain drugs . furthermore, snps in kv-channel genes also cause, or predispose individuals to, various neurological disorders including epilepsy , neuromyotonia and episodic ataxia , as well as other diseases, such as deafness . while not directly fatal, these disorders would still benefit from pre-symptomatic diagnosis and treatment. association studies have previously been used to identify kvchannel dcsnps , but there is concern that some variants may be incorrectly assigned because study cohorts were not large enough to infer statistical significance . results are also confounded by multiple testing errors, and the fact that compound snps are likely to cause, or contribute to, disease . variable phenotype penetrance and severity is observed in arrhythmia patients harboring the same kv-channel snp , suggesting that phenotypic modifier genes and/or variants exist . ranking snps by disease-causing probability would (i) prioritize variants for further examination and (ii) aid identification of phenotype-modifying variants. this is made even more relevant by the current sequencing revolution, where advances in high-throughput technology have facilitated genotyping to an unprecedented depth at affordable costs; resulting in a plethora of data that some are finding hard to analyse fast enough . computational methods to predict whether nssnps will cause disease were originally based on empirical rules but now tend to use machine learning approaches . variants of known consequence are used to train the machine learning predictor, which finds patterns within the annotated nssnp attributes that best classify the data into in their constituent groups: dcsnps and bsnps. once trained, the predictor can be applied to uncharacterized variants, emitting the likelihood that they are disease causing. this approach has resulted in prediction accuracies of up to 82 , but there is some evidence that performance can be improved if the machine learning model is built for a specific gene  
