an accessible database for mouse and human whole transcriptome qpcr primers motivation: real time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qpcr) is an important tool in quantitative studies of dna and rna molecules; especially in transcriptome studies, where different primer combinations allow identification of specific transcripts such as splice variants or precursor messenger rna. several softwares that implement various rules for optimal primer design are available. nevertheless, as designing qpcr primers needs to be done manually, the repeated task is tedious, time consuming and prone to errors. results: we used a set of rules to automatically design all possible exonexon and intronexon junctions in the human and mouse tran-scriptomes. the resulting database is included as a track in the ucsc genome browser, making it widely accessible and easy to use.quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qpcr) is an efficient tool to quantify changes in abundance of dna/rna molecules. its main advantage is that it has a large dynamic range and requires only basic sample preparation steps (reverse transcription of rna). double-stranded dna dye (such as sybr) based qpcr quantifies the amount of double-stranded dna in a sample. a pair of specific primers amplifies a short (usually 60130 bp) dna region, and the emitted light is measured after every cycle. the qpcr platforms allow measurement in parallel (on the same plate) of many different reactions, which saves time and work and reduces technical bias. primer design for qpcr is a relatively simple but repetitive time-consuming task. the first step is to choose a target sequence, for which one then has to define constraints about the primers product and reaction conditions. then, available software (e.g. primer3,) is used to get the set of best suggested primer pairs. when browsing rna transcripts, the target sequence should be determined and selected carefully because of constraints such as product size, amplification of a single product and, in particular, the need to amplify a specific isoform of a given gene. moreover, as qpcr platforms enable performing measurements for a large number of genes in parallel, the user has to repeat many times the task of target sequence selection and primer design manually, which can be tedious and prone to human errors. as an example, in the most frequent case, of measuring mrna, one wishes to amplify an exonexon junction, picking the sequences of both exons and imposing the constraint of having the forward primer on the 5 0 exon and the reverse primer on the 3 0 exon; see also sandhu and acharya (2005) discussed in supplementary information.  
