genome analysis large-scale analysis of conserved rare codon clusters suggests an involvement in co-translational molecular recognition events motivation: an increasing amount of evidence from experimental and computational analysis suggests that rare codon clusters are functionally important for protein activity. most of the studies on rare codon clusters were performed on a limited number of proteins or protein families. in the present study, we present the sherlocc program and how it can be used for large scale protein family analysis of evolutionarily conserved rare codon clusters and their relation to protein function and structure. this large-scale analysis was performed using the whole pfam database covering over 70 of the known protein sequence universe. our program sherlocc, detects statistically relevant conserved rare codon clusters and produces a user-friendly html output. results: statistically significant rare codon clusters were detected in a multitude of pfam protein families. the most statistically significant rare codon clusters were predominantly identified in n-terminal pfam families. many of the longest rare codon clusters are found in membrane-related proteins which are required to interact with other proteins as part of their function, for example in targeting or insertion. we identified some cases where rare codon clusters can play a regulating role in the folding of catalytically important domains. our results support the existence of a widespread functional role for rare codon clusters across species. finally, we developed an online filter-based search interface that provides access to sherlocc results for all pfam families. availability: the sherlocc program and search interface are open access and are available at http://bcb.recent studies suggest that beyond the amino acid sequence lies an additional layer of information, hidden within the codon sequence, able to mediate local kinetics of translation. in fact, synonymous codons that are used with low frequency, tend to have a depleted concentration of trnas thus causing ribosomes to pause at rare codons until the scarce activated trna brings the next amino acid to the growing polypeptide (; to whom correspondence should be addressed.). the observation that rare codons are not randomly distributed but rather organized in large clusters across species support the existence of a selective evolutionary pressure. many roles have been proposed to explain the heterogeneity of translational kinetics. for example, protein folding is a cotranslational process during which the nascent polypeptide chain is in dynamic interaction with components of the cellular milieu such as the ribosome structure, chaperone proteins, solvent molecules and also with its own residues. the speed at which the polypeptide chain grows dictates the time scale within which the translated residues that have already exited the ribosomal channel undergo local folding events (-helices are somehow an exception as they tend to start forming inside the tunnel). in this context, while not altering the sequence of the nascent protein, synonymous codon changes can lead to distinct folding pathways . several studies focused on identifying rare codons in protein sequences and replacing them with frequent synonymous ones. the results were diverse: decrease of a proteins specific activity , a change in substrate specificity and a decrease in protein solubility and activation of a gene designed to detect misfolded proteins . for these three studies, the results were suggested to be due to alterations in the folding pathway of the protein. it was also observed that slowly translated regions tend to preferentially code for -strands and coils, whereas faster translated regions tend to code for -helices . recent work showed that translation speed decreases at the start of secondary structures in escherichia coli . the ribosomal pauses caused by rare codons can in principle regulate-specific folding events but could also be involved in other mechanisms involving the nascent polypeptide chain such as protein targeting or co-translational molecular recognition events. a study that examined genes of emericella nidulans observed a correlation between the position of hydrophobic stretches, predicted to span across a membrane or to be a cleavable signal sequence, and rare codon clusters suggesting a potential control over membrane protein targeting or membrane insertion . it was observed that signal sequences of exported proteins of e. coli and salmonella typhimurium were enriched with rare codons . one study suggested that rare codons favored the proper structural arrangement of an -helix signal sequence, which ensured that the protein correctly followed its secretion pathway . moreover, a correlation between the position of rare codon clusters in mrna  
