large-scale dynamic gene regulatory network inference combining differential equation models with local dynamic bayesian network analysis motivation: reverse engineering gene regulatory networks, especially large size networks from time series gene expression data, remain a challenge to the systems biology community. in this article, a new hybrid algorithm integrating ordinary differential equation models with dynamic bayesian network analysis, called differential equation-based local dynamic bayesian network (deldbn), was proposed and implemented for gene regulatory network inference. results: the performance of deldbn was benchmarked with an in vivo dataset from yeast. deldbn significantly improved the accuracy and sensitivity of network inference compared with other approaches. the local causal discovery algorithm implemented in deldbn also reduced the complexity of the network inference algorithm and improved its scalability to infer larger networks. we have demonstrated the applicability of the approach to a network containing thousands of genes with a dataset from human hela cell time series experiments. the local network around brca1 was particularly investigated and validated with independent published studies. brac1 network was significantly enriched with the known brca1-relevant interactions, indicating that deldbn can effectively infer large size gene regulatory network from time series data.the increasing availability of high-throughput measurements of transcripts has presented a golden opportunity for elucidating gene regulatory pathways and networks for important traits such as human diseases. time series datasets such as the temporal measurements in yeast and human cell cycles are of particular interests for two reasons. first, the temporal measurements capture the expression profile of the genes to whom correspondence should be addressed. present address: school of life science, nantong university, p.r.china. in a dynamic process, which allows for efficient deconvolution of the regulatory interactions from the data. second, the time information of a temporal measurement provides an important extra dimension for causality studies based on the intuition that past events has causal effects on current and future events and not vice versa. it is the motivation of this article to develop a systems biology approach to reverse engineer gene regulatory network from time series data with higher accuracy and better scalability than has been achieved using currently existing methodologies. various approaches have been developed and applied for this purpose, which generally fall into one of the two categories, namely the modelbased approaches and the machine learning-based approaches. ordinary differential equation (ode) models were used in the model-based approaches to explicitly represent the dependence of the concentration of one genes transcripts on that of other genes. the representative example algorithms in this category include network identification by regression (nir) , singular value decomposition and regression analysis , mode-of-action by network identification (mni) , time series network identification (tsni) and inferator . examples in the second category include the use of various machine learning approaches for network learning, such as partial correlation , graphic gaussian models (ggm) , dynamic bayesian network analysis (dbn) , state space model and granger causality . however, the success of these approaches have been limited due to technical challenges such as the difficulty in estimating the parameters in the ode models and the computational complexity for machine learning approaches like dbn for large size networks and lack of gold standard datasets for the benchmarking of methodologies. in this article, we propose a new approach, named deldbn (differential equation based local dynamic bayesian network), to integrate ode models with dynamic bayesian analysis to infer gene regulatory networks. ode models represent a parametric version of mechanistic gene regulations with the advantage of accurately capturing the underlying data generation process. to avoid the challenge of estimating parameters in solving ode models, we applied a dbn analysis step to connect the left-hand side (transcription rate of a gene) to the right-hand side of an ode (expression level of regulatory genes). to improve the speedupin this study, we integrated for the first time a dynamic mechanistic gene expression model with dbn analysis and demonstrated its advantage against ode-based model such as tsni and dbn model in banjo when applied to fine time series dataset of irma, as shown in. we particularly noticed that the mutual connection between gal4 and gal80 was not able to be recovered by any of the methods discussed in. the connection between these two genes is due to interactions between gal4 and gal80 proteins. direct inference of these connections from transcriptional profiles proved to be a challenge . however, integrating the dynamic model, i.e. using the time differential to infer the connections, successfully uncovered these two connections.inferred the connections between gal4 and gal80 too using a more complicated non-parametric kinetics model with a gaussian process approach. therefore, it appears that the dynamic modeling integration step empowered the subsequent dbn inference to infer the subtle connections. these connections can only be inferred from their derived dynamic properties such as the transcriptional rate in our case. at the same time, the approach was also able to infer other strong transcriptional regulations found by other approaches. the current framework provided a way to incorporate more detailed mechanistic understanding of transcriptional gene regulation by modifying equation (1). given the increasing availability of genome-scale measurements such as profiling for mrna and small rna, it becomes more and more important for network reconstruction algorithms to have the capability to scale up to handle thousands of genes. deldbn adopted the local causal discovery algorithm that was introduced by), which reduced the complexity of the bayesian network inference algorithm by reducing the number of independency tests. deldbn can be applied to large size networks with thousands of genes and the computation can be finished reasonably fast (order of hours) as has been tested during the human hela cell data analysis. the local dbn analysis gave an approximate and faster solution to the dynamic problem as defined in equation (1), which otherwise has to be solved in a much longer time using more complex approaches such as the gaussian process . in the current analysis, we assumed the first order markov chain by modeling the expression of genes g at time t , g(t ) as the a function of its regulators r at the immediate previous time point, t 1. the approach can be extended easily to allow more optional time lags with the following equation.the equation can be solved using same local dbn approach to identify the mb of xi from its history predecessors. however, it increases the pool size of the potential regulator by allowing more time lags. although the first order approximation worked fine with irma network, the actual time lag should be determined carefully based upon knowledge on the experimental system under investigation. time series data allowed the inference of causal effects relations since the direction of regulation can only go from past to current and then to the future events. different approaches such as granger causality analysis and dbn analysis have been developed and applied to gene regulatory network analysis. granger causality analysis has been applied to the same human hela cell data previously (; nagarajan and). however in contrast to our study, no genes were found to connect to brca1 in these previous two studies. while in this article, it has been shown that with deldbn very relevant genes can be identified in the local neighborhood of brac1. therefore, deldbn might have advantages for large network analysis over other approaches. another advantage of deldbn is its flexibility to incorporate prior knowledge into the learning process. for example, we can restrict the connection from transcription factors to target genes by only allowing predefined transcription factors to be the regulators in the right-hand side of equation (1). we can also forbid certain connections, e.g. a b, by excluding a from the pool of potential regulators of b in equation (1). it should be noted that accurate dynamic profiles, e.g. transcription rates, can only be estimated from fine time series data with short sampling time intervals. the irma time series data is an excellent example of such kind with a sampling time interval of 10 min. the accurate inference of dynamic properties is crucial to the following dbn inference of the regulatory connections. thus, the advantage of the algorithm cannot be necessarily guaranteed when applying to datasets with large time scales (on the order of hours). the result from this study also provided an example of guidance on experimental design for gene regulatory network inference. a time interval of tens of minutes is recommended for dynamic network inference based on this study. a few other practical limitations should be considered when applying deldbn. first, sampling time intervals can be quite different in many existing studies, thus a good strategy is needed to decide on whether to use transcription rate or expression for dynamic network inference. in the current study, we applied both approaches and evaluated the network quality by comparing to gold standard datasets to make the final decision. as shown in the case of irma network inference case, using transcription rate clearly outperformed using expression data, and it validates the selection of transcription rate. we also applied transcription rate to the human hela cell cycle data and compared brca1 subnetwork (file 2 in supplementary material, network brca1.2) to the one shown in section 3 which was inferred with expression data (file 2 in supplementary material, network brca1). it was found that the brca1.2 network was less significantly enriched for the abovementioned gene categories. for example, none of the tubulin and topoisoenzyme genes was found in brca1.2 network. less number of kinesin genes was found the brca1.2 network. therefore, the comparison validates the selection of using expression data for network inference in this case. second, data were often not sampled densely enough to estimate accurate transcription rate. moreover, uneven timer intervals may be used in the sampling. the current approach needs to be extended to accommodate these situations. one candidate solution can be to increase the number of data points by interpolation using smoothing spline filters with adjustable smoothing parameters, as used in tsni algorithm . after smoothing and interpolation, discrete time series data is converted into continuous temporal data, which can then be sampled evenly and densely enough to estimate the transcription rate in silico. third, we estimated the transcription rate using the backward eulers method in this article with two time points. other approaches such page: 2691 26862691 deldbn as forward eulers method and three-point estimation can also be used. these approaches need to be evaluated in different cases to find the most appropriate one for best network inference.in conclusion, we have developed a new algorithm, differential equation integrated local dynamic bayesian network analysis (deldbn), for inference of large gene regulatory network from time series data. by benchmarking on two experimental datasets, irma and human hela cell cycle time series data, deldbn demonstrated significant improvements over other approaches such as dbn and granger causality analysis on reconstructing networks of both small and large sizes.  
