gene expression large-scale learning of combinatorial transcriptional dynamics from gene expression motivation: knowledge of the activation patterns of transcription factors (tfs) is fundamental to elucidate the dynamics of gene regulation in response to environmental conditions. direct experimental measurement of tfs activities is, however, challenging, resulting in a need to develop statistical tools to infer tf activities from mrna expression levels of target genes. current models, however, neglect important features of transcriptional regulation; in particular, the combinatorial nature of regulation, which is fundamental for signal integration, is not accounted for. results: we present a novel method to infer combinatorial regulation of gene expression by multiple transcription factors in large-scale transcriptional regulatory networks. the method implements a factorial hidden markov model with a non-linear likelihood to represent the interactions between the hidden transcription factors. we explore our models performance on artificial datasets and demonstrate the applicability of our method on genome-wide scale for three expression datasets. the results obtained using our model are biologically coherent and provide a tool to explore the concealed nature of combinatorial transcriptional regulation.understanding the control of gene expression is one of the major goals of systems biology. while gene expression is a complex process with multiple control points, perhaps the most fundamental is the control of mrna transcription by dna-binding proteins, transcription factors (tfs). a fundamental difficulty in elucidating this process from the experimental point of view is measuring active tf concentrations: tfs are often expressed at low levels, and their activity state is frequently determined by fast post-translational modifications which are difficult to measure directly. a possible solution to this impasse has arisen due to the availability of experimental tools to determine the connectivity of the transcriptional regulatory network, i.e. which tfs bind specific target genes. in particular, the large-scale take-up of chromatin to whom correspondence should be addressed. immunoprecipitation techniques (chip-on-chip) has meant that, for model organisms such as yeast and escherichia coli, this connectivity is now available on a high-throughput scale . as a result, several authors have recently proposed to integrate connectivity and gene expression data in an inferencebased approach to modelling transcription, whereby tf activity is treated as a latent variable to be reconstructed from observations of target genes expression. broadly speaking, inferential approaches to tf activity reconstruction have used one of two strategies: one approach is to use a very simplistic, typically log-linear model of transcription to infer the activity of a very large number of tfs . this approach is relatively well established and has already led to several novel insights in biological studies in a range of situations ; however, the simplicity of the models, imposed by the computational constraints of working with large datasets, has meant that important features of transcriptional regulation have been neglected. more recently, other authors have focused on inferring tf activities in small subnetworks but employing more realistic models of transcription based on differential equations . these approaches are computationally more expensive but allow to model biologically more plausible effects such as saturation , rapid transitions and non-linear interactions between tfs . in this article, we aim at retaining some of the desirable features of small-scale inference approaches in a model capable of learning tf activity on a genome-wide scale. we focus on the problem of modelling interactions between multiple tfs; this is a crucial mechanism that allows cells to integrate signals . we present what, to our knowledge, is the first statistical method for reconstructing combinatorial interactions between tfs from target genes expression levels. we achieve this by modelling tf activity as binary switches (which naturally allow for saturation) within a factorial hidden markov model (fhmm) with a non-linear emission model which models combinatorial interactions between multiple tfs at a promoter. we propose a fast structured variational approximation for inference in large-scale systems. as our model includes non-linear interaction, it is relatively more highly parametrized than simpler models. we, therefore, extensively tested our model on simulated data to check its identifiability. we then applied it to three real time course datasets in saccharomyces cerevisiae and e.coli, using network architectures derived from chip-on-chip experiments or curated databases of biological interactions. the key purpose ofpage: 1278 12771283while our model is still relatively simple, the addition of non-linear interaction terms means that more parameters need to be estimated. on top of that, asymptotically exact inference is computationally unfeasible in large-scale examples. therefore, as a first analysis we perform a thorough test of the proposed model using artificial data to verify its identifiability in a realistic simulated situation. we then use three real datasets; in all cases, the main purpose is to probe the extent to which combinatorial regulations can be learned from the expression data. these datasets are the classic and much studied yeast cell cycle dataset , the yeast metabolic cycle dataset and the e.coli micro-aerobic shift dataset . finally, we compare our results with those obtained with two different methods: a simplified version of the method byand the tfinfer method bywe present a novel method to infer combinatorial interactions between transcriptional regulators from expression data and network  
