large-scale model quality assessment for improving protein tertiary structure prediction motivation: sampling structural models and ranking them are the two major challenges of protein structure prediction. traditional protein structure prediction methods generally use one or a few quality assessment (qa) methods to select the best-predicted models, which cannot consistently select relatively better models and rank a large number of models well. results: here, we develop a novel large-scale model qa method in conjunction with model clustering to rank and select protein structural models. it unprecedentedly applied 14 model qa methods to generate consensus model rankings, followed by model refinement based on model combination (i.e. averaging). our experiment demonstrates that the large-scale model qa approach is more consistent and robust in selecting models of better quality than any individual qa method. our method was blindly tested during the 11th critical assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction (casp11) as multicom group. it was officially ranked third out of all 143 human and server predictors according to the total scores of the first models predicted for 78 casp11 protein domains and second according to the total scores of the best of the five models predicted for these domains. multicoms outstanding performance in the extremely competitive 2014 casp11 experiment proves that our large-scale qa approach together with model clustering is a promising solution to one of the two major problems in protein structure modeling. availability and implementation: the web server is available at: http://sysbio.rnet.missouri.edu/ multicom_cluster/human/.protein tertiary structure prediction has been an important scientific problem for few decades, especially in bioinformatics and computational biology . despite more and more native structures are included in protein data bank (pdb) database, the gap between the sequenced proteins and the native structures is still enlarging due to the exponential increase of protein sequences produced by large-scale genome and transcriptome sequencing. it is estimated that 1 of protein sequences have the native structures in pdb database . therefore, accurate computational methods for protein tertiary structure prediction that are much cheaper and faster than experimental structure determination techniques are needed to reduce this large sequence-structure gap. furthermore, computational structure prediction methods are important for obtaining the structures of membrane proteins whose structures are hard to be determined by experimental techniques such as x-ray crystallography . the two major problems of protein structure prediction are model sampling and model ranking. the former is to generate a number of structural models (conformations) for a protein target, and the latter is to rank these models and to select the presumably best ones as final predictions. the two main ways of generating protein models are template-based modeling and template-free modeling. template-based modeling methods use the known structures (templates) of the proteins that are homologous or analogous to a target protein to construct structural models for the target . for instance,we developed a large-scale model qa technique in conjunction with model clustering and refinement to improve protein tertiary structure prediction. inspired by the previous work that integrated several primary qa methods, our method that combined a large number of protein model qa methods reliably and consistently improved protein model rankingone of the major challenges of protein structure prediction. for the first time, we demonstrate that this large-scale consensus qa approach is more robust and accurate than any individual quality method by integrating their strength together. our tertiary structure prediction based on this method outperformed all the server predictors during the very competitive casp11 experiment in 2014. the casp11 official assessment also ranked our method as one of the top three best tertiary structure prediction methods on all the casp11 human targets. this outstanding performance demonstrates our large-scale model qa approach is a promising direction to advance the state of the art of protein model ranking and selection. moreover, our approach adopts an open qa system, into which, adding more complimentary methods may potentially improve the ranking, but incorporating redundant methods does not necessarily lead to an improvement. however, our general combination approach demonstrates the importance of developing more individual qa methods and the possibility of optimally combining them together to advance the field of protein structure prediction.  
