lcr-exxxplorer: a web platform to search, visualize and share data for low complexity regions in protein sequences motivation: local compositionally biased and low complexity regions (lcrs) in amino acid sequences have initially attracted the interest of researchers due to their implication in generating artifacts in sequence database searches. there is accumulating evidence of the biological significance of lcrs both in physiological and in pathological situations. nonetheless, lcr-related algorithms and tools have not gained wide appreciation across the research community, partly due to the fact that only a handful of user-friendly software is currently freely available. results: we developed lcr-exxxplorer, an extensible online platform attempting to fill this gap. lcr-exxxplorer offers tools for displaying lcrs from the uniprot/swissprot knowledgebase, in combination with other relevant protein features, predicted or experimentally verified. moreover, users may perform powerful queries against a custom designed sequence/lcr-centric database. we anticipate that lcr-exxxplorer will be a useful starting point in research efforts for the elucida-tion of the structure, function and evolution of proteins with lcrs. availability and implementation: lcr-exxxplorer is freely available at the url http://repeat.biol.during the past 30 years, the main focus of research related to regions of local compositional extremes (low complexity regions; lcrs) was their identification for the purpose of sequence masking for eliminating spurious hits in database searches . several studies have been published showcasing the abundance and importance of such regions at the molecular/structural (e.g.), functional (e.g.), organismic (e.g.) and habitat level (e.g.). despite the apparent biological importance of lcrs theres a distinct lack of tools or services capable of helping biologists to study them in depth. most of the methods capable of detecting lcrs were developed for the sole purpose of masking them and are meant to be used from the command line as part of a sequence analysis or search pipeline. while some tools, such as seg , cast or bias do offer more advanced reports as an option, their results are mostly meant to be parsed by a computer software and not a biologist. in this work, we present lcr-exxxplorer, an online service to search, visualize and share lcrs in protein sequences. we highlight v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.  
