gene expression learning combinatorial transcriptional dynamics from gene expression data motivation: mrna transcriptional dynamics is governed by a complex network of transcription factor (tf) proteins. experimental and theoretical analysis of this process is hindered by the fact that measurements of tf activity in vivo is very challenging. current models that jointly infer tf activities and model parameters rely on either of the two main simplifying assumptions: either the dynamics is simplified (e.g. assuming quasi-steady state) or the interactions between tfs are ignored, resulting in models accounting for a single tf. results: we present a novel approach to reverse engineer the dynamics of multiple tfs jointly regulating the expression of a set of genes. the model relies on a continuous time, differential equation description of transcriptional dynamics where tfs are treated as latent on/off variables and are modelled using a switching stochastic process (telegraph process). the model can not only incorporate both activation and repression, but allows any non-trivial interaction between tfs, including and and or gates. by using a factorization assumption within a variational bayesian treatment we formulate a framework that can reconstruct both the activity profiles of the tfs and the type of regulation from time series gene expression data. we demonstrate the identifiability of the model on a simple but non-trivial synthetic example, and then use it to formulate non-trivial predictions about transcriptional control during yeast metabolism.understanding the mechanisms by which cells alter gene expression in response to external stimuli is a fundamental challenge in systems biology. perhaps the most critical level at which this control is exerted is in the regulation of mrna transcription. a common mechanism for achieving this is by structural or chemical modification of transcription factor (tf) proteins: the environmental signal (typically a change in the concentration of some small molecule) causes a change in state in the tf, which enables the protein to bind target promoters and hence modulate the rate of to whom correspondence should be addressed. recruitment of rna polymerase and consequently transcription . this view lends itself to a straightforward mathematical formulation in terms of ordinary differential equations (odes), and has played a prominent role in the success of kinetic models of regulatory networks, enabling the construction of detailed models of many important processes . despite the success of kinetic modelling, a major obstacle to its wider application is its reliance on an accurate knowledge of a number of model parameters that are often difficult to experimentally measure. in particular, tfs activity states are often difficult to assay in a dynamical fashion due to several technical limitations: tfs are often present at low intercellular concentrations and the changes in their activity state can occur rapidly due to post-translational modifications. this has led to considerable activity in the statistics and machine learning community to develop computational methods to infer tf activity profiles from time-course measurements of mrna expression levels. early tf inference models exploited the availability of maps of the architecture of the regulatory network (obtained e.g. through high-throughput chip-on-chip experiments;) to simultaneously infer the activity profile of a large number of tfs. this approach was pioneered by the network component analysis model of, which was subsequently cast in a probabilistic framework . while the predictions of such models have provided valuable biological insights , the large number of variables means that only extremely simplified models of transcriptional control can be considered to ensure model identifiability. to have more realistic predictions, some authors have recently proposed inferential approaches based on realistic, ode-based models of transcription . thus, gene expression dynamics is governed by an ode with a driving force represented by the tf activity. placing a suitable prior distribution over the tf activity, posterior estimation can be performed, along with estimation of model parameters such as mrna decay and synthesis rates. while there is much promise in employing more realistic models, the mathematical difficulties encountered in solving this inverse problem are significant, and the inference procedure cannot handle models of the complexity routinely used in kinetic modelling. to our knowledge, all existing methods restrict themselves to the single-input motif (sim) scenario, where a module of genes is controlled by a single tf. in this contribution, we build on our previous model of sim dynamics and extend the results to simultaneously infer the activities of multiple interacting tfs.page: 1624 16231629  
