systems biology learning gene network structure from time laps cell imaging in rnai knock downs motivation: as rna interference is becoming a standard method for targeted gene perturbation, computational approaches to reverse engineer parts of biological networks based on measurable effects of rnai become increasingly relevant. the vast majority of these methods use gene expression data, but little attention has been paid so far to other data types. results: here we present a method, which can infer gene networks from high-dimensional phenotypic perturbation effects on single cells recorded by time-lapse microscopy. we use data from the mitocheck project to extract multiple shape, intensity and texture features at each frame. features from different cells and movies are then aligned along the cell cycle time. subsequently we use dynamic nested effects models (dynonems) to estimate parts of the network structure between perturbed genes via a markov chain monte carlo approach. our simulation results indicate a high reconstruction quality of this method. a reconstruction based on 22 gene knock downs yielded a network, where all edges could be explained via the biological literature. availability: the implementation of dynonems is part of the bioconductor r-package nem.the availability of large rnai screens has raised the interest in computational approaches for reverse engineering parts of biological networks from measurable effects of targeted gene perturbations. examples thereof range from graph theoretical algorithms over bayesian networks to factor graphs , epistasis analysis and ordinary differential equation systems . most of these methods make use of gene expression data. the few attempts to reverse engineer gene networks from phenotypic data include studies by, who rely on hierarchical clustering of static images, and, who use a probabilistic graphical model for only one binary phenotypic variable in static images. to our knowledge, there is yet no method for the inference of networks from time-lapse microscopy based on large numbers of statistical image features. nested effects models (nems) are a class of probabilistic graphical models that have been introduced originally byand extended substantially later on by);;;. in nems, indirect high-dimensional downstream effects of multiple single-gene knock downs are studied. nems allow for inferring the signaling flow between these perturbed genes on a transcriptional as well as non-transcriptional level based on the measured intervention effects.extended the theory of nems to time-series data, and applied it to infer parts of a transcriptional network involved in murine stem cell development. originally, nems assumed downstream effects to be measured via gene expression profiling, but here we use phenotypic image features from movies instead. our movies were taken from the mitocheck database , in which about 20 000 human genes were silenced via rnai and subsequently screened for cell cycle defects. we use dynamic nems to estimate the network between perturbed genes based on the dynamic response of the phenotype along the cell cycle. the inference is based on a markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) algorithm, which is introduced in this article.we have shown that it is possible to learn pathway structures from phenotypic perturbation effects recorded in time-lapse movies. at the heart of the method lies the extraction of morphological features yielding measurable differences in cell phenotypes. we have developed a method to quantify these differences such that an extended version of the dynonem method is applicable. to do so, cell trajectories were automatically aligned to the standard cell cycle, and a likelihood ratio score for the detection of feature changes was calculated. here, this was done by comparing the distribution of each feature across different cells in a control and treated population, which makes the detection of significances sensitive given the large number of observed cells. one might also imagine comparing each feature in a single treated cell against the population of control cells as an alternative. this would probably be less sensitive, but could also be valuable, if cell by cell differences are of relevance. we have developed a novel mcmc sampler for network structure learning to estimate the posterior likelihood of each interaction. our method allows for the inclusion of prior knowledge in a bayesian fashion. our whole approach aims at the reconstruction of small networks on the order of 10 nodes, for which the search space of signaling graphs can be sampled representatively. for larger networks, possible solutions include the restriction of the number of possible interaction partners of each node as well as divide and conquer approaches , but this is subject to future research. our simulations demonstrate the high sensitivity and specificity of our approach. this is also reflected in our application to movies of 22 sirna knock downs from the mitocheck database, where all estimated interactions were explainable by literatureknown pathways. we detect and exploit phenotypic differences that develop in response to a perturbation of the cell. in our present application, all phenotypic differences are derived from merely one fluorescence staining of the cell (gfp-histone tagging). we expect a significant increase in power of our method if multiple stainings were used, and the individual fluorescence labels were indicative of the biological process under investigation.a basic assumption of our present movienem approach is that phenotypic perturbation effects should occur at some point during the cell cycle and then remain until the end of the cell cycle. this assumption may not be fulfilled in all cases. even more, some perturbations may not yield a phenotypic effect at all. in such cases, movienem is not applicable. finally, it is worth emphasizing that movienem up to now is certainly not an approach for large-scale network reconstruction. this is due to the huge network space (increasing exponentially with the number of network nodes), which makes sampling-based methods (as well as heuristic approaches) computationally slow. the reconstruction of cellular networks affords a better insight into the organization of a cell. targeted rnai screens have revealed their great potential for this purpose during the past years. given the fact that the combination with omics-data is not always possible or affordable, image-based techniques can offer a promising alternative. our movienem approach is therefore a step toward better exploiting this information-rich data to uncover biological mechanisms.  
