learning hmms for nucleotide sequences from amino acid alignments profile hidden markov models (profile hmms) are known to efficiently predict whether an amino acid (aa) sequence belongs to a specific protein family. profile hmms can also be used to search for protein domains in genome sequences. in this case, hmms are typically learned from aa sequences and then used to search on the six-frame translation of nucleotide (nt) sequences. however, this approach demands additional processing of the original data and search results. here, we propose an alternative and more direct method which converts an aa alignment into an nt one, after which an nt-based hmm is trained to be applied directly on a genome.the identification of protein coding sequences is an important step in genome annotation. profile hidden markov models (profile hmms) are probabilistic models that can efficiently search for characteristic domains of protein families in databases. for this purpose, profile hmms can be trained from alignments of amino acid (aa) sequences, called here aa-hmms. as nucleotide (nt) sequences degrade more rapidly than the aa sequences they encode, aa alignments are generally more accurate than their corresponding nt ones . moreover, aa alignments can be more easily obtained than nt alignments: databases like pfam and cdd make available aa alignments related to many protein domains. therefore, aa-hmms have also been used for searching for protein domains in genomes. the usual way of doing this is to translate the genome sequence into six aa sequences according to the reading frames and apply the hmms on each one. however, this approach demands additional treatment of both the original data and the search results, such as translating the whole genome into six aa sequences. furthermore, depending on the tool to run the hmms, it is necessary to cut each aa sequence into small windows and create overlapping windows to prevent loss of regions of interest, leading to a lot of overhead. the length of the windows and the overlapping regions depend on the hmm to be used, which becomes worse when using several hmms with very different numbers of states. moreover, the relative positions of the hmms predictions have to be mapped onto the real positions in the genome. in this work, we propose a method that converts aa alignments into nt ones to learn hmms from nt, called here nt-hmms, for searching directly on nt sequences. this method is an alternative in order to avoid all the additional data and results processing previously described. we tested our method searching for different types of protein domain in several organisms. the method was developed for using with the program hmmer . v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.comin this section, we verify whether hmms built on converted nt alignments are able to retrieve genome sequences related to the tested domains. we compare the results produced by corresponding nt-hmms and aa-hmms with each other and also compare them with domain annotations for the genomes, if they are available. details can be found in the supplementary material.  
