leveraging input and output structures for joint mapping of epistatic and marginal eqtls motivation: as many complex disease and expression phenotypes are the outcome of intricate perturbation of molecular networks underlying gene regulation resulted from interdependent genome variations, association mapping of causal qtls or expression quantitative trait loci must consider both additive and epistatic effects of multiple candidate genotypes. this problem poses a significant challenge to contemporary genome-wide-association (gwa) mapping technologies because of its computational complexity. fortunately, a plethora of recent developments in biological network community, especially the availability of genetic interaction networks, make it possible to construct informative priors of complex interactions between genotypes, which can substantially reduce the complexity and increase the statistical power of gwa inference. results: in this article, we consider the problem of learning a multitask regression model while taking advantage of the prior information on structures on both the inputs (genetic variations) and outputs (expression levels). we propose a novel regularization scheme over multitask regression called jointly structured inputoutput lasso based on an 1 // 2 norm, which allows shared sparsity patterns for related inputs and outputs to be optimally estimated. such patterns capture multiple related single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) that jointly influence multiple-related expression traits. in addition, we generalize this new multitask regression to structurally regularized polynomial regression to detect epistatic interactions with manageable complexity by exploiting the prior knowledge on candidate snps for epistatic effects from biological experiments. we demonstrate our method on simulated and yeast eqtl datasets. availability: software is available atone of the fundamental problems in computational biology is to understand associations between genomic variations such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) and phenotypic variations. complex phenotypes (e.g. disease syndromes or pathological signatures) usually consist of a large number of quantitative traits such as clinical and molecular (e.g. gene expression) signals. differences between these phenotypes involve the complex interplay of a large number of snps that perturb the function of diseaserelated genes in the context of a regulatory or interaction network, rather than these snps acting individually . thus, unraveling the causal genetic variations and understanding the to whom correspondence should be addressed. mechanisms of consequent cell and tissue transformation requires an analysis that jointly considers the epistatic and marginal effects of genomic locations that affect the phenotypic variations. specifically, genomic locations that influence the expression levels of genes or mrnas are called expression quantitative trait loci (eqtls). previously, linear marginal effects of eqtls have been studied extensively in the past decade. to increase the power of detecting causal genetic variants reliably, many different approaches have been proposed that take advantage of the correlation structures in the form of either physical or inferred molecular networks in the genome and phenome, and other prior knowledge of such structures from previous studies. for example, graph-guided fused lasso analyzed multiple traits simultaneously by considering a network of multiple traits to find genetic markers with pleiotropic effects that affect multiple-correlated traits jointly . another approach, lirnet, was proposed to make use of prior knowledge on regulatory features, such as conservation scores for a more informed search of association snps . unlike linear effects of eqtls, detecting non-linear snpsnp interactions is still in its infancy due to a very large number of possible interactions between snps [we refer readers to (for the meanings of snpsnp interactions or epistasis]. for example, a typical association analysis often involves up to millions of snps; with j 10 6 snps, the number of candidates of snp pairs for pairwise interactions becomes j 2 which is clearly pushing the limit of practical computing resources. more importantly, it also carries a serious statistical issue that is the multiple testing problem . if we test all snp pairs to find epistatic effects, only a handful of snp pairs may be left after correcting for multiple hypothesis testing. to cope with the problem, previous methods attempted to reduce the number of snp pairs for hypothesis testing in various ways. for example,proposed a two-step approach. it first fits a linear regression model with only marginal effects and then considers only the snps with significant marginal effects for epistatic interactions. this approach reduces the candidate interaction pairs but it significantly limits the scope of the analysis since genetic loci with epistatic effects may not show any marginal effects. the two-step approach will completely miss such interactions. another proposed approach is sequential search . it chooses a primary snp by finding the snp with the largest marginal effect, and then the secondary snp is selected in such a way that residual sum of squares is minimized in a regression setting with the two chosen snps. even though it has been shown that this approach is more powerful than exhaustive 2d search, it still suffers from the cases where interacting snps do not have significant marginal effects. furthermore,proposed a different approach where the candidates of snp pairs for epistatic effects are chosen using biology networks . in particular, under the guidance of proteinprotein interaction network  
