systems biology licre: unsupervised feature correlation reduction for lipidomics motivation: recent advances in high-throughput lipid profiling by liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spec-trometry (lc-esi-ms/ms) have made it possible to quantify hundreds of individual molecular lipid species (e.g. fatty acyls, glycerolipids, glycerophospholipids, sphingolipids) in a single experimental run for hundreds of samples. this enables the lipidome of large cohorts of subjects to be profiled to identify lipid biomarkers significantly associated with disease risk, progression and treatment response. clinically, these lipid biomarkers can be used to construct classification models for the purpose of disease screening or diagnosis. however, the inclusion of a large number of highly correlated bio-markers within a model may reduce classification performance, unnecessarily inflate associated costs of a diagnosis or a screen and reduce the feasibility of clinical translation. an unsupervised feature reduction approach can reduce feature redundancy in lipidomic bio-markers by limiting the number of highly correlated lipids while retaining informative features to achieve good classification performance for various clinical outcomes. good predictive models based on a reduced number of biomarkers are also more cost effective and feasible from a clinical translation perspective. results: the application of licre to various lipidomic datasets in diabetes and cardiovascular disease demonstrated superior discrimination in terms of the area under the receiver operator characteristic curve while using fewer lipid markers when predicting various clinical outcomes. availability and implementation: the matlab implementation of licre is available from https://sites.google.com/site/licrerepository/supervised feature reduction approaches have commonly been used in genomics to improve computational efficiency and classification performance. for instance,demonstrated that the omission of uninformative single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) microarray-derived copy number measurements improved both the classification performance of various cancer subtypes and overall computational efficiency. in the context of snps, uninformative features may constitute probesets with probe sequences matching multiple genomic loci giving rise to cross-hybridization and spurious copy number measurements. in lipidomics, lipid species experimentally analysed tend to be highly correlated because of similarities in their chemical properties (e.g. lipids that are co-regulated or members of a common metabolic pathway). thus, feature reduction to minimize the number of correlated lipids in the dataset can be useful to ensure good classification performance by using a limited set of non-redundant but informative features. the advantage of an unsupervised feature reduction approach is that the reduction is not biased towards any sample or outcome classification, and a single reduced dataset can be used for the analysis of multiple outcomes. the use of a limited number of markers also enhances the feasibility for potential translation in a clinical setting for disease risk prediction, diagnosis, prognosis and prediction/monitoring of therapeutic response.we have developed an unsupervised feature reduction approach for lipidomic data. the application of licre on clinical lipidomic datasets (see supplementary material) demonstrates a statistically significant improvement in area under the roc curve that is achieved with the use of a reduced number of features. this suggests potential utility in identifying concise markers for risk prediction, diagnostic, prognostic models of disease and for monitoring therapeutic response.  
