ligand-binding site prediction of proteins based on known fragment–fragment interactions motivation: the identification of putative ligand-binding sites on proteins is important for the prediction of protein function. knowledge-based approaches using structure databases have become interesting, because of the recent increase in structural information. approaches using binding motif information are particularly effective. however, they can only be applied to well-known ligands that frequently appear in the structure databases. results: we have developed a new method for predicting the binding sites of chemically diverse ligands, by using information about the interactions between fragments. the selection of the fragment size is important. if the fragments are too small, then the patterns derived from the binding motifs cannot be used, since they are many-body interactions, while using larger fragments limits the application to well-known ligands. in our method, we used the main and side chains for proteins, and three successive atoms for ligands, as fragments. after superposition of the fragments, our method builds the conformations of ligands and predicts the binding sites. as a result, our method could accurately predict the binding sites of chemically diverse ligands, even though the protein data bank currently contains a large number of nucleotides. moreover, a further evaluation for the unbound forms of proteins revealed that our building up procedure was robust to conformational changes induced by ligand binding. availability: our method, named bumble, is available atstructural information of proteins has been explosively increasing, mainly due to structural genomics projects. on the other hand, the to whom correspondence should be addressed. molecular functions of many proteins still remain uncharacterized. therefore, computational methods that can predict the molecular functions are required . since many proteins conduct their molecular functions through the specific recognition of small molecules (ligands), information about the ligand-binding sites can provide insights into their molecular functions . currently, the most successful prediction methods adopt the similarity-based approach. this approach searches databases for proteins that are similar to a query protein in one or more properties, such as sequence, fold and physicochemical properties, and predicts the functions of the query protein by transferring the annotations from similar proteins . however, this approach fails if there is no protein with any detectable similarities. to overcome these intrinsic limitations, several methods for binding-site prediction that are based only on the 3d structure of the query protein have been proposed. most of these methods fall into two groups: the geometry-based and force field-based approaches. the former does not consider the physicochemical properties of the protein surface, because it focuses only on the shapes of the surface (i.e. sizes and depths of clefts;). on the other hand, the latter method, which considers the stability of probes positioned around the protein surface, does not adequately consider complicated effects, such as solvent effects . the knowledge-based approach is an appealing alternative. this approach can include a wide range of complicated effects by taking advantage of the statistics of molecular interactions obtained from structure databases, such as the protein data bank . the potential of this approach is growing fast, because of the recent rapid accumulation of structure data. existing knowledgebased methods are based on interactions on one of two levels: interatomic and fragment-level interactions. the approach based on the interatomic interactions uses pair-wise potential functions constructed from the statistics of interatomic contacts observed in the databases. this approach has been mainly used for scoring functions in molecular docking studies .we have proposed a new knowledge-based method for predicting binding sites, by building the ligand conformations from the predicted interaction hotspots. evaluations revealed that our method could reasonably predict the binding sites not only for nucleotides but also for chemically diverse ligands, although the background knowledge dataset contained a large number of nucleotides. in addition, the robustness to the conformational changes of proteins was shown by a further evaluation with protein structures in the unbound form. an important point is that the predictions were accomplished by using the information about the patterns of fragment interactions that are common among various proteins, as well as the binding motifs. our method is available on the web server named bumble, which means building up molecules for binding location estimation, at the following address: http://bumble.hgc.jp/.  
