likelihood-based complex trait association testing for arbitrary depth sequencing data in next generation sequencing (ngs)-based genetic studies, researchers typically perform genotype calling first and then apply standard genotype-based methods for association testing. however, such a two-step approach ignores genotype calling uncertainty in the association testing step and may incur power loss and/or inflated type-i error. in the recent literature, a few robust and efficient likelihood based methods including both likelihood ratio test (lrt) and score test have been proposed to carry out association testing without intermediate genotype calling. these methods take genotype calling uncertainty into account by directly incorporating genotype likelihood function (glf) of ngs data into association analysis. however, existing lrt methods are computationally demanding or do not allow covariate adjustment; while existing score tests are not applicable to markers with low minor allele frequency (maf). we provide an lrt allowing flexible covariate adjustment, develop a statistically more powerful score test and propose a combination strategy (unc combo) to leverage the advantages of both tests. we have carried out extensive simulations to evaluate the performance of our proposed lrt and score test. simulations and real data analysis demonstrate the advantages of our proposed combination strategy: it offers a satisfactory trade-off in terms of computational efficiency, applicability (accommo-dating both common variants and variants with low maf) and statistical power, particularly for the analysis of quantitative trait where the power gain can be up to $60 when the causal variant is of low frequency (maf 0.01).next generation sequencing (ngs) technologies have transformed genomic studies since their appearance in 2005. in the past few years, ngs technologies have extended genome-wide association studies (gwas) from common variants (minor allele frequency 0.05) to low frequency variants (maf 0.05) and provided a powerful tool to identify less common genetic variants associated with both mendelian and complex traits . most association testing methods are designed for genotypes, which are not directly available from ngs data. thus, to perform association testing on ngs data, researchers typically perform genotype calling first . there are multiple sources of non-negligible error in ngs data, such as basecalling error and assembly or alignment error , each of which can cause considerable uncertainty in genotype calling. to take these various sources of error into account, many existing genotype calling algorithms adopt a probabilistic framework and generate genotype likelihood functions (glf). currently, accurate genotype calling can be achieved from glf data either with high depth sequencing, or with low depth sequencing if a large number of individuals are sequenced . however, genotype calling can incur a number of problems, particularly when served as an intermediate step for association testing or inference in population genetics. first, uncertainty in genotype calls is ultimately lost in subsequent inference, leading to possible power loss. second, for low coverage sequencing data, multi-sample lineage disequilibrium (ld) aware methods can be rather computationally intensive. third, the dependence of genotype calling on ld pattern may lead to potential bias in population genetics inference . lastly, both uncertainty (particularly differential uncertainty across varying values of phenotypic traits) and inconsistencies in called genotypes may result in inflated type-i error in association testing , particularly when combined from multiple datasets of varying sequencing depths. in the literature, as an attractive alternative to the two-step testing approach (i.e. genotype calling in the first step and association testing based on called genotypes in the second step), computationally efficient one-step methods have been proposed for association analysis that directly model sequencing data for association testing without the intermediate genotype calling step. these one-step methods test association by incorporating glf into the association testing likelihood function and carrying out likelihood based association inference (focusing primarily on testing) without explicitly calling genotypes . among them,) and li (2011) test allele frequency difference between cases and controls via likelihood ratio test (lrt). however, lrt requires numerical optimization under both the null and the alternative hypothesis and is therefore computationally demanding for large-scale datasets. furthermore, existing lrt methods are designed only for binary traits and do not allow covariates adjustment.adopt a generalized linear model (glm) framework to accommodate both quantitative and binary traits and to allow covariates with a motivation conceptually similar to the one proposed for haplotype association testing .sketch the possibility of an lrt, where they envision a two-step approach that first estimates maf based on a partial likelihood without phenotype information and then plugs the estimated maf into the likelihood function to carry out association testing. however, the maximum likelihood estimator (mle) of maf in the two-step approach is not the oracle estimator (details to follow) and thus may incur power loss in subsequent association testing.develop a computationally efficient score test (abbreviated as ska score test hereafter) within the glm framework; however, the information matrix used for the construction of the ska score test ignores the correlation between the maf estimator and estimators for the regression parameters, likely causing the ska score test statistically underpowered. moreover, the score test is generally not applicable when maf is low because the minimal degree of variation in log-likelihood function required for numerical stability of score test statistic cannot be reached. type-i error inflation was reported in the original work for maf under 0.01 . for the same reason, a variation of the ska score test developed particularly for accommodating publicly available control groups also adopts 0.01 as maf threshold. in this paper, we first provide an lrt for association analysis of ngs data (unc lrt), which allows covariate adjustment and handles both quantitative and binary phenotypic traits. in our lrt, the statistically efficient mle of maf is obtained in one unified framework that simultaneously estimates maf and association parameters. second, we improve upon the work of skotte et al. (2012) by considering the correlation between maf estimator and regression parameter estimators in the information matrix and develop a statistically more powerful score test (unc score test). third, although lrt and score test are asymptomatically equivalent, it is well known that their performance can differ considerably in practice. we evaluate the performance of our proposed lrt and score test by simulations and propose a combination strategy to take advantage of both tests (hereafter, referred to as unc combo). extensive simulations and real data based analysis are carried out to examine the robustness, computational efficiency and statistical power of ska score test, unc score test, unc lrt and unc combo. our results suggest advantages of unc combo in practice when genetic architecture (in particular, maf of associated or causal genetic variant(s)) is unknown, particularly for quantitative traits. in our simulations, we observe gains in power up to 60 with losses of less than 8 across a wide range of scenarios considered, when using unc combo. in our real data based simulations, unc combo is able to identify all causal snps while other methods miss at least one.association testing using ngs data without genotype calling is an appealing approach. this approach not only avoids the potentially computationally intensive genotype calling step but also carries all of the information from sequencing into association, in contrast toat least some information loss with an intermediate genotype calling step. population structure and other potential confounding factors are almost inevitable in gwas studies and need to be adjusted for. in this article, we develop unc score test and unc lrt to allow covariate adjustment in association testing based on glfs. both unc score test and unc lrt directly incorporate the uncertainty of the observed sequencing data into analysis by constructing likelihood function based on glfs and do not require explicit genotype calling. instead of a two step approach , unc lrt produces mle of maf together with mles of regression parameters in one step and thus is theoretically more powerful. the unc score test improves upon the previous work of skotte et al.(2012) by taking into account the correlation between regression parameter estimators and maf estimator. using simulations, we have demonstrated that unc score test is generally statistically more powerful than, or at least comparable to, ska score test. unc score test is computationally faster than unc lrt because score test only involves the model under the null hypothesis and does not require time-consuming optimization. on the other hand, in practice, unc lrt can be applied to snps over the entire maf spectrum while unc score test can only be applied to snps with mafs greater than certain threshold (p threshold ) because type-i errors of score tests are inflated without maf filtering. we therefore propose a combination strategy (unc combo) to take advantage of the strengths of our two tests. as shown in simulation results for quantitative trait, unc combo improves upon the two unc tests in three aspects: (i) it can be applied to all snps across the entire maf spectrum, a desirable feature inherited from unc lrt; (ii) it is computationally more efficient than unc lrt, because lrt is calculated only for snps with maf below p threshold ; (iii) it manifests higher statistical power than at least one of the two unc tests. in the real data analysis, unc combo outperforms bothunc lrt and unc score test for simulated quantitative traits. for the reasons above, we recommend unc combo when the trait(s) of interest is/are quantitative. for binary traits, unc score test outperforms other methods and is thus recommended. maf and variation in log-likelihood function are two factors potentially correlated with the inflation of type-i error of the score test. we fit regression models to investigate the relationship among them. we use the determinant of the information matrix as a measure of variation in the log-likelihood function. a linear regression analysis shows that unc score test statistic is negatively associated with the determinant of information matrix (p-value 2e16). moreover, another linear regression indicates that the determinant of the information matrix is positively associated with maf (p-value 2e16). consequently, the lower the maf of a snp, the more ill-conditioned the information matrix becomes and the more likely to result in inflated type-i error. for a simulated binary trait, we also evaluate an alternative approach to filter out snps for the score tests: namely, estimating mafs using only controls and filtering snps based on control maf estimation. simulation results show that this approach may lead to inflated type-i error (e.g. type-i error is 0.265 for unc score test and 0.132 for ska score test with p threshold 0:01, d 2 and n 1000). this is because mafs of rare variants tent to be overestimated when only controls are used in estimation . for example, the maf estimate of ascertained singletons in controls would be double of its true value (assuming equal numbers of cases and controls) if only controls were used to estimate the maf. these unwarrantedly retained rare variants consequently lead to numerical instability and eventually to inflated type-i errors. in appendix f, we introduce correlation between maf estimator and association parameter estimators by letting the effect of the causal snp depend on covariates. in real data, this can be observed due to gene environment interactions. under the scenario, unc score test outperforms ska score test by up to $15. in practice, non-negligible correlation between maf and association parameters estimators can arise in various and unknown ways. it is thus desirable to have a theoretically more powerful score test (unc score test) to guard against such scenarios where correlation among maf and regression parameters is non-negligible. the optimal maf threshold depends on the genetic architecture (number, mafs and effect sizes of the causal snps), which is generally unknown. this threshold also depends on the sample size (n) and sequencing depth. to err on the conservative side, we choose p threshold 20=2n as adopted in the literature and as supported by our own simulation results. in the future, an optimal threshold might be derived by taking sequencing depth into account. moreover, differential sequencing depths between cases and controls introduce additional biases, leading to inflated type-i error of ska as shown in. future work is desired to study the impact of differential sequencing depths on our proposed unc tests. lastly, while the current work focuses on single variant association, extension to rare variant association testing is highly warranted given the higher level of uncertainty in genotype calling for rarer variants.  
