data and text mining linkinpath: from sequence to interconnected pathway linkinpath is a pathway mapping and analysis tool that enables users to explore and visualize the list of gene/protein sequences through various flash-driven interactive web interfaces including kegg pathway maps, functional composition maps (treemaps), molecular interaction/reaction networks and pathway-to-pathway networks. users can submit single or multiple datasets of gene/protein sequences to linkinpath to (i) determine the co-occurrence and co-absence of genes/proteins on animated kegg pathway maps; (ii) compare functional compositions within and among the datasets using treemaps; (iii) analyze the statistically enriched pathways across the datasets; (iv) build the pathway-to-pathway networks for each dataset; (v) explore potential interaction/reaction paths between pathways; and (vi) identify common pathway-to-pathway networks across the datasets. availability: linkinpath is freely available to all interested users atpathways are functional units resulted from the interplay of interacting genes, rnas, proteins and small molecules. mapping genes or proteins into the context of pathways can help gain more insights into their functions and interactions in an organism. although sequence similarity-based methods [e.g. ncbi blast ] have been commonly used for identification of pathways to genes/proteins based on their orthologous genes/proteins annotated in the well-characterized pathways, these methods have limitations such that some best hits (such as those annotated as hypothetical or unknown genes/proteins) may not necessarily be annotated in any pathway. the incorporation of additional data such as proteinprotein interactions and enzymatic reactions can help infer the pathways and their interconnection and uncover the biological function of genes/proteins. however, the information regarding the connections between pathways through molecular interactions and reactions are not included and adequately represented to support the exploratory analysis in most pathway mapping tools (reviewed in), for example, genmapp , pathway explorer and pathway projector . to overcome to whom correspondence should be addressed. these limitations, a web-based interactive tool, so-called linkinpath, was developed to analyze, map and visualize the gene/protein lists in the context of interconnected pathways, which provides a valuable resource for not only comprehensive studies of genegene interaction, but also functional genomics in virtually all organisms.linkinpath is a web-based tool that was applied the state of the art visualization techniques for original aspects of pathway mapping and analyses. its novel contributions such as functional composition using treemaps, pathway-to-pathway interconnections and the global metabolic map with highlighting mechanisms add value over comparable existing tools.  
