genetics and population analysis linkphase3: an improved pedigree-based phasing algorithm robust to genotyping and map errors many applications in genetics require haplotype reconstruction. we present a phasing program designed for large half-sibs families (as observed in plant and animals) that is robust to genotyping and map errors. we demonstrate that it is more efficient than previous versions and other programs, particularly in the presence of genotyping errors. availability and implementation: the software linkphase3 is included in the phasebook package and can be freely downloaded from www.giga.ulg.ac.be/jcms/prod_381171/software. the package is written in fortran and contains source codes. a manual is provided with the package.haplotype reconstruction is useful in many applications including quantitative trait locus (qtl) mapping, whole genome prediction, imputation of missing genotypes, identification of selective sweeps and analysis of the recombination process. in plant and animals, large half-sibs families are common and methods that exploit the corresponding within family linkage information result in accurate haplotype reconstruction. we implemented a method combining such information with mendelian segregation rules in linkphase, a program included in our phasebook package . linkphase has been successfully used in many applications including studies of the recombination process in cattle , imputation of missing marker genotypes (e.g.), qtl mapping in half-sib families or routine genomic evaluation in dairy cattle . however, the methods implemented in linkphase and related programs are sensitive to genotyping and map errors. these will affect accuracy and power in applications such as qtl mapping, genomic selection or genotype imputation and will inflate the estimated number of crossovers. we herein describe an extension of linkphase, referred to as linkphase3, based on the implementation of a new haplotyping method which is faster, robust to genotyping errors and can identify map errors.  
