databases and ontologies lipidgo: database for lipid-related go terms and applications motivation: lipid, an essential class of biomolecules, is receiving increasing attention in the research community, especially with the development of analytical technique like mass spectrometry. gene ontology (go) is the de facto standard function annotation scheme for gene products. identification of both explicit and implicit lipid-related go terms will help lipid research in many ways, e.g. assigning lipid function in protein function prediction. results: we have constructed a web site lipidgo that facilitates browsing and searching lipid-related go terms. an expandable hierarchical go tree is constructed that allows users to find lipid-related go terms easily. to support large-scale analysis, a user is able to upload a list of gene products or a list of go terms to find out which of them is lipid related. finally, we demonstrate the usefulness of lipidgo by two applications: (i) identifying lipid-related gene products in model organisms and (ii) discovering potential novel lipid-related molecular functions availability and implementation: lipidgo is available atlipid and their metabolites are essential in many processes in biology like energy homeostasis, signaling, neurobiology, infectious diseases and so forth. the development of analytical technique like mass spectrometry gives rise to the field of lipidomics . an important goal in lipidomics research is to identify genes and proteins involved in lipid synthesis, metabolism and other relevant processes. as with other subfield of biology, lipid researchers are primarily interested in elucidating functions of gene products. the gene ontology (go) is the most widely used control vocabulary in functional annotation of genes products, and it is being widely used by wet lab researchers and bioinformaticians alike. thus, the identification of lipid-related go terms can facilitate lipid research, either directly or with other bioinformatics tool involving go terms. for example, lipid-related go terms were used to identify novel lipid-associated complexes involved in cancer progression . go consists of three independent subontologies: biological process (bp), cellular component (cc) and molecular function (mf). go is a directed acyclic graph with multiple inheritance property. in go, there are several relationship types. however, in the lipidgo project, where the focus is on the lipid-relatedness property, only is-a relationship is considered. more on term relationship is elaborated in the appendix and in the documentation section of our web site the lipid-related go terms in lipidgo are discovered by curation and computational approach. detailed procedures and issues are given in section 3. all the lipid-related go terms found are subject to stringent predefined curation rules. the rules can be found in the documentation at our web site or appendix. in our web site, the following notations are used to describe class labels of go terms: bp for lipid-related bp terms, bp for nonlipid-related bp terms and bp? for bp terms whose lipid relatedness has not been examined by a curator. similar notations are defined for cc terms (cc, cc, cc?) and mf terms (mf, mf, mf?). we will talk about the unknown class labels in section 3.  
