data and text mining lipid-pro: a computational lipid identification solution for untargeted lipidomics on data-independent acquisition tandem mass spectrometry platforms a major challenge for mass spectrometric-based lipidomics, aiming at describing all lipid species in a biological sample, lies in the computational and bioinformatic processing of the large amount of data that arises after data acquisition. lipid-pro is a software tool that supports the identification of lipids by interpreting large datasets generated by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (lcms/ms) using the advanced data-independent acquisition mode ms e. in the ms e mode, the instrument fragments all molecular ions generated from a sample and records time-resolved molecular ion data as well as fragment ion data for every detectable molecular ion. lipid-pro matches the retention time-aligned mass-to-charge ratio data of molecular-and fragment ions with a lipid database and generates a report on all identified lipid species. for generation of the lipid database, lipid-pro provides a module for construction of lipid species and their fragments using a flexible building block approach. hence, lipid-pro is an easy to use analysis tool to interpret complex ms e lipidomics data and also offers a module to generate a user-specific lipid database. availability and implementation: lipid-pro is freely available at:lipids are compounds of biological origin that are soluble in nonpolar solvents. in biological systems, lipids perform ubiquitous functions such as construction of cell membranes, stabilization of membrane-bound proteins, balancing of energy metabolism or cell signaling . all lipid species in a cell or tissue are referred to as the lipidome. changes within lipidomes have been closely linked to stress responses or various diseases including diabetes, obesity, heart diseases or neurodegenerative diseases (reviewed in). liquid-chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (lcms/ms) is suitable for lipidome analysis since it can cover a broad range of lipids . both, data-dependent acquisition (dda) and data-independent acquisition (dia) are widely used for lcms-based lipidomics. in dda, the most abundant molecular ions at each retention time (rt) are successively v c the author 2014. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com selected for isolation and fragmentation. despite the advantages of the dda approach, there are some inherent limitations such as often irreproducible molecular ion selection, undersampling and long instrument cycle times. dia overcomes those limitations. ms e , supported by waters qtof instrument platforms, acquires intact molecular-and fragment ions in an unbiased manner by continuously switching the energy for collision-induced dissociation between low (ms) and high (ms/ms) energy. dia analysis requires coherent and intricate data processing since it produces complex data containing information on all molecular and fragment ions at each rt. commercial and free downloadable software such as mzmine 2 or lipid data analyser provide support to align and compare the spectral features of lcms data. these applications identify lipid species in lcms raw data by matching their monoisotopic masses or elemental compositions with a custom-based or online database. however, these software applications do not consider fragmentation data. lipidblast identifies lipid species by matching the measured ms/ms spectra to an in silico generated library after converting raw data into the mgf format. lipidblast can be used for the analysis of ms e data, but it is laborious to match hundreds of different lipid species of the database with lcms/ms data. we developed the lipid-pro software solution for rapid identification of lipids in preprocessed dia data acquired with lcms/ms using rt-aligned monoisotopic masses of molecular ions (ms) and fragment ions (ms/ms). since lipid-pro provides a module for construction of lipid species and their characteristic fragments using a flexible building block approach, rare or even non-described lipids beside the common species can be identified in total lipid extracts of biological samples. to meet the technological objectives of this research, we took a step forward in the development of a new user friendly, modular and client-based database management system. the lipid-pro application can be configured on microsoft windows platforms following a simple six-step installation process.  
