data and text mining literature mining of host–pathogen interactions: comparing feature-based supervised learning and language-based approaches motivation: in an infectious disease, the pathogens strategy to enter the host organism and breach its immune defenses often involves interactions between the host and pathogen proteins. currently, the experimental data on hostpathogen interactions (hpis) are scattered across multiple databases, which are often specialized to target a specific disease or host organism. an accurate and efficient method for the automated extraction of hpis from biomedical literature is crucial for creating a unified repository of hpi data. results: here, we introduce and compare two new approaches to automatically detect whether the title or abstract of a pubmed publication contains hpi data, and extract the information about organisms and proteins involved in the interaction. the first approach is a feature-based supervised learning method using support vector machines (svms). the svm models are trained on the features derived from the individual sentences. these features include names of the host/pathogen organisms and corresponding proteins or genes, keywords describing hpi-specific information, more general proteinprotein interaction information, experimental methods and other statistical information. the language-based method employed a link grammar parser combined with semantic patterns derived from the training examples. the approaches have been trained and tested on manually curated hpi data. when compared to a nave approach based on the existing proteinprotein interaction literature mining method, our approaches demonstrated higher accuracy and recall in the classification task. the most accurate, feature-based, approach achieved 6673 accuracy, depending on the test protocol. availability: both approaches are available through philm web-server: http://korkinlab.org/philm.htmlinfections are complex biological processes that target host organisms from virtually all kingdoms of life and involve a variety of microbial pathogens such as viruses, bacteria, fungi, protozoa, multicellular parasites and even proteins (; to whom correspondence should be addressed.). the pathogens strategy to enter the host organism and breach the hosts immune defenses often involves interactions between the host and pathogen proteins . systematic determination and analysis of hostpathogen interactions (hpis) provides a challenging task for both experimental and computational approaches, and is critically dependent on previously obtained knowledge about these interactions. for example, several bioinformatics approaches apply the homology information to predict new hpis, characterize the interaction structures or find conservation patterns across hpi networks . other approaches, either manual or reliant on the existing databases, collect the hpi molecular or genetic data into a centralized repository . however, a fully automated system for extracting molecular hpi data directly from the biomedical literature is yet to be built. rapid growth of published biomedical research has resulted in the development of a number of methods for biomedical literature mining during the last decade . the methods dealing with the biomolecular information are generally divided into three categories based on the domain of biomedical knowledge they target:(i) automated protein or gene identification in a text ; (ii) literaturebased functional annotation of genes and proteins ; and (iii) extracting the information on the relationships between biological molecules, such as proteins and rnas or genes . the relationships detected by the methods from the third category range from a co-occurrence of the genes and proteins in a text to detecting the proteinprotein interactions (ppis) and identification of signal transduction networks and metabolic pathways . related to the problem of mining hpis, the problem of extracting general ppis from the text has received an increasing amount of attention from the community. a number of approaches have been recently proposed to extract ppis from text. a basic approach determines an occurrence of a ppi by detecting the co-occurrence of names of the interacting proteins or genes in the same sentence . a more advanced approach relies on pattern matching to capture the semantic structure from the text phrasesin this work, the problem of mining interactions occurring between proteins/genes of a pathogen organism and its host from the abstracts of biomedical publications was addressed. to do so, two new approaches were introduced: a feature-based approach, which relied on svm methodology, and a language-based approach, which employed the link grammar. three basic hpi mining tasks were defined; for each task the approaches were evaluated and compared with each other. the performance of the two approaches was also compared with a nave approach utilizing a publicly available state-of-the-art method for mining ppis. the evaluation demonstrated that both approaches could mine the hpi information more accurately than the nave  
