databases and ontologies literome: pubmed-scale genomic knowledge base in the cloud the cost of sequencing a full human genome has recently dropped below $1000 (www.illumina.com/systems/hiseqx-sequencing-system.ilmn). the impending broad availability of genomics data holds the promise of making personalized medicine a reality. there has been a rapid rise of interest in applying sequencing in clinical applications such as cancer treatment and pediatrics, as well as in consumer genomics such as 23andme. however, it remains a significant challenge to interpret genomics data for identifying causal genes for diseases and proposing novel drug targets. for complex diseases like cancer, the causal mechanism is complex and involves the synergistic interactions of many genetic components . consequently, there has been increasing interest in adopting a systems approach to boost the signal-to-noise ratio by integrating prior knowledge such as gene networks . of equal importance is to keep up with new genomics findings and automate the process of genomic interpretation, as the evidence for diagnosis and treatment has grown from a handful of symptoms into hundreds or even thousands of genome-scale markers. the majority of biomedical knowledge resides in free-text publications from online repositories such as pubmed (www.ncbi. nlm.nih.gov/pubmed), which currently contains422 million published articles and is growing by 41 million each year. this makes it a priority to automate curation of genomic knowledge for scientific and translational research. in the literome project, we have developed a natural-language processing (nlp) system to automatically extract biomedical entities and relations from pubmed abstracts and made the resulting knowledge base available on the internet. currently, literome focuses on entities and relations most pertinent to genomic medicine: genes, single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), diseases and drugs, related through genomic interactions (e.g. transcription factors and kinases) and genome-wide associations (e.g. snp drug or genedisease associations). users can browse and search the resulting knowledge base in the literome web site, which will be kept up to date as new abstracts become available. the web site and the knowledge base are deployed on azure (azure.microsoft.com). it is straightforward to apply literome to full texts (e.g. pubmed central). we will pursue this in future work.  
