databases and ontologies lncrnator: a comprehensive resource for functional investigation of long non-coding rnas motivation: a number of long non-coding rnas (lncrnas) have been identified by deep sequencing methods, but their molecular and cellular functions are known only for a limited number of lncrnas. current databases on lncrnas are mostly for cataloging purpose without providing in-depth information required to infer functions. a comprehensive resource on lncrna function is an immediate need. results: we present a database for functional investigation of lncrnas that encompasses annotation, sequence analysis, gene expression , protein binding and phylogenetic conservation. we have compiled lncrnas for six species (human, mouse, zebrafish, fruit fly, worm and yeast) from ensembl, hgnc, mgi and lncrnadb. each lncrna was analyzed for coding potential and phylogenetic conservation in different lineages. gene expression data of 208 rna-seq studies (4995 samples), collected from geo, encode, modencode and tcga databases, were used to provide expression profiles in various tissues, diseases and developmental stages. importantly, we analyzed rna-seq data to identify coexpressed mrnas that would provide ample insights on lncrna functions. the resulting gene list can be subject to enrichment analysis such as gene ontology or kegg pathways. furthermore, we compiled proteinlncrna interactions by collecting and analyzing publicly available clip-seq or par-clip sequencing data. finally, we explored evolutionarily conserved lncrnas with correlated expression between human and six other organisms to identify functional lncrnas. the whole contents are provided in a user-friendly web interface. availability and implementation: lncrnator is available at http://long non-coding rnas (lncrnas) are nonprotein-coding transcripts 4200 nt. many lncrnas have been reported to play important molecular and cellular functions despite of not producing protein products. they typically recruit proteins to help or disturb formation of ribonucleoprotein (rnp) complexes. depending on the role of interacting proteins, lncrnas play central roles in a wide range of cellular processes. an illustrative example is rmst, a brain-specific lncrna, which physically interacts with sox2 and plays a key role in transcriptional regulation of neurogenic transcription factors . several lncrnas were implicated in various types of cancers . malat1 was reported to be a critical regulator of the metastasis phenotype of lung cancer cells , and ccat2 was shown to promote tumor growth, metastasis and chromosomal instability in wnt-dependent fashion in colon cancer . in fact, lncrnas are expected to be involved in every stage of hallmarks of cancer , thereby serving as critical regulators and therapeutic targets in many cases. owing to the development of high-throughput sequencing technologies, thousands of lncrnas have been recently discovered from rna-seq data. however, the biological and molecular characteristics of the large majority of lncrnas remain unknown. databases or tools that facilitate functional investigation of lncrnas would be of great value to identify important lncrnas based on understanding of biological roles. several databases on lncrnas have already been developed for various purposes. lncipedia , lncrnadb and lncrnome are mostly for annotation databases based on literature evidence. nred and noncode v3.0 provide microarray expression profiles in various tissues for human and mouse. some of these databases contain additional useful information on function such as the rna secondary structure, microrna binding and protein-lncrna interactions , but they are mostly limited for human. furthermore, rna-seq data, the most useful source of lncrna properties, have never been systematically collected and mined for functional investigation yet. thus, we still lack a comprehensive resource to cover sequence characteristics and function-related data organized in a systematic way. here, we introduce lncrnator to perform in-depth functional analysis of lncrnas by combining sequence characteristics, gene expression data and proteinlncrna interactions. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to compile massive rnaseq data with the support of downstream analysis such as to whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. coexpression and gene set enrichment, covering six important model organisms.  
