locuszoom: regional visualization of genome-wide association scan results genome-wide association studies (gwas) have revealed hundreds of loci associated with common human genetic diseases and traits. we have developed a web-based plotting tool that provides fast visual display of gwas results in a publication-ready format. locuszoom visually displays regional information such as the strength and extent of the association signal relative to genomic position, local linkage disequilibrium (ld) and recombination patterns and the positions of genes in the region. availability: locuszoom can be accessed from a web interface at http://csg.sph.umich.edu/locuszoom. users may generate a single plot using a web form, or many plots using batch mode. the software utilizes ld information from hapmap phase ii (ceu, yri and jpt+chb) or 1000 genomes (ceu) and gene information from the ucsc browser, and will accept snp identifiers in dbsnp or 1000 genomes format. single plots are generated in 20 s. source code and associated databases are available for download and local installation, and full documentation is available online.genome-wide association studies (gwas) have identified hundreds of loci associated with complex human diseases and traits . gwas test for association with dichotomous or quantitative traits at millions of snps across the genome and can identify variants many hundreds of kilobases away from any known gene. the next challenge in human genetics will be to identify the causal variants and genes responsible for disease association at the many disease-associated loci identified from gwas. an associated region may contain only a single strongly associated snp, or more commonly, a set of snps with varying degrees of association due to local linkage disequilibrium (ld) patterns. when examining results. an example locuszoom plot showing the hdl cholesterolassociated region near the mmab gene . conservation), which is available for all snps in dbsnp or the 1000 genomes project (august 2009 release). the size of the data points can optionally reflect the square root of the sample size. the bottom panel of a locuszoom plot shows the name and location of genes in the ucsc genome browser . positions of exons are displayed, and the transcribed strand is indicated with an arrow. this allows the visual comparison of association results relative to coding regions. gene names are automatically spaced relative to one another to avoid overlap. currently used plotting tools include regional association plotter snap and ld-based viewers such as ld-plus , candisnper and valid . locuszoom provides additional features not currently available in any other single tool, such as: (i) the display of 1000 genomes or novel snps from sequencing studies, (ii) functional annotation of snps, (iii) exon/intron distinction and automated gene spacing, (iv) ability to plot regions larger than 500 kb, (v) no pre-selection of input files and (vi) web-based batch mode and availability of source code and databases for download and local installation of locuszoom.  
