genome analysis longtarget: a tool to predict lncrna dna-binding motifs and binding sites via hoogsteen base-pairing analysis motivation: in mammalian cells, many genes are silenced by genome methylation. dna methyltransferases and polycomb repressive complexes , which both lack sequence-specific dna-binding motifs, are recruited by long non-coding rna (lncrna) to specific genomic sites to methylate dna and chromatin. increasing evidence indicates that many lncrnas contain dna-binding motifs that can bind to dna by forming rna:dna triplexes. the identification of lncrna dna-binding motifs and binding sites is essential for deciphering lncrna functions and correct and erroneous genome methylation; however, such identification is challenging because lncrnas may contain thousands of nucleotides. no computational analysis of typical lncrnas has been reported. here, we report a computational method and program (longtarget) to predict lncrna dna-binding motifs and binding sites. we used this program to analyse multiple antisense lncrnas, including those that control well-known imprinting clusters, and obtained results agreeing with experimental observations and epigen-etic marks. these results suggest that it is feasible to predict many lncrna dna-binding motifs and binding sites genome-wide. availability and implementation: website of longtarget:in mammalian cells (especially differentiated somatic cells), many genes are accurately silenced by dna and chromatin methylation via dna methyltransferases (dnmts) and polycomb repressive complexes (prcs) . by contrast, in cancer cells, genomic regions are often erroneously methylated or demethylated . mammals have very limited dnmt and prc proteins, which lack sequence-specific dnabinding motifs . many long noncoding rnas (lncrnas) have dna-and protein-binding motifs, allowing them to carry dnmts and prcs to specific genomic sites , and lncrnas can bind to dna by forming rna:dna triplexes. however, details of how lncrnas bind to dna targets are scarce. single-stranded rnas that are rich in pyrimidines (t and c) can bind to dna strands that are rich in purines (a and g) by hoogsteen-type hydrogen binding to form rna:dna triplexes . in vitro studies have revealed at least four types of rna:dna binding: (i) a pyrimidine-rich rna strand binds to a polypurine dna strand by hoogsteen basepairing; (ii) a purine-rich rna strand binds to a polypurine dna strand by reverse hoogsteen base-pairing; and (iii and iv) an rna strand that is rich in both purines and pyrimidines binds to a polypurine dna strand by either hoogsteen or reverse hoogsteen base-pairing . triplexes, however, occur widely between rna:rna and rna:dna. a recent study indicates that there should be additional non-canonical situations of hoogsteen and reverse hoogsteen base-pairing . given the huge number (414 000) of human lncrnas , the experimental identification of their dna-binding motifs and binding sites is not feasible. a computational program was reported to predict rna:dna binding based on the above four canonical base-pairing rules and was used to analyse a large set of short (mostly 3050 bp), chromatin-associated rnas . compared with such short non-coding rnas, the prediction of lncrna dna-binding motifs and binding sites is complicated by two factors and is much more challenging. first, lncrnas may contain thousands of nucleotides and multiple functional motifs with featured sequences. second, a considerable number of lncrnas, such as hotair , function in trans and regulate remote genome methylation, for which binding to their target regions is also controlled by ctcf . here, we introduce a computational method and program (longtarget) to predict lncrna dna-binding motifs and binding sites. we used this program to analyse multiple antisense lncrnas, including some well-characterized lncrnas that control gene imprinting. the predicted binding motifs and binding sites exhibit significant sensitivity and specificity and agree with experimental observations. these lncrnas bind not only to promoter regions and cpg sites but also to many transposable elements.there are two classes of lncrnas. one class locates near and antisense to the genes they regulate; a typical example is anril (cdkn2b-as), which regulates the expression of cdkn2a/ arf/cdkn2b . an antisense lncrna may silence nearby genes if its transcript fully or partially overlaps with these genes, but many lncrnas, including those controlling imprinted gene clusters, function as long-range cissilencers to regulate non-overlapping genes . the second class comprises lncrnas that are located far from their target genes; the best known is hotair, which is located between hoxc11 and hoxc12 on chromosome 12 and regulates the expression of multiple hoxd genes on chromosome 2 . compared with antisense lncrnas, the targets of lncrnas that function in trans are poorly understood. the tertiary structures play an important role in target site recognition for some lncrnas . at this stage, we used longtarget to analyse multiple antisense lncrnas and obtained results agreeing with experimental observations (supplementary results).the prediction of lncrnas dna-binding motifs and binding sites is important for uncovering the correct and aberrant genome modification. longtarget is different from the reportedtriplexator in that it explores a wide range of base-pairing rules (e.g. cg-a and gc-c in the dominant rule-set r12 for multiple lncrnas) instead of canonical ones, examines base-pairing between all nucleotides instead of enriched ones, determines the single best tfo on the rna sequences in triplexes that overlap most densely in the lncrna, determines the best tfos ttss upon dense distributions of triplexes in a genome region, and evaluates the triplexes stability (; supplementary table s3; supplementary). because binding between ncrnas and dna sequences occurs widelyin the large kcnq1 imprinting cluster. ttss were predicted at the promoter regions of multiple imprinted genes, including ascl2, tspan32 and cd81, which are located far from kcnq1ot1 (supplementary). note that the h3k27me3 signals at this region in the shown datasets are not as strong as the specific report ), it is necessary to include non-canonical base-pairing rules. the inclusion of these rules in longtarget is harmless if these rules do not generate significant triplexes but is significant in some case. because on these rule-sets a nucleotide in a tfo can bind to two different nucleotides in a tts; ttss are structurally more complex and informative than are tfos, which may explain why anrils ttss are more sensitive to sequence shuffling than its tfo1. the permutation tests of anril and the quality of other lncrna tfo1 indicate that tfo1 and its ttss have a high sensitivity and specificity. the analysis of these lncrnas suggests that it is feasible to predict many lncrna tfos and ttss. consistent with experimental evidence, most of the predicted ttss of lncrnas are at promoter regions of nearby genes and at cpg sites. examined with signals of encode histone modification in the ucsc genome browser, these ttss match well with ezh2, suz12 and h3k4m3 signals but poorly with h3k27m3 and h3k9m3 signals in many cells. this poor match can be explained by four reasons. first, the detected h3k27m3 signals may be low in some experiments but high in others . second, lncrnas, such as kcnq1ot1, and prc proteins may have preferred target sites from where they most likely spread to neighbouring imprinted genes , making sites of h3k27m3 signals different from and broader than ttss. third, the expression levels of lncrna are low; therefore, the amount of transcripts is likely insufficient for them to bind to the broad h3k27m3 domains. fourth, in some situations, lncrnas interact with methylated histone h3 lysine 27 , suggesting that h3k27m3 signals may exist as a condition for a lncrna to bind to dna. it is interesting that many ttss perfectly match strong h3k4m3 or h3k27ac signals, which indicate active chromatin and occur in many gene promoter regions, and some ttss occur at the gap in high level h3k4 and h3k27 signals (, supplementary). because in many datasets, both h3k4m3/h3k27ac signals and h3k9m3/h3k27m3 signals exist at a genomic site, the ttss at sites with strong h3k4m3 and h3k27ac signals are sensible, and it is possible that such sites can be competitively bound by lncrnas of different regulatory functions. technically, when predicting a lncrna tfo1 and ttss, three issues should be considered. first, the default minimal tfo length = 20 is rather small. while this value ensures that no important triplexes would be filtered out, it increases the chance of generating a bad tfo1 because rna sequences in short triplexes are prone to generate more dense distributions in the lncrna. a large value (minimal tfo length470) shares the same risk because it filters out too many triplexes. it is advisable to try a small and a large minimal tfo length and to determine whether tfo1 is different or whether the number of its triplexes is significantly changed. normally, minimal tfo length = 40 or 50 and offset = 10 or 15. second, we determined whether filtering the triplexes with a large identity would improve the quality of tfo1 and found that identity = 0.7 may help, but identity = 0.8 does not, indicating that lncrna:dna triplexes may enjoy a high binding affinity but not accurate base-pairing between all nucleotides. third, while most lncrna tfo2s are negligible, some lncrna tfo2s generate considerable triplexes. whether some lncrnas could use two motifs to bind to dna sequences is an interesting and unresolved issue. promoter regions, cpg sites and dmrs are known targets of genome modification ; the predicted ttss of lncrnas at these positions indicate that they are direct targets of lncrnas. transposable elements inserted into the introns of functional genes can reduce the transcription of those genes. because considerable ttss are at transposable elements, we postulate that after targeting by lncrnas, the methylation of these transposable elements may hinder the transcription of genes and that because many lncrna genes contain multiple transposable elements , the ttss at transposable elements in lncrnas help control the highly tissue-specific expression of lncrnas. because most lncrnas emerge in mammals, beyond the hypothesis that x-inactivation and gene imprinting may have co-evolved in mammals , imprinting in somatic cells as a genome defence against transposable elements and as a mechanism regulating gene expression may also have an associated origin and evolution.  
