looping: a template-based tool for predicting the structure of protein loops motivation: predicting the structure of protein loops is very challenging, mainly because they are not necessarily subject to strong evolutionary pressure. this implies that, unlike the rest of the protein , standard homology modeling techniques are not very effective in modeling their structure. however, loops are often involved in protein function, hence inferring their structure is important for predicting protein structure as well as function. results: we describe a method, looping, based on the random forest automated learning technique, which, given a target loop, selects a structural template for it from a database of loop candidates. compared to the most recently available methods, looping is able to achieve similar accuracy for short loops (410 residues) and significant enhancements for long loops (1120 residues). the quality of the predictions is robust to errors that unavoidably affect the stem regions when these are modeled. the method returns a confidence score for the predicted template loops and has the advantage of being very fast (on average: 1 min/loop).the functional characterization of proteins is an important and, at the same time, challenging problem in biology. the annotation task can be facilitated by the knowledge of the three-dimensional (3d) structure of the protein of interest and of its complexes . however, determining a protein 3d structure experimentally is an expensive and time-consuming task. as a result, the number of experimentally solved protein structures is very small compared to the number of available protein sequences. however, this situation is changing and homology modeling is currently making structural information available for a large number of proteins . structurally speaking, proteins consist of elements of secondary structure (alpha helices and beta strands) connected by loops. these often play important functional roles and frequently interact with other biomolecules. although they might adopt different conformations and/or be flexible, especially when located on the surface , it is still the case that they often adopt a specific conformation and are well defined in x-ray crystallographic structures. in terms of sequence composition, loops are the most variable parts of proteins and tend to be more frequently subject to insertions, deletions and substitutions than secondary structure regions. consequently, the accuracy of loop structure prediction by template-based methods is generally lower than that of other regions . on the other hand, the most variable regions within a family of evolutionary related proteins are often those determining the protein specificity . similarly to the prediction of the whole protein structure, loop modeling methods can be categorized into two main groups. ab-initio loop structure prediction is generally based on the exploration of different loop conformations in a given environment, guided by minimization of a selected energy function (bruccoleri v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.  
