gene expression lox: inferring level of expression from diverse methods of census sequencing we present lox (level of expression) that estimates the level of gene expression from high-throughput-expressed sequence datasets with multiple treatments or samples. unlike most analyses, lox incorporates a gene bias model that facilitates integration of diverse transcriptomic sequencing data that arises when transcriptomic data have been produced using diverse experimental methodologies. lox integrates overall sequence count tallies normalized by total expressed sequence count to provide expression levels for each gene relative to all treatments as well as bayesian credible intervals.the quantification of genomic gene expression variation across conditions has become an increasingly common component of diverse research programs. while microarray technology has been widely and successfully applied in the past, high-throughput sequencing technology has garnered significant attention for the identification of differentially expressed transcripts . high-throughput sequencing technology facilitates discrete counts of expressed sequences, enabling accurate and precise quantification of differential expression levels, especially for low-abundance transcripts, and is not subject to issues of crosshybridization. these features represent important advantages over hybridization-based microarray technologies (t), provided that suitable approaches are applied for data analysis. experimentally, sequencing-based expression methodologies differ in rna isolation and priming strategies (e.g. band-cutting, oligo-dt primers, random primers, gene-specific primers or multitargeted primers), as well as sequence lengths and coverage (e.g. 454, solid and solexa). for nearly all expression assays, reverse transcription from messenger rna (mrna) to complementary dna (cdna) is a key step that contributes considerable experimental variance . throughput of the reaction is biased for each gene by secondary and tertiary structures ). to make full use of diverse datasets gathered by different methodologies and to enable accurate and precise expression profiling, therefore, it is necessary to be able to analyze gene expression levels based on data from diverse methodologies. although several recent tools are appropriate for sequencing-based gene expression data, little attention has been devoted to the development of software that can support of analysis not just of homogeneously gathered datasets, but also of datasets gathered by multiple methodologies . here, we present open-source, cross-platform software, lox (level of expression), enabling powerful, accurate and precise quantification of expression from multiple treatments and/or sequencing methodologies.lox quantifies gene expression levels, bayesian credible intervals and statistical significance across multiple treatments or samples using mcmc integration. as the cost of diverse high-throughput sequencing methodologies decreases, lox will provide increasing utility to a burgeoning number of gene expression studies.  
