genome analysis lpmerge: an r package for merging genetic maps by linear programming consensus genetic maps constructed from multiple populations are an important resource for both basic and applied research, including genome-wide association analysis, genome sequence assembly and studies of evolution. the lpmerge software uses linear programming to efficiently minimize the mean absolute error between the consensus map and the linkage maps from each population. this minimization is performed subject to linear inequality constraints that ensure the ordering of the markers in the linkage maps is preserved. when marker order is inconsistent between linkage maps, a minimum set of ordinal constraints is deleted to resolve the conflicts. availability and implementation: lpmerge is on cran at http://cran. r-project.org/web/packages/lpmerge.broadly speaking, two types of strategies have been used to construct genetic maps across multiple populations. one is to minimize an objective function based on the observed recombination frequencies between markers, analogous to the strategy used for linkage mapping in a single population. examples of this approach include the software packages joinmap and multipoint . the second strategy is to work directly with the component linkage maps instead of the underlying recombination frequencies, which can lead to significant gains in computational efficiency without compromising map accuracy . this second strategy is used by the software package mergemap , which has been used in several different species .identified a weakness in mergemap and proposed an alternative algorithm for merging linkage maps based on linear programming (lp), which was incorporated into an r package called dagger. the accuracy of the lp algorithm was validated on simulated data, and in comparison with mergemap using real barley data was found to have lower mean-squared error on a genome-wide basis . a significant limitation of dagger was that it required the component linkage maps to have a consistent marker order. in practice, the linkage maps from different populations often have ordering conflicts, even when there is a single physical order, because of genotyping errors and statistical errors arising from the use of small populations. another weakness of dagger was that the length of the consensus genetic map was shrunken compared with the original linkage maps. both of these limitations have been overcome to create a new r package called lpmerge, which is available on cran. the lp algorithm has been reformulated without graph theory to eliminate shrinkage of the consensus map, and a new algorithm for resolving ordinal conflicts between linkage maps has been added. the objectives of this applications note are to describe these modifications and to illustrate the performance of the conflict resolution algorithm.  
