genome analysis an alignment-free test for recombination motivation: why recombination? is one of the central questions in biology. this has led to a host of methods for quantifying recombin-ation from sequence data. these methods are usually based on aligned dna sequences. here, we propose an efficient alignment-free alternative. results: our method is based on the distribution of match lengths, which we look up using enhanced suffix arrays. by eliminating the alignment step, the test becomes fast enough for application to whole bacterial genomes. using simulations we show that our test has similar power as established tests when applied to long pairs of sequences. when applied to 58 genomes of escherichia coli, we pick up the strongest recombination signal from a 125 kb horizontal gene transfer engineered 20 years ago.it is surprisingly difficult to account for the prevalence of sex and recombination in nature . classical explanations for the evolution of sex are based on the realization that it can speedup adaptation . in addition, it removes deleterious mutations from the population . however, recombination also leads to the breakup of coadapted genes, which begs the question as to whether recombination has an evolutionary cause, or is a mere consequence of molecular mechanisms such as dna repair . perhaps both views are correct, as the contemporary consensus is that sex and recombination would only be maintained in multicellular organisms with high mutation rates and largely negative fitness interactions between genes . irrespective of this uncertainty about the function of recombination in unicellular organisms, horizontal gene transfer in bacteria has attracted particular attention, as it often underlies the emergence of virulent pathogens . the enigma of recombination, combined with its prevalence and clinical importance, has inspired the development of numerous methods for assessing genetic exchange . these fall into two broad categories: methods for detecting the presence of recombination, and methods for estimating its rate. we concentrate here on the simpler detection problem. in the past, this has been solved in two ways: by looking for clustering of mutations or by identifying multiple mutations to the same nucleotide in distinct lineages. such recurrent mutations are called homoplasies. methods based on the detection of clustered polymorphisms include the widely used max-2 method and the runs method implemented in the popular geneconv program . both are based on the realization that the time to the most recent common ancestor varies along a recombining sequence . because the number of mutations that affect a genomic region is proportional to the time to the most recent common ancestor of the sampled sequences, the number of mutations varies along the sequence; as a result, the mutations are clustered. classical homoplasy-based methods rest on the assumption that any nucleotide mutates at most once, thus generating three haplotypes between a pair of polymorphisms, say 10, 01 and 00. the missing fourth possible haplotype, 11 in our example, can only be generated through recombination. the detection of such haplotype quartets is used to determine the minimum number of recombination events in an aligned sample of homologous sequences . more recently, this diagnosis of either presence or absence of a recombination event between a pair of polymorphisms was generalized to inferring possibly more than one recombination in samples of more than four sequences. this has been formalized as the w statistic and implemented in phi, a fast tool for detecting recombination . like all homoplasy-based tests, w tends to have greater power than its rivals based on polymorphism clustering . the detection of recombination among a sample of homologous sequences is thus a well-understood problem, as long as an alignment of the sequences is available. however, aligning genomes remains challenging despite great advances in this field . at the same time, there is interest in analyzing recombination at the scale of bacterial genomes, if not greater . fortunately, the nucleotide-wise assignment of homology that defines alignments is not necessary to test for recombination. we show this by developing a fast alignment-free test for recombination. like max-2 and to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com geneconv , our test is based on the detection of polymorphism clustering. but instead of scoring single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), we record the lengths of exact matches between pairs of sequences. to a first approximation this corresponds to the distances between snps. recombination leads to an increase in the fluctuation of match lengths when compared with no recombination. because match lengths can be looked up efficiently using modern string algorithms , our test scans a pair of escherichia coli genomes totaling 10 mb in only 8 s on a contemporary laptop. in the following, we derive our test and demonstrate its sensitivity and specificity through simulation. we also use simulations to compare it with two published tests, max-2 and w. finally, we apply our test to 58 e.coli genomes to search for horizontal gene transfer.our fast method for detecting recombination from unaligned genomes is accurate when applied to simulated data. applied to bacterial genomes, it diagnoses recombination too frequently, due to variation in mutation rate across long sequences. this is a weakness d r shares with other methods to detect recombination based on identifying polymorphism clustering . nevertheless, using the recombination measure q, we discovered the strongest signal for the pair of e.coli genomes that had undergone an engineered 125 kb horizontal gene transfer 20 years ago.  
