genetics and population analysis an alternative approach to multiple testing for methylation qtl mapping reduces the proportion of falsely identified cpgs introduction: an increasing number of studies investigates the influence of local genetic variation on dna methylation levels, so-called in cis methylation quantitative trait loci (meqtls). a common multiple testing approach in genome-wide cis meqtl studies limits the false discovery rate (fdr) among all cpgsnp pairs to 0.05 and reports on cpgs from the significant cpgsnp pairs. however, a statistical test for each cpg is not performed, potentially increasing the proportion of cpgs falsely reported on. here, we presented an alternative approach that properly control for multiple testing at the cpg level. results: we performed cis meqtl mapping for varying window sizes using publicly available single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) and 450 kb data, extracting the cpgs from the significant cpgsnp pairs (fdr50:05). using a new bait-and-switch simulation approach, we show that up to 50 of the cpgs found in the simulated data may be false-positive results. we present an alternative two-step multiple testing approach using the simes and benjaminihochberg procedures that does control the fdr among the cpgs, as confirmed by the bait-and-switch simulation. this approach indicates the use of window sizes in cis meqtl mapping studies that are significantly smaller than commonly adopted.genome-wide association studies (gwass) are widely used to uncover the genetic basis of complex disease. disease-associated genetic variants identified in gwass are commonly located in non-coding regions, leaving the molecular mechanism underlying the associations unclear . the likely mechanism involves an effect on transcriptional activity of genes nearby (cis) or located distantly (trans), for example, by influencing epigenetic regulation . this can be studied by investigating the relationship between genetic variation, and epigenetic marks, including dna methylation, and gene expression. already, many studies have reported on associations of specific genetic variants with variation in gene expression (expression qtl or eqtls) and dna methylation, in particular the methylation of cytosines in cpg dinucleotides (e.g.) (dna methylation quantitative trait loci or meqtls). creating catalogs of meqtls and eqtls will be instrumental in the discovery of genetic mechanisms determining dna methylation and gene expression, the possible interplay between the two, and eventually the etiology of common diseases. to achieve this goal, further development of sound statistical methodology will be important. typically in meqtl and eqtl studies, a gwas (i.e. testing hundreds of thousands to millions of single-nucleotide polymorphisms, snps) is performed for the level of methylation of every cpg measured or the level of transcription of every gene (more generally, for every transcript or exon), respectively, leading to a vast amount of possible combinations to investigate. although we will focus on cis meqtl studies, we note that the same principles and problems may also apply to cis eqtl studies. with the recent introduction of the illumina 450 k dna methylation array , meqtl studies have become possible investigating4400 thousand cpgs in large numbers of subjects. to test for associations of methylation at cpgs with genetic variants in cis, that is locally, studies have been considering snps anywhere between 5 (gutierrez) to 1000 kb from measured cpgs. particularly large window sizes will result in hundreds of millions statistical tests, and thus brings about a huge multiple testing problem. a common strategy to account for multiple testing in meqtl studies is to control the false discovery rate (fdr;) of all significantly associated cpgsnp pairs at 0.05 (e.g.). this means that 5 of all significantly associated cpgsnp pairs are expected to be false-positive results. owing to the extensive linkage disequilibrium (ld) in the human genome, individual cpgs will frequently be associated with many snps. hence, a particular cpg will often occur many to whom correspondence should be addressed. times in the list of significant cpgsnp pairs. in practice, this is redundant information because ld structure renders it impossible to pinpoint the causal snp responsible for the variation in dna methylation using statistical means (cf. gwas;). hence, the results reported on and further analyses generally focus on the cpgs in the list of significant cpg-snp associations, i.e. all cpgs that significantly associate with at least one snp (e.g.). we will refer to this approach as the cpgsnp pair-based approach. a large proportion of cpgs among the fdr significant cpgsnp pairs may be false-positive results . to obtain a list of cpgs influenced by genetic variation in cis that is properly controlled for multiple testing, we propose to formally test each cpg, obtaining a single valid p-value per cpg and control the fdr among those pvalues, which we will refer to as the cpg-based approach. using a new bait-and-switch simulation scheme, we compare the proportion of falsely identified cpgs using the cpgsnp pair-based approach and our proposed cpg-based approach in simulated data.  
