maistas: a tool for automatic structural evaluation of alternative splicing products motivation: analysis of the human genome revealed that the amount of transcribed sequence is an order of magnitude greater than the number of predicted and well-characterized genes. a sizeable fraction of these transcripts is related to alternatively spliced forms of known protein coding genes. inspection of the alternatively spliced transcripts identified in the pilot phase of the encode project has clearly shown that often their structure might substantially differ from that of other isoforms of the same gene, and therefore that they might perform unrelated functions, or that they might even not correspond to a functional protein. identifying these cases is obviously relevant for the functional assignment of gene products and for the interpretation of the effect of variations in the corresponding proteins. results: here we describe a publicly available tool that, given a gene or a protein, retrieves and analyses all its annotated isoforms, provides users with three-dimensional models of the isoform(s) of his/her interest whenever possible and automatically assesses whether homology derived structural models correspond to plausible structures. this information is clearly relevant. when the homology model of some isoforms of a gene does not seem structurally plausible, the implications are that either they assume a structure unrelated to that of the other isoforms of the same gene with presumably significant functional differences, or do not correspond to functional products. we provide indications that the second hypothesis is likely to be true for a substantial fraction of the cases.determining the identity and function of all the sequence elements in human dna is a daunting challenge. the large scale pilot phase of the encode project provided an exhaustive identification and verification of functional sequence elements in a limited region of 1 of the human genome. the computational analysis of the data revealed several unexpected features of the genome . perhaps the most surprising one was that many transcribed elements could be neutral elements that serve as a reservoir for natural selection. many of these transcripts derive from alternative splicing events. their putative products were manually analysed by the biosapiens european consortium . the analysis led to the striking conclusion that more than 50 of them might not give rise to proteins structurally and/or functionally related to the other isoforms of the same genes or be the result of aberrant splicing events giving rise to non-functional proteins . indeed, comparison of the putative proteins encoded by the alternatively spliced transcripts with the main isoform showed that most of them lacked an active site, key trans-membrane segments, essential signalling regions and post-transcriptionally modified sites. most importantly, models of their putative threedimensional structures did not seem to correspond to plausible folds . this observation was confirmed by moult and co-workers (, b) who, using a completely different dataset of alternative splicing variants, found that the vast majority of them resulted in putatively unstable protein conformations. recently, some of us manually analysed the putative structures of isoforms of the human genome, the existence of which had been confirmed by mass-spectrometry and of isoforms of the same genes for which no evidence exists in proteomic databases reaching essentially the same conclusions . altogether these observations suggest that we might be observing the effects of noisy selection of splice sites by the splicing machinery and/or that alternatively spliced products of a gene might assume unrelated conformations. these findings raise several interesting questions, but also a few practical issues. first of all, the careful manual analysis performed by the biosapiens consortium on 1 of the genome needs to be scaled up to the whole genome and therefore automated. secondly, analysis tools should be available to biologists performing experiments in a user-friendly manner. at present, there are a few systems that partially satisfy this need. for example, the prosas database (http:// www.bio.ifi.lmu.de//forschung/structural-bioinformatics/prosas) stores structures and models (provided the target proteins shares at least 40 sequence identity with a known template) for the alternative isoforms annotated in ensembl (the automatic analysis performed by maistas requires that the user inputs one or more protein/gene accession codes from the common public databases (see section 2) or a set of sequences in the fasta format. in all but the last case, the sequence(s) corresponding to the user query is retrieved and mapped back to the appropriate genome database by using a local installation of the biomart database . the peptide sequences of all isoforms of the target gene, as annotated in ensembl, are retrieved. if the input is a set of amino acid sequences in the fasta format, they are assumed to be different isoforms of the same gene. the user can supply an email address (optional) to which the results will be sent or bookmark the result page. the initial query page of maistas provides a link to an example result page, which allows the user to inspect a typical output . in the first step, the tool evaluates whether a structure exists for any of the isoforms or, lacking this, whether a comparative model can be built. in the latter case, the template is identified using the hhsearch program, which builds a hidden markov model (hmm) of the target protein family and compares it to the hmms representing a set of non-redundant families of proteins of known structure (sequence identity between any pair below 70). this strategy has been shown in blind tests to be one of the most sensitive for finding structural templates . the target sequence, the template(s) and the alignment obtained by the hhsearch are automatically analysed. only models based on template structures solved by x-ray crystallography or an nmr are considered. they are inspected to detect any possible gaps in the coordinate set (for example, because of the absence of electron density in x-ray structures). if these regions are present at the n-or c-terminus of the protein they are trimmed, otherwise a warning is issued. a warning is also issued if the alignment includes insertions larger than 50 residues that might correspond to an inserted domain or deletions larger than 20 residues.the alignment is used to build the model using a local installation of modeller . once the model has been built, the system computes the model hydrophobic solvent accessible area and packing efficiency. if the modelled isoform presents deletions with respect to the template, the euclidean distance between the c residues before and after the deletion(s) is recorded. if insertions are present, the surface exposed to the solvent of the amino acids surrounding them and the number of inserted amino acids is computed. the tool informs the user that the model might not correspond to a complete or plausible structure if the distance between the two residues on either side of a deletion is 15 and/or if there are more than three residues inserted in the core of the protein and/or if the hydrophobic solvent accessible area of the model is larger than a set threshold (see section 2). in assessing the results, the system takes into account the corresponding values for the template used for modelling. the output of maistas is shown in@bullet the option to inspect the multiple sequence alignment via a jalview applet . @bullet the option to visualize and analyse the models via a jmol applet (http://www.jmol.org/). @bullet a final remark about the plausibility/completeness of the predicted structure. maistas depends on the availability of structural templates to predict the three-dimensional structure of the isoforms by comparative modelling. if no structural templates are available, a no template satisfying all parameters warning is issued. when maistas is unable to provide a reasonable structural model (e.g. when very large insertions are present) the system will return the message maistas is having trouble modelling or assessing this isoform. the online result pages are accessible via the url sent either by e-mail or via the retrieve results by job identifier or by email window, using the provided job identification code or the e-mail address.the more detailed is the analysis of the genomes of higher eukaryotes, the more complex they are revealed to be. for example, it is becoming clear that alternative splicing events do not simply result in a modulation of the function of the gene products, for example, by removing or adding structurally compact domains, or by modifying the sequence of specific regions of the encoded protein, but that they can either have a profound effect on the structure and function of the products of the same gene or give raise to nonfunctional products . the latter can nevertheless have a relevant biological function. for example, poliseno et al. demonstrated that transcripts may also function by competing for microrna binding, a biological activity independent of the translation of the protein they encode . it is impossible for any currently available method, including ours, to assess which is the case. the method described here is able to correctly classify as plausible a large fraction of the experimentally characterized isoforms, and to highlight dubious cases. our aim is to provide easy access to a computational tool able to draw the attention of the life science community to them. consequently, we took special care to convey the results of the analysis, although based on rather sophisticated tools, in an easy and understandable fashion. maistas provides access to all the intermediate data used to generate the results, but it describes them in a human readable form. we believe that maistas represents a step in the direction of using the knowledge accumulated in structural bioinformatics as well as the maturity of the tools available for applications related to the interpretation of genomic data and that it can be effectively used as a first step in characterizing novel proteins as well as a support for selecting interesting and intriguing cases for structural and functional studies.  
