genome analysis making whole genome multiple alignments usable for biologists here we describe a set of tools implemented within the galaxy platform designed to make analysis of multiple genome alignments truly accessible for biologists. these tools are available through both a web-based graphical user interface and a command-line interface. availability and implementation: this open-source toolset was implemented in python and has been integrated into the online data analysis platform galaxy (public web access:with the emergence and rapid proliferation of new sequencing technologies, data generation is no longer a major challenge in genomics. unfortunately, the relative ease of genome sequencing does not automatically translate into the expanding of biological knowledgeit is still quite difficult to decipher the functional significance of genomic dna. one reason for this is that the vast majority of functional studies have focused on annotating the genomes of human and model organisms. whole genome alignments offer a solution to this challenge. by aligning newly sequenced genomes against well-annotated sequences, one can obtain a variety of functional, structural and evolutionary insights. yet there are still two formidable barriers preventing biomedical scientists, the ultimate consumers of whole genome alignments, from effectively utilizing them in their research. first, whole genome alignments are very large. for example, the existing alignment sets of 28 mammalian species and 46 vertebrate species occupy several hundred gigabytes of disk space and contain millions of alignment blocks. handling data at this scale presents challenges even for researchers with extensive programming experience, while for most experimental biologists they are simply beyond reach. second, the data exists to whom correspondence should be addressed. http://usegalaxy.org. in a specialized format, the multiple alignment format (maf; supplementary). although the maf format is versatile and contains the information necessary for interpreting the alignments, it is currently not readily accepted or processed by downstream applications. here we describe a set of tools, available through both a webbased graphical user interface (gui) and a command-line interface, designed to address challenges faced when working with these data. no downloads are required in order to use the gui version of the tools, as they have been implemented into the web-based genome analysis platform galaxy . galaxy aims to bridge the gap between the data and successful analysis. available freely as a public service (http://usegalaxy.org) and as an open source software project (http://getgalaxy.org), galaxy can be deployed in individual labs and on cloud resources . galaxy features a history system that tracks user inputs and parameter settings, ensuring that analyses can be reproduced precisely, as well as a seamless workflow system that allows reusable multiple tool pipelines to be created by extracting from an existing analysis history or through using an interactive drag and drop interface. not only are researchers able to share their analysis histories and workflows with colleagues or the greater scientific community, but they can also compose complete analysis protocols (pages) using a web-based word processor style (i.e. wysiwyg) editor with built-in history and workflow embedding capabilities. supplementary information for this manuscript is available as one of these galaxy pages (http://usegalaxy.org/u/dan/p/maf). maf format in brief: the maf format has emerged as a de facto standard for storing and exchanging whole genome multiple alignments. alignments stored in this format retain the sequence and genomic position information for the aligning sequence ranges. as a convention in galaxy, sequences are named according to the source species genome build and sequence identifier within that build (generally a chromosome or contig); the genome build and sequence identifier are separated by a period. for example, the sequence of chromosome 21 from a march 2006 human genome reference assembly, known as hg18, would be named hg18.chr21. alignments are arranged in blocks separated by a blank line, where each block constitutes an individual set of sequence ranges (e.g. a single local alignment involving some set of species). these ranges need not be unique as a maf set can contain overlapping blocks. in the maf format, the genomic coordinates of alignments on the - strand are numbered relative to the reverse complement of the source sequence (unlike other common formats for genome annotation, such as gff and bed). though often an obstacle to biologists tryingpage: 2427 24262428  
