maligner: a fast ordered restriction map aligner motivation: the optical mapping system discovers structural variants and potentiates sequence assembly of genomes via scaffolding and comparisons that globally validate or correct sequence assemblies. despite its utility, there are few publicly available tools for aligning optical mapping datasets. results: here we present software, named maligner, for the alignment of both single molecule restriction maps (rmaps) and in silico restriction maps of sequence contigs to a reference. maligner provides two modes of alignment: an efficient, sensitive dynamic programming implementation that scales to large eukaryotic genomes, and a faster indexed based implementation for finding alignments with unmatched sites in the reference but not the query. we compare our software to other publicly available tools on rmap datasets and show that maligner finds more correct alignments in comparable runtime. lastly, we introduce the m-score statistic for normalizing alignment scores across restriction maps and demonstrate its utility for selecting high quality alignments.optical mapping, a single molecule system , constructs genome-wide physical maps through the acquisition and analysis of large datasets comprising restriction maps created from very long genomic dna molecules (400500 kb). such genome-wide restriction maps, through analysis, elucidate genomic structure with a resolution of about 2 kb, thereby complementing dna sequencing technologies which provide relatively short range information at base pair resolution. optical mapping analysis has been used as part of large-scale sequencing efforts and as a means for discovery of structural variants in normal human and cancer genomes. despite such promise, very few software tools are freely available for working with genomic mapping data for large genomes. soma is an open-source software tool for aligning assembled sequence contigs to an optical map but does not scale to large genomes and often gives incorrect contig placements due to the greedy nature of its alignment algorithm. twin is a recently developed tool for efficiently aligning sequence contigs to an optical map, but as we show, it does not allow for alignments which have unmatched sites, limiting its applicability in noisy experimental datasets. here we present maligner, an open-source software package for aligning single molecule restriction maps (rmaps) and in silico maps of contigs from a sequence assembly to a reference restriction map at speeds that are comparable or faster than currently available tools. maligner has two modes of alignment: one which uses traditional dynamic programming (malignerdp) and a secondindex-based mode of alignment that runs orders of magnitude faster but is more stringent in the alignments that it accepts (malignerix). in addition, we present a novel method for normalizing the alignment scores across queries based on computing the median absolute deviation (mad) across the best random alignments, which allows for the selection of an alignment score cutoff that is applicable across queries, thereby obviating the need for a computationally expensive permutation test for determining alignment significance.in this section we present results demonstrating the utility of the m-score statistic in discerning correct alignments from spurious alignments. next, we compare the maligner software to other available software tools by aligning in silico digested contigs from an e.coli k12 sequence assembly to both an in silico digest of the reference sequence and an optical map. we also align e.coli k12 rmaps to the in silico reference map. lastly, we demonstrate our methods on a large genome by aligning both sequence contigs and rmaps to an optical map of the budgerigar (melopsittacus undulatus), an australian parakeet.  
