databases and ontologies mamphea: a web tool for mammalian phenotype enrichment analysis mamphea is a web application dedicated to understanding functional properties of mammalian gene sets based on mouse-mutant phenotypes. it allows users to conduct enrichment analysis on predefined or user-defined phenotypes, gives users the option to specify phenotypes derived from null mutations, produces easily comprehensible results and supports analyses on genes of all mammalian species with a fully sequenced genome. availability: http://evol.nhri.org.tw/mamphea/ contact:to biologically interpret gene lists generated from high-throughput studies, enrichment analyses on annotations of gene features, such as terms of gene ontology (go; http://www.geneontology.org), have become routine in genomic research. numerous enrichment tools have been developed in the past few years (see review by . the implementation of novel statistics has provided new tools to deal with gene sets of special property, e.g. gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) for genes with an ordered structure . however, the power of enrichment analyses still relies largely on the biological nature of backend annotations used for finding enrichment. most mouse (mus musculus) mutants generated in laboratories have been designed to aid the study of human genetics, physiology or diseases progression. according to the current version of mouse genome informatics (mgi, http://www.informatics.jax.org/;), nearly 9000 genes in the mouse genome have been mutated and phenotyped in the way that closely resembles human clinical examinations. the mutant phenotypes characterize the consequence of disturbing or disrupting the information output of a gene and thus are ideal to aid understanding of how genes function at the systems level. these unique attributes make the enrichment analyses incorporating mouse-mutant phenotypes outperform those using go or kegg pathways (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/), the two most widely used backend databases in enrichment analyses , in human disease candidate gene prioritization to whom correspondence should be addressed. and in work to understand genetic bases of neurological disorders . these cases clearly suggest a pressing need for a versatile enrichment tool from the aspect of mutant phenotypes in studying mammalian biology. we have therefore developed mamphea (mammalian phenotype enrichment analysis). in comparison to toppgene , the only other enrichment tool employing mouse phenotypes, mamphea has several unique features. first, mamphea allows users to perform enrichment analysis not only on phenotypes predefined by mgi, but also on user-defined phenotypes to study complex traits. second, different types of mutations impact protein functions distinctly; to remove potential biases caused by the use of data derived from differential mutagenesis approaches , mamphea allows users to perform analysis of phenotypes exclusively derived from loss-of-function mutations. third, in order to give users easily understood results, mamphea generates graphical and downloadable output displaying the enriched or depleted phenotypes according to the hierarchical structure of the phenotypic classification. and, finally, mamphea supports analyses of genes of all mammalian species with a fully sequenced genome (35 to date).  
