analysis of aggregated cell–cell statistical distances within pathways unveils therapeutic-resistance mechanisms in circulating tumor cells motivation: as omics biotechnologies accelerate the capability to contrast a myriad of molecular measurements from a single cell, they also exacerbate current analytical limitations for detecting meaningful single-cell dysregulations. moreover, mrna expression alone lacks functional interpretation , limiting opportunities for translation of single-cell transcriptomic insights to precision medicine. lastly, most single-cell rna-sequencing analytic approaches are not designed to investigate small populations of cells such as circulating tumor cells shed from solid tumors and isolated from patient blood samples. results: in response to these characteristics and limitations in current single-cell rna-sequencing methodology, we introduce an analytic framework that models transcriptome dynamics through the analysis of aggregated cellcell statistical distances within biomolecular pathways. cellcell statistical distances are calculated from pathway mrna fold changes between two cells. within an elaborate case study of circulating tumor cells derived from prostate cancer patients, we develop analytic methods of aggregated distances to identify five differentially expressed pathways associated to therapeutic resistance. our aggregation analyses perform comparably with gene set enrichment analysis and better than differentially expressed genes followed by gene set enrichment. however, these methods were not designed to inform on differential pathway expression for a single cell. as such, our framework culminates with the novel aggregation method, cell-centric statistics (ccs). ccs quantifies the effect size and significance of differentially expressed pathways for a single cell of interest. improved rose plots of differentially expressed pathways in each cell highlight the utility of ccs for therapeutic decision-making.the advent of single-cell rna-sequencing (scrna-seq;) enables discovery of transcriptional patterns at the most fundamental unit of life. in contrast, conventional rna-seq technologies only provide an average rna expression across many cells, concealing much of the transcriptional heterogeneity . understanding individual cell uniqueness within a multicellular context offers new insights into the biological underpinning of organ ontogeny, immune response and cancer etiology, progression and drug resistance . particularly, scrna-seq has become increasingly adopted to resolve intra-tumor heterogeneity and analyze rare tumor cell populations such as circulating tumor cells (ctcs) originating from primary solid tumors. however, analyzing whole-genome rna expression from individual cells remains challenging . these challenges include the poor sensitivity of conventional methods for studying a limited number of cells and the absence of methods for generating statistical significance at a single-cell transcriptome. improvements in scrna-seq experimentation, through the additional quantitative standards of spike-in external control rna and unique molecular identifiers , as well as computational methodologies , have reduced the impact of noisy measurements in single-cell rna expression. however, these methods rely on expensive technologies and require many single-cell transcriptomes to adequately model noise and infer sources of variation, which preclude analysis of individual cells. to establish significance of patterns observed at a single cell, one could in theory compare cellular mrnas with a consensus mrna expression atlas . however, the notion that there is a consensus transcriptome is questionable as expression levels and kinetics vary over time and across tissues. in response to these shortcomings, we introduce a novel analytic framework: the analysis of aggregated cellcell statistical distances within pathways . we hypothesized that we could aggregate many analyses of pairs of single-cell transcriptomes to predict differentially expressed pathways (deps). in principle, this approach could even produce cell-centric statistics (ccs) that may scale down to analyze deps in a single cell despite the lack of true reference transcriptome and circumvent sample size requirements intrinsic to group-based statistics. by quantifying gene sets (pathways) rather than individual mrnas, our framework is designed ab initio to reduce the noise intrinsic to scrna-seq measurements, while providing functional interpretation of dynamic changes between cells. our aggregation framework begins by quantifying transcription dynamics for a pair of cells through the application of a gene set scoring procedure, n-of-1-pathways mahalanobis distance (md), that we recently developed to predict deps using a single pair of transcriptomes . md produces pathway-level significance that is readily interpretable biologically and potentially clinically actionable for pathway-targeting therapies. originally, we applied md to measure dynamic changes of mrna within a single subject by exploring differential pathway expression from a baseline to a case sample (i.e. dysregulation). in this manner, two transcriptomes from a patient could be transformed into a personal pathway dysregulation profile. these patient-specific profiles are predictive of clinical outcomes, including survival and response to therapy, in cancer and viral infection . moreover, n-of-1pathways md can also be used to measure differential pathway expression between any pair of samples. we have shown that this approach unveils deps between groups when traditional statistics are underpowered (. in this study, we introduce and validate our aggregation framework using rna-seq data derived from prostate cancer ctcs as a proof of concept and implicate mechanisms of resistance to androgen inhibition therapy. deps are identified at the individual cell level using the ccs component of the framework. emerging biological systems properties of pathway resistance are illustrated at the level of individual cells, as well as aggregated at the level of individual patient and at the treatment group level. the accuracy of our aggregation method in prioritizing deps across treatment groups is contrasted to that of conventional methods such as gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) , single-cell differential expressed genes (scde) followed by gene set enrichment (deg enrichment) and weighted least squares (wls) regression . further, novel single-cell visualization of dep transcriptome dynamics is developed to demonstrate the utility of ccs for predicting therapeutic resistance based on a single ctc.scrna-seq offers insight into transcriptional diversity of individual cells and presents unprecedented actionable opportunities in biology and medicine. the described methodologies of aggregation of cell cell statistical distances within pathways including ccs and cellcentric visualizations bridge an analytical gap between cohort-based statistics and single-cell expression signals. we provide evidence that our framework accurately identifies deps in an individual cell. specifically, treatment-resistance pathways of individual ctcs were differentially expressed in distinctive patterns when comparing prostate cancer subjects treated with ezt to those treated without it. furthermore, single ctcs of some patients never exposed to ezt presented a higher heterogeneity of treatment-resistance pathway expression, with some ctcs strikingly similar to those of resistant subjects. as many therapies target pathways, these single-cell analyses may provide biologically meaningful interpretations and clinically actionable metrics. these observations suggest the utility of ccs to identify subjects likely to present resistance to future therapies as well as transcriptome dynamics of resistance over time.  
