manta: rapid detection of structural variants and indels for germline and cancer sequencing applications we describe manta, a method to discover structural variants and indels from next generation sequencing data. manta is optimized for rapid germline and somatic analysis, calling structural variants, medium-sized indels and large insertions on standard compute hardware in less than a tenth of the time that comparable methods require to identify only subsets of these variant types: for example na12878 at 50 genomic coverage is analyzed in less than 20 min. manta can discover and score variants based on supporting paired and split-read evidence, with scoring models optimized for germline analysis of diploid individuals and somatic analysis of tumor-normal sample pairs. call quality is similar to or better than comparable methods, as determined by pedigree consistency of germline calls and comparison of somatic calls to cosmic database variants. manta consistently assembles a higher fraction of its calls to base-pair resolution, allowing for improved downstream annotation and analysis of clinical significance. we provide manta as a community resource to facilitate practical and routine structural variant analysis in clinical and research sequencing scenarios. availability and implementation: manta is released under the open-source gplv3 license. source code, documentation and linux binaries are available from https://github.com/illumina/manta.whole genome and enrichment sequencing is increasingly used for discovery of inherited and somatic genome variation in clinical contexts, however tools for rapid discovery of structural variants (svs) and indels in this scenario are limited. we address this gap with manta, a novel method for accurate discovery and scoring of svs, medium-sized indels and large insertions in a unified and rapid process. manta discovers variants from a sequencing assays paired and split-read mapping information using an efficient parallel workflow. many advanced structural variant methods are available which focus on research and population genomics . however, none to our knowledge combine as many variant types into a rapid workflow focused on individual or small sets of related samples. per its focus on clinical pipelines, manta provides a complete solution for discovery, assembly and scoring using only a reference genome and alignments from any standard read mapper. it provides scoring models for germline analysis of diploid individuals and somatic analysis of tumornormal sample pairs, with additional applications under development for rna-seq, de novo variants, and unmatched tumors. we describemantas methods and compare with representative tools to demonstrate high variant call quality with dramatically reduced compute cost.we describe na12878 variant call performance in the top portion of, comparing the results of each method to pedigree-consistent calls for this sample (see methods). the first section describes large deletions and duplications, showing that mantas results are competitive overall and have a somewhat higher recall (or higher rate of pedigree consistency due to correct genotyping). manta calls consistently show a higher fraction of calls agreeing with the pedigree-consistent set which also have breakends assembled to basepair resolution. for deletions and insertions smaller than 500 bases, the next section ofreiterates the large sv pattern of strong performance, with a trend towards higher recall across these smaller indel variant classes. somatic call performance for the hcc1954/hcc1954bl tumor/ normal sample pair is described in the final portion of, comparing each methods variant calls to cosmic variant entries for hcc1954 (see section 2). in this case, the truth set does not reflect a complete catalog of somatic variants for the cell line, however it does provide a useful relative precision estimate reflecting enrichment for known variants. here we observe strong performance for manta calls across all variant types with a trend towards a greater fraction of true calls assembled to base-pair resolution, consistent with germline variant observations.summarizes runtime and memory cost for each variant caller, benchmarked in both parallel and serial modes to show workload distribution and methods efficiency. by either of these runtime or memory metrics we observe that manta has substantially lower compute cost and turnaround time, while providing coverage of more variant types. we note that delly is designed to parallelize primarily across, instead of within, samples, so the parallel test reflects a limited use of all server cores. when manta is restricted to provide variant call coverage similar to delly (variants 300 bases and larger), observed compute cost is even lower, further highlighting the efficiency of mantas implementation relative to current methods. mantas approach is sufficiently flexible to support several types of sequencing assays. the primary focus for rapid analysis and large-scale sv calling has been whole genome sequencing, but manta is routinely used to analyze exome and other enrichmentbased targeted sequencing assays. the method is not designed for targeted amplicon sequencing but successful results have been reported. we additionally note that manta has been extensively optimized to handle the shorter fragment lengths and higher chimera rates found in highly degraded ffpe samples as part of an ongoing focus on clinical sequencing workflows. conflict of interest: all authors are employees of illumina inc., a public company that develops and markets systems for genetic analysis.  
