systems biology mantra 2.0: an online collaborative resource for drug mode of action and repurposing by network analysis elucidation of molecular targets of a compound [mode of action (moa)] and its off-targets is a crucial step in drug development. we developed an online collaborative resource (mantra 2.0) that supports this process by exploiting similarities between drug-induced transcriptional profiles. drugs are organized in a network of nodes (drugs) and edges (similarities) highlighting communities of drugs sharing a similar moa. a user can upload gene expression profiles before and after drug treatment in one or multiple cell types. an automated processing pipeline transforms the gene expression profiles into a unique drug node embedded in the drug-network. visual inspection of the neighbouring drugs and communities helps in revealing its moa and to suggest new applications of known drugs (drug repur-posing). mantra 2.0 allows storing and sharing user-generated network nodes, thus making mantra 2.0 a collaborative ever-growing resource. availability and implementation: the web tool is freely available for academic use at http://mantra.tigem.it.we developed a computational approach to predict drug mode of action (moa) and drug repurposing from the analysis of the connectivity map , a compendium of gene expression profiles (geps) following drug treatment of human cell lines with 1309 bioactive small molecules . the approach was based on generating, for each drug, a single prototype ranked list (prl) of differentially expressed genes following drug treatment across multiple cell lines or at different dosages . we devised a drug similarity measure based on gene set enrichment analysis (gsea;) to compute similarity between two prls. transcriptional similarities were represented as a network. the position of a drug within the network was shown to provide insights about its moa by exploiting previous knowledge on neighbouring drugs. here we introduce a collaborative online resource, named mantra 2.0, implementing our computational approach to drug discovery integrated with a relational database engineered to analyse and store user-provided geps and metadata following small-molecule treatments, single gene perturbations or disease states. an example of a workflow can be found in the help section of the mantra 2.0 website. mantra 2.0 guides the user beginning with gep upload and annotation, which are then automatically transformed into a node in the network by connecting it to similar nodes, according to our similarity measure. the result is visualized as an interactive network that can be explored to reveal similarities among drugs, genes and diseases.mantra 2.0 is a collaborative resource for elucidating drug moa and for drug repurposing. the network framework makes it easy to discover unexpected relationships among drugs, genes and diseases. the possibility of uploading and sharing users data allows for the growth of the network, thus making mantra 2.0 an ever-growing collaborative resource for drug discovery.  
