mapping networks of light–dark transition in lov photoreceptors motivation: in optogenetics, designing modules of long or short signaling state lifetime is necessary for control over precise cellular events. a critical parameter for designing artificial or synthetic photoreceptors is the signaling state lifetime of photosensor modules. design and engineering of biologically relevant artificial photoreceptors is based on signaling mechanisms characteristic of naturally occurring photoreceptors. therefore identifying residues important for lightdark transition is a definite first step towards rational design of synthetic photoreceptors. a thorough grasp of detailed mechanisms of photo induced signaling process would be immensely helpful in understanding the behaviour of organisms. results: herein, we introduce the technique of differential networks. we identify key biological interactions, using light-oxygen-voltage domains of all organisms whose dark and light state crystal structures are simultaneously available. even though structural differences between dark and light states are subtle (other than the covalent bond formation between flavin chromophore and active site cysteine), our results successfully capture functionally relevant residues and are in complete agreement with experimental findings from literature. additionally, using sequence-structure alignments, we predict functional significance of interactions found to be important from network perspective yet awaiting experimental validation. our approach would not only help in minimizing extensive photo-cycle kinetics procedure but is also helpful in providing first-hand information on the fundamentals of photo-adaptation and rational design of synthetic photoreceptors in optogenetics.optogenetics aims to confer light sensitivity to genetically encoded molecules , thus controlling multifarious organismal functionalities with great spatiotemporal precision. while the initial motivation might have been the targeting of neuronal pathologies using natural photoreceptors or photosensors, optogenetics has grown beyond the use of naturally existing photoreceptors. with clever accommodation of biologically inspired design of artificial photosensors, optogenetics is now being used extensively to target any significant cellular event. to decipher the synchronization of molecular events among the components of the signaling network, it is essential to understand the signaling states of photosensors in utmost detail. light sensitive modular proteins usually consist of two parts, photosensor (or input domain, that absorbs light) and effector (or output domain, that executes biological function of that particular protein) and thus enable them to carry out the desired physiological activities such as phototropism, plant morphogenesis, visual perception in animals and so on. combination of x-ray protein crystallography, ultrafast spectroscopic techniques and mutagenesis studies have identified and validated some of themajor contributing amino acid residues responsible for lightdark transition, elaborated later. however, the individuality of photosensors in terms of direction of signal flow, distinct topological arrangement specially in light-oxygen-voltage (lov) terminals demands further investigation. lov domains, first discovered in a. thaliana , have served as candidate sensors for designing light regulated proteins/molecules . lov domains are part of per-arnt-sim (pas) super-family of receptor proteins which control varied biological functions in plants, animals and prokaryotes. lov photoreceptors absorb blue light by binding to an organic, non-protein component, namely flavin chromophore (fmn or fad) to initiate photo-cycle which is usually reversible in nature. photon absorption leads to formation of cysteine-flavin adduct state , commonly known as light state, resulting in a cascade of signaling processes within the domain. this thermally activated signaling state may sustain itself for timescales of few seconds to few hours and then converts back to the non-signaling state or the so called dark state. the most prominent effect of photon-absorption is the formation of cysteine-flavin adduct. though this is well established for many plant lovs, a detailed comprehension of the underlying mechanism of the ensuing signal transduction is still in its preliminary stage. for reasons aforementioned, flavin mono nucleotide (fmn) chromophore has not been taken into consideration during network construction and subsequently the conserved cysteine residue, that bonds with fmn chromophore, does not feature in the present analysis. the goal of this work is to identify important residues in pathway(s) of long-range transmission of structural changes that originate in the chromophore and its immediate environment upon absorption of a photon, by introducing new techniques. herein, we introduce the technique of differential networks. knowledge of the aforementioned residues in photoreceptors and their importance is obtained from these differential networks. we successfully identify functionally important residues for the lightdark transition which are in total agreement with experimental findings from previous literature. we also submit predictions on specific functionally important residues which can be experimentally verified. thus, the methods proposed here should be helpful in mitigating the need of extensive mutagenesis studies . moreover, precise idea on such participating residues in this transition, would greatly benefit the understanding of molecular mechanisms behind photo adaptation as well as rational design of synthetic photoreceptors for use in optogenetics. network theory has been applied to many biological systems including macromolecules , and, even towards diagnostics and biomedical devices . however, it has never been applied before to study transition of signaling states in photosensors. these studies are usually based on structure of the entire protein. not all interactions maybe of equivalent energetic stability. remarkably, our results demonstrate that at least to a first approximation, overlooking specifics of energetics in interactions (which of course are implicitly included through structural changes during the transition), still leads to good agreement with known experimental findings. for example, for the well researched ytva and vvd lov, this agreement is 100 and 88, respectively.both light and dark state crystal structures of any natural or synthetic full-length photoreceptor (not merely the photosensor domain), is simultaneously unavailable till date. it is well-known that upon photon absorption, fmn binding site located in lov undergoes a major conformational change leading to loss or gain of new interactions in both light and dark states. therefore, we restrict ourselves to model only the lov (sensor) domain, rather than the whole protein as a network of amino acid residues. it is reasonable to presume that the predicted amino acid residues found to be important for isolated lov domains might not be too different from full length structures as well. preservation of coiled coil signaling j a helix has been evidenced in both the isolated lov domain of ytva and in the only crystal structure of full length synthetic photoreceptor structure . crystal structures of core lov domains show almost no structural difference in dark and light state . however, within the same lov subfamily that share significant structural homology in core region, there is wide variation in photo cycle kinetics and conformational orientation of the flanking signalling helices. hence, the sequences and structures are considered individually. to account for these subtle structural differences and to transcend this limitation, herein we introduce the technique of differential networks. we demonstrate that changes arising upon illumination of the lov sensor domain leading to lightdark transition can be effectively captured by this approach. we show that the combined effect of interactions which are lost or gained during lightdark transition plays an important role in signalling. detailed analyses of biologically significant interactions among these, yield valuable information.fmn/fad based blue-light responsive lov photoreceptors are present across all kingdoms of life. this indicates their indispensability and diverse function in many crucial biological signaling events. photon absorption leads to signal propagation accompanied by structural alterations, downstream or upstream, which eventually affects the behavioral pattern of the organism. since our study is completely dependent on crystal structure, it should be noted that photo-induced dynamics amidst static nature might vary with data collection at different temperature. further, crystallography artefacts might also mildly affect network construction from different chains, even from one single structure. nevertheless, by introducing the notion of differential network, our study successfully identifies important interactions and residues with functional significance, as attested by experiments as well as sequence-structure homology. thus, it would be helpful in guiding future experiments. our network based approach is not only useful in understanding photo-adaptability in natural photoreceptors but will be extremely helpful in rational design of novel and complex photoreceptors with interesting light-responsive functions.  
