genome analysis marker2sequence, mine your qtl regions for candidate genes marker2sequence (m2s) aims at mining quantitative trait loci (qtls) for candidate genes. for each gene, within the qtl region, m2s uses data integration technology to integrate putative gene function with associated gene ontology terms, proteins, pathways and literature. as a typical qtl region easily contains several hundreds of genes, this gene list can then be further filtered using a keyword-based query on the aggregated annotations. m2s will help breeders to identify potential candidate genes for their traits of interest. availability: marker2sequence is freely accessible atquantitative trait loci (qtls) are regions on the genome statistically associated with a phenotype. plant breeders aim to introgress these regions from a donor parent to improve a cultivar . however, a typical qtl region may contain hundreds of genes, including genes negatively influencing the breeding goals. complete genome sequences of many crop plants are becoming available, including the genome of important food crops such as tomato (the international tomato genome) and potato (the potato genome sequencing). the availability of structural and functional genome annotations makes it possible to investigate the qtl region for genes positively or negatively influencing the trait of interest. a tool that offers this functionality is gbrowse . however, exploring several hundreds of putative candidate genes with gbrowse will still be a lot of work, as limited information is available for each gene. identification of putative candidate genes can be improved using data integration approaches. biologically relevant knowledge about, for example, gene ontology (go; the gene ontology consortium, 2000), protein functions or metabolic pathways can be combined with expert knowledge about the trait under investigation. the basic principle of semantic web technology is to integrate different to whom correspondence should be addressed. types of data from different sources using standardized ontologies . important resources such as uniprot and go have become available in a resource description framework (rdf; http://www. w3.org/tr/rdf-primer/) format allowing data integration against these resources. our research aims to develop a tool, called marker2sequence (m2s), which plant breeders can use to identify the putative candidate gene for their qtl. we describe how m2s uses semantic data integration approaches to obtain available information for each gene model and combine this with a keyword-based search function to mine for the appropriate candidate gene. m2s, by design, can work with any genome annotation, but we show the functionality of m2s, using the tomato genome annotation.  
