markophylo: markov chain analysis on phylogenetic trees continuous-time markov chain models with finite state space are routinely used for analysis of discrete character data on phylogenetic trees. examples of such discrete character data include restriction sites, gene family presence/absence, intron presence/absence and gene family size data. while models with constrained substitution rate matrices have been used to good effect, more biologically realistic models have been increasingly implemented in the recent literature combining, e.g., site rate variation, site partitioning, branch-specific rates, allowing for non-stationary prior root probabilities, correcting for sampling bias, etc. to name a few. here, a flexible and fast r package is introduced that infers evolutionary rates of discrete characters on a tree within a probabilistic framework. the package, markophylo, fits maximum-likelihood models using markov chains on phylogenetic trees. the package is efficient, with the workhorse functions written in c and the interface in user-friendly r. availability and implementation: markophylo is available as a platform-independent r package from the comprehensive r archive network at https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/marko phylo/. a vignette with numerous examples is also provided with the r package.a markov chain framework is frequently adopted to estimate evolutionary rates of discrete characters on phylogenetic trees. some examples of previously investigated data using such models include restriction sites , gene family size data , gene family presence/absence patterns , intron presence/absence data , etc. a good introduction to such models can be found in omeara (2012) and yang (2014). it has been noted before that many variants of such models are just restrictions of more general models for investigation of specific hypotheses or different kinds of data (o). hence, there is a clear need for a flexible and efficient software to provide a unified interface that would allow fitting of varied discrete character datasets. recently, kim and hao (2014) put forward a unified r (r core) package, namely discml, that provided users the option of biologically realistic features like gamma rate variation , estimation of character prior root probabilities , correcting for ancient characters being lost from all examined extant taxa (cf.), etc. as noted in kim and hao (2014), while many of these features are found in existing programs like bayestraits , cafe3 , badirate and gloome , the sum total of these above-mentioned desirable features was not available in a single flexible software. however, discml is not computationally inexpensive. moreover, discml does not currently allow for partition analyses or for accounting for sampling bias arising due to multiple unobserved phyletic patterns (see supplementary material). here, we present markophylo, an r package that is both fast and flexible. the markophylo package allows for estimating evolutionary rates using a user-specified, i.e. hypothesis driven,substitution rate matrix in a continuous-time markov chain model on phylogenies. the package is computationally efficient, with the workhorse functions written in c, using the rcpp and rcpparmadillo packages. the package is flexible, capable of modelling a myriad array of processes (described below in section 2.2).here, a flexible and efficient r package named markophylo for estimating evolutionary rates of discrete characters is introduced. when compared with existing packages like discml, markophylo is at least an order of magnitude faster. moreover, markophylo implements a wide variety of features increasingly seen in more biologically realistic markov chain models run on discrete character datasets.  
