a bio-inspired computing model for ovarian carcinoma classification and oncogene detection downloaded from motivation: ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer deaths in women in the western world for 2013. in ovarian cancer, benign tumors turn malignant, but the point of transition is difficult to predict and diagnose. the 5-year survival rate of all types of ovarian cancer is 44, but this can be improved to 92 if the cancer is found and treated before it spreads beyond the ovary. however, only 15 of all ovarian cancers are found at this early stage. therefore, the ability to automatically identify and diagnose ovarian cancer precisely and efficiently as the tissue changes from benign to invasive is important for clinical treatment and for increasing the cure rate. this study proposes a new ovarian carcinoma classification model using two algorithms: a novel dis-cretization of food sources for an artificial bee colony (dfabc), and a support vector machine (svm). for the first time in the literature, oncogene detection using this method is also investigated. results: a novel bio-inspired computing model and hybrid algorithms combining dfabc and svm was applied to ovarian carcinoma and oncogene classification. this study used the human ovarian cdna expression database to collect 41 patient samples and 9600 genes in each pathological stage. feature selection methods were used to detect and extract 15 notable oncogenes. we then used the dfabc-svm model to examine these 15 oncogenes, dividing them into eight different classifications according to their gene expressions of various pathological stages. the average accuracyof the eight classification experiments was 94.76. this research also found some oncogenes that had not been discovered or indicated in previous scientific studies. the main contribution of this research is the proof that these newly discovered oncogenes are highly related to ovarian or other cancers. availability and implementation:ovarian cancer is a common gynecological cancer which is the fifth leading cause of cancer deaths in women in the western world . the overall 5-year survival rate for ovarian cancer is about 44, a statistic that has remained unchanged in america for the past 25 years . ovarian cancer patients generally go through three major pathological stages: benign, borderline and invasive. for those whose ovarian cancer is diagnosed in the early pathological stage, the survival rate is higher. however, the transition from a symptomatic benign ovarian tumor (ovt) to a cancerous malignancy is difficult to diagnose and estimate. ca125 is commonly used for ovarian cancer screening, but its specificity or sensitivity is insufficient for early detection . many recent scientific studies have noted that gene expressions are highly related to the identification of ovarian cancer stages . in these studies, the microarray has been used extensively and shown to be a promising tool. microarray analysis has revealed specific genes, called oncogenes, which biological experiments have apparently indicated are causally related to ovarian cancer. based on this same analysis, pathologists have further observed the variations of gene expressions in these specific ovarian genes and compared the levels of gene expression in different pathological stages and conditions. biological and statistical computing can be used to represent gene expressions for such comparisons, particularly during the progressive states as a tumor transitions from benign to invasive ovarian cancer tissue. therefore, gene expression analysis has become increasingly important because of its excellent performance in both bioinformatics and biomedical studies of the human genome system. however, gene expression analysis is a complex process and requires a large dataset in order for enough useful information to be extracted. thus, computer-based analysis and classification of diseases can be helpful for diagnostics. the support vector machine (svm) is one artificial intelligence method which has recently become popular, mainly because it can process classification and predication via different core parameters and is more capable of making predictions using different types of datasets . in addition, the svm formalism is also a graphical and mathematical tool for the design, specification, simulation and verification of systems. in recent years, the bio-inspired algorithm has become increasingly useful as an optimization tool . by simulating biologically peculiar social behavior, such as mating or foraging, bio-inspired algorithms quickly search for the optimal solution and achieve the effect of stable convergence. therefore, this study proposes to apply the parameter optimization method, i.e. a discretized food source for an artificial bee colony (dfabc) algorithm, to an svm model to develop a hybrid dfabcsvm classification model which achieves fast convergence and has good prediction capability when handling complex and varying types of ovarian cancer datasets. in addition, the proposed model is compared with those of several pioneering studies regarding ovarian carcinoma prediction.in this study, a novel bio-inspired computing model and hybrid algorithms of dfabc and svm were applied to the classification of ovarian carcinoma and the prediction of oncogenes. the average accuracy of predicted target oncogenes in eight classifications was over 94.76. according to the literature, 13 oncogenes are reportedly related to various cancers, and five genes (pappa, cxcl12, pfkfb3, gnb1 and bcl-2) are associated with ovarian cancer at different pathologic stages. in addition, two oncogenes (znf509 and mtmr2) are first time to associate with the cancer. this research seeks to develop a new bio-inspired algorithm to quickly search for specific ovarian cancer biomarkers, which is typically a laborious process, and the resulting specificity and sensitivity is typically insufficient for the early detection of ovarian cancer. improving the survival probability for ovarian cancer patients requires the precise location of efficient tumor markers as tumors transition from benign to invasive. thus, future work will focus on confirming the expressions of these genes using experimental methods such as real-time pcr, western blotting, and immunohistochemistry. we believe that our discovery of new stage-specific genes can allow for the development of a rapid screening platform for oncogenes and thus improve early diagnosis of various types of cancer.  
