gene expression m as-o-menos: a simple sign averaging method for discrimination in genomic data analysis motivation: the successful translation of genomic signatures into clinical settings relies on good discrimination between patient subgroups. many sophisticated algorithms have been proposed in the statistics and machine learning literature, but in practice simpler algorithms are often used. however, few simple algorithms have been formally described or systematically investigated. results: we give a precise definition of a popular simple method we refer to as m as-o-menos, which calculates prognostic scores for discrimination by summing standardized predictors, weighted by the signs of their marginal associations with the outcome. we study its behavior theoretically, in simulations and in an extensive analysis of 27 independent gene expression studies of bladder, breast and ovarian cancer, altogether totaling 3833 patients with survival outcomes. we find that despite its simplicity, m as-o-menos can achieve good discrimination performance. it performs no worse, and sometimes better, than popular and much more cpu-intensive methods for discrimination, including lasso and ridge regression. availability and implementation: m as-o-menos is implemented for survival analysis as an option in the survhd package, available from http://www.bitbucket.org/lwaldron/survhd and submitted to bioconductor.the successful translation of genomic signatures into clinical settings relies on good discrimination between patient subgroups that should receive different clinical management. relatively, sophisticated methods such as penalized regression, support vector machines, random forests, bagging and boosting have seen detailed treatments in the statistics and machine learning literature (b uhlmann and van de; sch olkopf and); however, in practice many researchers prefer simpler algorithms . a systematic meta-analysis of prognostic models for late-stage ovarian cancer found that the most common methods in the field, and those used to generate the best-performing models on independent datasets, were of the univariate ensemble type, where results of univariate regressions are aggregated to formulate a risk score. the simplest of the univariate ensemble class of prediction methods sets the coefficients of a linear risk score for standardized covariates equal to the signs of their univariate associations with the clinical outcome of interest. in other words, for survival analysis it produces a risk score equal to the sum of the bad prognosis features minus the sum of the good prognosis features. this method and closely related variants can be found in the top clinical, bioinformatic and general science journals and in commercially available prognostic gene signatures, such as the myprs signature for multiple myeloma prognosis . it has even been proposed, in a formula-free article, as a practical algorithm that can be performed in a spreadsheet with the software and skill sets available to the cancer biologist . despite the popularity and apparent effectiveness of this simplest of methods, to our knowledge, it has never been formally described or systematically investigated. we give a precise definition of the procedure and study its behavior theoretically, in simulations and in an extensive analysis of 27 independent gene expression studies of bladder, breast and ovarian cancer, altogether totaling 3833 patients with survival outcomes. we provide theoretical arguments that this method has good discrimination power and low variability when positively correlated features tend to have the same directions of marginal association with outcome. in simulations under a variety of sparsity and covariance structures, it performs competitively with lasso and ridge regression under all situations except the unlikely scenario of independent features, and was more than an order of magnitude faster. in application to survival analysis of three large microarray databases, it performed better than lasso and ridge regression in two of three cancer types, and comparably in the third. we refer to the method as m aso-menos because in spanish the phrase m as o menos means both plus or minus, describing the methods implementation, to whom correspondence should be addressed. and so-so, describing its theoretically non-optimal but still practically useful discrimination ability.we have studied m as-o-menos, a simple algorithm for classification and discrimination that has seen popular adoption but has not been formally investigated. we gave a precise definition of the algorithm, showed theoretically and in simulations that it can perform well and demonstrated in an extensive analysis of real cancer gene expression studies that it can achieve good discrimination performance in realistic settings, even compared with lasso and ridge regression. our results provide some justification to support its widespread use in practice. we hope our work will help shift the emphasis of ongoing prediction modeling efforts in genomics from the development of complex models to the more important issues of study design, model interpretation and independent validation. one reason why m as-o-menos is comparable with more sophisticated methods such as penalized regression may be that we often use a prediction model trained on one set of patients to discriminate between subgroups in an independent sample, usually collected from a slightly different population and processed in a different laboratory. this cross-study variation is not captured by standard theoretical analyses, so theoretically optimal methods may not perform well in real applications .proposed a method for giving a realistic measure of the practical utility of algorithms in the presence of cross-study variation. at the same time, we found using cross-validation experiments that even within the  
