mass spectrometry-based protein identification with accurate statistical significance assignment motivation: assigning statistical significance accurately has become increasingly important as metadata of many types, often assembled in hierarchies, are constructed and combined for further biological analyses. statistical inaccuracy of metadata at any level may propagate to downstream analyses, undermining the validity of scientific conclusions thus drawn. from the perspective of mass spectrometry-based proteomics, even though accurate statistics for peptide identification can now be achieved, accurate protein level statistics remain challenging. results: we have constructed a protein id method that combines peptide evidences of a candidate protein based on a rigorous formula derived earlier; in this formula the database p-value of every peptide is weighted, prior to the final combination, according to the number of proteins it maps to. we have also shown that this protein id method provides accurate protein level e-value, eliminating the need of using empirical post-processing methods for type-i error control. using a known protein mixture, we find that this protein id method, when combined with the soricformulasoricsoricformula, yields accurate values for the proportion of false discoveries. in terms of retrieval efficacy, the results from our method are comparable with other methods tested. availability and implementation: the source code, implemented in c on a linux system, is available for download at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/qmbp/qmbp_ms/raid/raid_linux_64bit.peptide identifications (id) via mass spectrometry (ms) have become the central component in modern proteomics; this component, combined with additional analyses, routinely yields pragmatic metadata, including protein id, protein quantification, protein structure and protein associations . these metadata, especially the associated statistical significance assignments, need to be as accurate as possible because they often form the building blocks for investigations at the systems biology level and influence the scientific conclusions drawn henceforth. in this article, we focus on protein id, in particular on improving the accuracy of statistical significance assigned to proteins identified. the need for robust developments towards accurate statistical significance assignments has been advocated despite the existence of many protein id methods . it has also been suggested that the primary cause of unreliable significance assignmentpublished by oxford university press 2014. this work is written by us government employees and is in the public domain in the us.the results will be described in the following order. first, we illustrate that our e-value assignments are accurate at both the peptide and the protein levels. we further show that using the formula proposed by soric(soricsoric(1989), our reported pfds agree well with the targetdecoy pfds. second, our protein e-value accuracy is compared with that of using the formulas in. by extending the formula of soricforsoricsoricfor the method of, we also evaluate the agreement between their reported pfds and the targetdecoy pfds. benchmarking with some of the existing protein id methods will be described in the third part.our investigation indicates that it is possible to achieve faithful protein p-value assignment, hence accurate type-i error control, in protein id. since our approach is founded on a derived mathematical formula that requires accurate peptide e-values as input, it is evident that accurate protein p-values require accurate statistical significance at the peptide id level. the discrepancy between the computed protein p-value and the pfd results in our implementation of the method ofis interesting. based on the results in, the peptide p-values are reasonably accurate albeit exhibiting slightly larger fluctuations than the results from raid_dbs. in addition to the possibility of accumulating uncertainty of peptides p-values, the other possibility is that the iterative procedure to choose the combination yielding the most significant z-score may skew the p-values toward the significant side. investigation of the origin of the pfd and p-value discrepancy when using the method of, however, is beyond the scope of this study and might be most appropriately done by the authors of . as explained earlier, we allow more than one candidate peptide per spectrum to accommodate cofragmentation of multiple precursor ions with proximate masses. (when a low-resolution mass analyzer is used, it can happen that more than one underlying peptide appears significant.) however, readers may ask why do we choose to use dpvs for lower-ranking peptides per spectrum instead of using ordered statistics. the reason is that in this context using ordered statistics beyond the first is not meaningful: the nth-ordered statistics assumes that for a given query spectrum the best n 1 scored peptides are spurious while the rank-n peptide is the underlying peptide whose fragmentation yields the query spectrum. this contradicts the general idea of using a scoring function: among candidate peptides of a query spectrum, the better a peptide scores the more likely it is the underlying peptide. on the other hand, when using the dpv for the rank-n peptide, we are essentially assuming that the top n 1 candidate peptides of the query spectrum are cofragmented underlying peptides and are not considered to be spurious. the protein id method proposed in this article illustrates the possibility of accurate type-i error control, providing a theoretically sound significance assignment method that is also pragmatically simpler than the target-decoy approach. this is particularly important since the number of identified proteins versus pfds provides trustworthy retrieval results only if the reported pfds truly reflects the proportion of false discoveries. evidently, to achieve accurate type-i error control is a task best done by developers of individual software. only when this is accomplished can a true retrieval comparison among different methods be done. since we did not focus on type-ii error, there is definite room for improvement in terms of retrieval efficacy. we note that the information of negatives (segments of a candidate protein not covered by the proteins evidence peptides) is not used. we also believe that, in principle, scoring functions for peptide id can also be improved to better separate true underlying peptides from false positives. currently, we are using a flat peptide weight (by the number of proteins a peptide covers). it is perceivable that more sophisticated weighting may be useful in better separating true positive proteins from false positives. it is our plan to investigate these avenues of improvement in the near future.  
