gene expression mass-spectrometry-based spatial proteomics data analysis using proloc and prolocdata motivation: experimental spatial proteomics, i.e. the high-throughput assignment of proteins to sub-cellular compartments based on quantitative proteomics data, promises to shed new light on many biological processes given adequate computational tools. results: here we present proloc, a complete infrastructure to support and guide the sound analysis of quantitative mass-spectrometry-based spatial proteomics data. it provides functionality for unsupervised and supervised machine learning for data exploration and protein classification and novelty detection to identify new puta-tive sub-cellular clusters. the software builds upon existing infrastructure for data management and data processing. availability: proloc is implemented in the r language and available under an open-source license from the bioconductor project (http:// www.bioconductor.org/). a vignette with a complete tutorial describingknowledge of the spatial distribution of proteins is of critical importance to elucidate their role and refine our understanding of cellular processes. mis-localization of proteins have been associated with cellular dysfunction and disease states , highlighting the importance of localization studies. spatial or organelle proteomics is the systematic study of the proteins and their subcellular localization; these compartments can be organelles, i.e. structures defined by lipid bi-layers, macro-molecular assemblies of proteins and nucleic acids or large protein complexes. despite technological advances in spatial proteomics experimental designs and progress in mass-spectrometry , software support is lacking. to address this, we developed the proloc package that provides a wide range of thoroughly documented analysis methodologies. the software includes stateof-the-art statistical machine-learning algorithms and bundles them in a consistent framework, accommodating any experimental designs and quantitation strategies.  
