sequence analysis maxalike: maximum likelihood-based sequence reconstruction with application to improved primer design for unknown sequences motivation: the task of reconstructing a genomic sequence from a particular species is gaining more and more importance in the light of the rapid development of high-throughput sequencing technologies and their limitations. applications include not only compensation for missing data in unsequenced genomic regions and the design of oligonucleotide primers for target genes in species with lacking sequence information but also the preparation of customized queries for homology searches. results: we introduce the maxalike algorithm, which reconstructs a genomic sequence for a specific taxon based on sequence homologs in other species. the input is a multiple sequence alignment and a phylogenetic tree that also contains the target species. for this target species, the algorithm computes nucleotide probabilities at each sequence position. consensus sequences are then reconstructed based on a certain confidence level. for 37 out of 44 target species in a test dataset, we obtain a significant increase of the reconstruction accuracy compared to both the consensus sequence from the alignment and the sequence of the nearest phylogenetic neighbor. when considering only nucleotides above a confidence limit, maxalike is significantly better (up to 10) in all 44 species. the improved sequence reconstruction also leads to an increase of the quality of pcr primer design for yet unsequenced genes: the differences between the expected t m and real t m of the primer-template duplex can be reduced by 26 compared with other reconstruction approaches. we also show that the prediction accuracy is robust to common distortions of the input trees. the prediction accuracy drops by only 1 on average across all species for 77 of trees derived from random genomic loci in a test dataset. availability: maxalike is available for download and web server at:with increased opportunities for high-throughput sequencing, a large number of additional genomes will be sequenced in the near future. given the limitations of these sequencing technologies, however, it is likely that routinely produced genomic sequences will be incomplete at various levels. also, the genomic information for less popular model organisms or economically important species might remain unavailable for a long time. it is still essential to infer as much knowledge as possible about incomplete or missing genomic data in relation to specific analyses, such as studying the distribution of gene families across the phylogeny of species. the relative position of the target species in the evolutionary tree is typically known or can be inferred from the partial sequence information that is already available. with the rapidly growing collection of sequence data from diverse organisms, homologs for a certain region of interest can be utilized, together with their inherent pattern of evolutionary variation. we present an algorithmmaxalikethat aims at reconstructing sequences in a particular target species, based on a species phylogeny and sequence homologs from other species. the maxalike algorithm uses a multiple sequence alignment and a corresponding phylogenetic tree, annotated with phylogenetic distances on the branches, to estimate mutation rates for each alignment column. it then infers nucleotide probabilities for each site in the theoretical homologous sequence in the target species. from the estimated nucleotide probabilities, the entire sequence can be reconstructed, given a certain level of confidence. the reconstructed sequence can then be utilized for several applications. the sensitivity and specificity of homology search methods that are based either on primary sequence alone or on profile alignment algorithms can be increased by employing a search query that is optimized for the target species of the homology search . a very important application of (partially) reconstructed sequences is the design of oligonucleotide primers for a pcr experiment, e.g. for analysis of expression of the targeted (re-)sequencing of a particular region that is not or incompletely represented in a genome assembly. the successful amplification of a gene sequence depends on a careful selection of a pair of short primers, which, besides certain thermodynamic properties,page: 318 317325the maxalike algorithm estimates the nucleotide probabilities at each sequence position for an unknown sequence in a target species using a combination of homology information from a multiple sequence alignment and a phylogenetic tree. the calculated nucleotide probabilities can be used for homology search or for reconstruction of sequences on which primer design can be made. in a benchmark dataset, we demonstrated that the inclusion of phylogenetic information in sequence reconstruction significantly improves the reconstruction accuracy compared with two standard approaches. for the comparison to the first standard approach, frequency-based consensus sequences, the maxalike reconstruction rate is up to 10 higher in most target species, when using a suitable probability threshold. taking the closest available phylogenetic neighbor (the second standard approach) as a prediction for the target species yields poor results in many cases and is often worsepage: 324 317325  
