data and text mining maxlink: network-based prioritization of genes tightly linked to a disease seed set maxlink, a guilt-by-association network search algorithm, has been made available as a web resource and a stand-alone version. based on a user-supplied list of query genes, maxlink identifies and ranks genes that are tightly linked to the query list. this functionality can be used to predict potential disease genes from an initial set of genes with known association to a disease. the original algorithm, used to identify and rank novel genes potentially involved in cancer, has been updated to use a more statistically sound method for selection of candidate genes and made applicable to other areas than cancer. the algorithm has also been made faster by re-implementation in c++, and the web site uses funcoup 3.0 as the underlying network. availability and implementation: maxlink is freely available at http:// maxlink.sbc.su.se both as a web service and a stand-alone application for download.the vast amount of gene and protein interaction data emanating from high-throughput experiments have been skillfully compiled into networks of functional associations, such as funcoup . these networks combine information on different types of proteingene interactions from different species, data sources and data types to achieve a much higher quality and interaction coverage than pure proteinprotein interaction networks. owing to their high coverage, such networks have a high potential of yielding predictions about previously un-annotated gene function(s) and/or disease associations, through guilt-by-association (gba), i.e. assuming related functions of network neighbors . maxlink ( ) applies a gba algorithm to search the funcoup network to identify and rank genes enriched in connections to a seed set of known disease genes. in the original implementation, the algorithm was tested and validated on a set of cancer genes. the new version of maxlink has been implemented as a web resource and has been further generalized to identify and rank potential disease genes of any disease or condition where a seed set of implicated genes can be provided.maxlink, a network prioritization algorithm for genes, identified based on interactions with a seed set, has been improved by a statistically more sound specificity filtering. it is now released as a much faster c++ implementation, applicable to any set of seed genes, and available as an easy-to-use web resource. the tool can be used in general biological and applied biomedical research, e.g. prediction of potential disease genes, prioritization and/or analysis of results from gwas/linkage studies. other tools exist for candidate gene prioritization, many of which are collected at the gene prioritization portal . these tools use various strategies, e.g. text mining or functional annotation analysis , and data sources, e.g. gene expression and ppi networks (k ohler et al., 2008). most of the tools require a distinct region of the genome as input to narrow down the search space. in contrast, maxlink prioritizes genes from the whole genome, applying a unique gba algorithm to funcoup that integrates information on several types of protein and gene associations from many species and data sources, and is one of the most comprehensive networks available. furthermore, many of the tools use keywords as input, as opposed to maxlink, which only uses gene sets. gene set-based tools have been shown to perform better than keyword-based ones (b ). performance in general is, however, heavily dependent on the selection of evaluation datasets , but tools relying on more comprehensive data integration appear to be more powerful (b ornigen et al., 2012). performance benchmarking remains non-trivial owing to the diversity of the ways the tools are to be used, lack of solid experimental validation and knowledge contamination when statistical methods such as cross-validation are used . a future extension of maxlink could be to use other functional networks than funcoup, to evaluate the algorithm on different data. this could also provide an even wider coverage of potential geneprotein functional interaction space. furthermore, search methods such as shortest path or pagerank could be implemented to exploit other topological properties of the network and to test the suitability of different types of search methods and queries.  
