data and text mining mcagui: microbial community analysis r-graphical user interface (gui) microbial communities have an important role in natural ecosystems and have an impact on animal and human health. intuitive graphic and analytical tools that can facilitate the study of these communities are in short supply. this article introduces microbial community analysis gui, a graphical user interface (gui) for the r-programming language (r development core team, 2010). with this application, researchers can input aligned and clustered sequence data to create custom abundance tables and perform analyses specific to their needs. this gui provides a flexible modular platform, expandable to include other statistical tools for microbial community analysis in the future. availability: the mcagui package and source are freely available as part of bionconductor atseveral graphical user interface software (gui) packages exist for the analysis of microbial community data. these programs include invue, which specializes in creating interactive graphical representations for large datasets and unifrac, a web-based gui that allows users to compare microbial communities using phylogenetic information . many of these applications were built using programming languages such as c and c++. currently, there are few guis specifically available for the analysis of microbial communities that also take advantage of the r programming language. this article introduces microbial community analysis gui (mcagui), an r-package built to help microbial biologists harness the power of statistical analysis tools provided in r without having to learn the r programming language. using mcagui, researchers can perform statistical analyses and create various interactive and analytical data representations specific to microbial ecology. to whom correspondence should be addressed.what distinguishes mcagui from similar applications is its ability to directly input aligned sequence data that provide information about microbial community composition. this allows researchers to create custom abundance tables using both sample metadata and data on operational taxonomic units (otu). mcagui is modular and expandable; it provides a platform that can be extended to include more functionality in the future.  
