genetics and population analysis mcheza: a workbench to detect selection using dominant markers motivation: dominant markers (darts and aflps) are commonly used for genetic analysis in the fields of evolutionary genetics, ecology and conservation of genetic resources. the recent prominence of these markers has coincided with renewed interest in detecting the effects of local selection and adaptation at the level of the genome. results: we present mcheza, an application for detecting loci under selection based on a well-evaluated f st-outlier method. the application allows robust estimates to be made of model parameters (e.g. genome-wide average, neutral f st), provides data import and export functions, iterative contour smoothing and generation of graphics in an easy to use graphical user interface with a computation engine that supports multicore processors for enhanced performance. mcheza also provides functionality to mitigate common analytical errors when scanning for loci under selection. availability: mcheza is freely available under gpl version 3 fromnon-specific amplification methods, such as diversity arrays technology (dart) markers and amplified fragment length polymorphism (aflp), are commonly used for analysis of withinspecies variation because they allow the rapid acquisition of substantial genetic information, at relatively low cost. although other alternative sequencing techniques have since been developed, darts and aflps are still widely used in the fields of evolutionary genetics, ecology and conservation. one of the most important applications of these dominant markers is in detecting the effects of selection and local adaptation at the level of the genome, in areas ranging from parasitology to conservation genetics. there are two current approaches to detect selection: classical f st-outlier approaches [reviewed in, based on the distribution of summary statistics; and those based on likelihood (such as). the original f st-outlier methods do not account for dominant markers such darts or aflps. these markers have two phenotypes detectable at each locus: one allele (the plus-allele) is amplifiable,a fundamental consideration in the design of mcheza is supporting the user by correctly computing important non-trivial parameters that are needed to properly calculate candidate loci for selection. erroneous usage of population genetics applications can easily produce results that seem correct but are, in effect wrong. while mcheza tries to minimize usage errors, the user should be aware of potential limits of the underlying method. potential users are advised to read, wherein several scenarios where dfdist is less applicable are clearly explained. in particular, the bayesian method of foll and, implemented in the program bayescan is an important alternative, with which results should be compared. by improving the estimation of the neutral mean f st when the number of demes is low, mcheza addresses situations where dfdist is known to perform less well . in summary, mcheza tries to provide an intuitive interface, which includes intelligent suggestions to the user with regards to correct usage of software, while enforcing model constraints and providing necessary corrections (e.g. fdr support). it is hoped that this approach will lower barriers to its use, allowing researchers to concentrate more on the biological problems (including the theoretical assumptions and limitations of underlying models) and less on unnecessary software complexity.  
