mdcc_tools: characterizing multi-modal atomic motions in molecular dynamics trajectories we previously reported the multi-modal dynamic cross correlation (mdcc) method for analyzing molecular dynamics trajectories. this method quantifies the correlation coefficients of atomic motions with complex multi-modal behaviors by using a bayesian-based pattern recognition technique that can effectively capture transiently formed, unstable interactions. here, we present an open source toolkit for performing the mdcc analysis, including pattern recognitions, complex network analyses and visualizations. we include a tutorial document that thoroughly explains how to apply this toolkit for an analysis, using the example trajectory of the 100 ns simulation of an engineered endothelin-1 peptide dimer. availability and implementation: the source code is available for free atmolecular dynamics (md) simulations are a promising method to investigate the dynamical behaviors of various molecular systems with atomic details. although recent advances in the computer technologies have realized the long-term simulations of large systems, the huge amount of trajectory data thus generated is not easily interpreted. in order to tackle this problem, analyses toolkits have been extensively developed, such as mdanalysis , wordom and vmd . long-term trajectories reflect complex behaviors of the local and global conformational changes of molecules. the distributions of atomic coordinates may be unimodal, i.e. adequately described by a cluster that is approximated by a single mean and standard deviation, or multi-modal, with several spatially distinct clusters, often slowly interchanging with relatively rapid fluctuations within each cluster. for example, a common multi-modal local motion in proteins results from the rearrangements of hydrogen bonds associated with transient flipping of side chains. the analysis of multi-modal motions, which are not each describable by a single gaussian distribution, is not straightforward. we previously proposed a new analysis method, named multimodal dynamic cross correlation (mdcc) , as a variant of the conventional dynamic cross correlation (dcc) method . because dcc calculates the correlations between atomic motions, based on deviations from the averaged coordinate of each atom, it does not make sense when atoms undergo multi-modal motions. to characterize such multimodal motions, the mdcc method takes advantage of a bayesian statistics-based pattern recognition technique , and classifies the distributions of atomic coordinates into some clusters, or modes. we applied this method to analyze transcription factordna interactions, and found that many transient, multi-modal interactions are formed at interfaces between proteins and dna. see supplementary materials s1 and s2 for details of the method. here, we present an open source, easy-to-use toolkit for the mdcc method. this toolkit performs the full analysis techniques applied in our previous work , and not only covers the correlative coefficients of multi-modal atomic motions, but also enables visualization of the results effectively as a heatmap and a complex network diagram, powered by standard software v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.  
