mdd–soh: exploiting maximal dependence decomposition to identify s-sulfenylation sites with substrate motifs s-sulfenylation (s-sulphenylation, or sulfenic acid), the covalent attachment of s-hydroxyl (soh) to cysteine thiol, plays a significant role in redox regulation of protein functions. although sulfenic acid is transient and labile, most of its physiological activities occur under control of s-hydroxyl-ation. therefore, discriminating the substrate site of s-sulfenylated proteins is an essential task in computational biology for the furtherance of protein structures and functions. research into s-sul-fenylated protein is currently very limited, and no dedicated tools are available for the computational identification of soh sites. given a total of 1096 experimentally verified s-sulfenylated proteins from humans, this study carries out a bioinformatics investigation on soh sites based on amino acid composition and solvent-accessible surface area. a twosamplelogo indicates that the positively and negatively charged amino acids flanking the soh sites may impact the formulation of s-sulfenylation in closed three-dimensional environments. in addition, the substrate motifs of soh sites are studied using the maximal dependence decomposition (mdd). based on the concept of binary classification between soh and non-soh sites, support vector machine (svm) is applied to learn the predictive model from mdd-identified substrate motifs. according to the evaluation results of 5-fold cross-validation, the integrated svm model learned from substrate motifs yields an average accuracy of 0.87, significantly improving the prediction of soh sites. furthermore, the integrated svm model also effectively improves the predictive performance in an independent testing set. finally, the integrated svm model is applied to implement an effective web resource, named mdd-soh, to identify soh sites with their corresponding substrate motifs. availability and implementation: the mdd-soh is now freely available to all interested users atprotein s-sulfenylation (also known as s-sulphenylation), is a reversible post-translation modification (ptm) involving covalent attachment of hydroxide to the thiol group of cysteine residues. oxidation of the thiol functional group in cysteine ((cysso 3 h) has emerged over the last decade as an important method of controlling protein functions through both physiologic and oxidative stress conditions . more than 200 sulfenic modifications have been identified from transcription factors, signaling proteins, metabolic enzymes, proteostasis regulators and cytoskeletal components. due to the labile nature and low abundance of in vivo s-sulfenylation, the detail characteristics and mechanisms of s-sulfenylation still need to be clarified. to our knowledge, the protein database of human, mouse or rat only consists of $2 cysteine residues. both the degree of ssulfenylation within proteins and quantification of protein sulfenic modification are necessary for understanding oxidative ptm regulation. several chemo-proteomic strategies exist for identifying ssulfenylated sites with various clickable probes , but these are very expensive. in the laboratory, the lack of the information about sites and the multiplicity of redox changes both lead to false-positive identifications . as for the increasing number of experimentally identified ssulfenylated peptides, building a resource database is essential for further biological investigation of s-sulfenylated proteins and the substrate specificities of s-sulfenylation sites. with the development of powerful bioinformatics technologies, these approaches are adopted for prognostication of individual cysteine residues to ssulfenylation. although several published algorithms and public servers are available to analyze and predict the reactive state of cysteine and oxidative yet disulfide cysteine , no unconfirmed bio-reports exist on the specific information of s-sulfenylated targets and substrate sites, except for chemical approaches with over 1000 s-sulfenylation sites on 700 proteins in intact cells . other potential novel consensus s-sulfenylation motifs and substrate site specificities remain unclear. this work concentrates on identifying s-sulfenylation sites with potential substrate motifs. depending on the in silico characterization of protein, the sequential and structural features including amino acid composition (aac), amino acid pair composition (aapc), position-specific scoring matrix (pssm), position weight matrix (pwm), amino acid substitution matrix (blosum62) and accessible surface area (asa), are applied to discriminate between the soh sites and non-soh sites. additionally, this study proposes an iteratively statistical method for recognizing s-sulfenylation sites and promising consensus motifs by maximal dependence decomposition (mdd) . based on the most significant dependencies between positions, mdd allows a large group of aligned sequence to be separated into subgroups containing characteristic motifs. for each subgroup, support vector machine (svm) was adopted to build the predictive model for each mdd cluster. consequently, the ability to predict results between s-sulfenylation sites and non-s-sulfenylation sites is significantly increased through evaluation of 5-fold cross-validation. furthermore, an independent testing set, which is blind to the training dataset, was generated from the experimental data of published database to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed models in the evaluation of 5-fold cross-validation. to facilitate the study of protein s-sulfenylation, the mdd-identified substrate motifs were employed to implement a web-based resource for identifying s-sulfenylation sites with their corresponding substrate motifs.this study identified the s-sulfenylation sites of proteins, and investigated the statistically significant conserved motifs. through twosamplelogo, the analysis of position-specific amino acids composition between s-sulfenylation and non-s-sulfenylation site identified the relationship between flanking amino acids with the s-sulfenylation cysteine site. moreover, this investigation also found that the solvent-accessible surface of amino acid surrounding s-sulfenylation sites have a tendency to higher than that aroundexploiting mdd to identify s-sulfenylation sitesnon-s-sulfenylation sites. based on the results of 5-fold cross-validation, the hybrid feature of blosum62 and pssm was estimated as the best feature with the highest proportion of sensitivity, specificity, accuracy and mcc. as stated previously, the main purpose is to find the conserved motifs of s-sulfenylation sites based on the amino acid sequences. by using mddlogo, all s-sulfenylation proteins were clustered into 10 subgroups corresponding with 10 conserved motifs. the mdd-identified motif can thus be adopted to train the model to enhance significantly the predictive performance of the ssulfenylation site. the sets were evaluated through independent testing using two models, namely mddlogo-clustered svm and single svm without mdd. as expected, mddlogo-clustered svm model, which contained the significant conserved motifs, achieved the better performance. consequently, this model was employed to set up a novel web-based resource, named mdd-soh, to identify s-sulfenylation sites and their corresponding substrate motifs.  
