measurement of genome-wide rna synthesis and decay rates with dynamic transcriptome analysis (dta) standard transcriptomics measures total cellular rna levels. our understanding of gene regulation would be greatly improved if we could measure rna synthesis and decay rates on a genome-wide level. to that end, the dynamic transcriptome analysis (dta) method has been developed. dta combines metabolic rna labeling with standard transcriptomics to measure rna synthesis and decay rates in a precise and non-perturbing manner. here, we present the open source r/bioconductor software package dta. it implements all required bioinformatics steps that allow the accurate absolute quantification and comparison of rna turnover. availability: dta is part of r/bioconductor. to download and install dta refer tototal rna levels are a consequence of rna synthesis and decay. these individual contributions can be monitored by dynamic transcriptome analysis (dta,). dta requires culturing cells in the presence of a labeling substrate (e.g. 4su or 4tu). during a short, non-perturbing rna labeling pulse, cells incorporate 4tutp into newly transcribed rna instead of uridine. this setup yields three types of rna fractions: total cellular rna, newly transcribed labeled rna and pre-existing unlabeled rna. the quantification of these fractions on microarrays or by rna-seq is used to estimate rna synthesis and decay rates on a genome-wide scale, assuming exponential decay. for each rna g, the synthesis rate g and the decay rate g are estimated from the equationswhere t is the labeling duration, ccl the cell cycle length, and l g , u g , t g are the measurements of the labeled, unlabeled and total rna fractions, respectively. can be set to 0 in the case of primary cells (e.g. macrophages). it has been shown that dta has higher sensitivity and higher temporal resolution in detecting gene regulatory changes than standard transcriptomics to whom correspondence should be addressed.. one of the technical obstacles of standard transcriptomics is the unknown normalization factor between samples, i.e. wild-type and mutant cells. variations in rna extraction efficiencies and amplification steps in the biochemical protocol introduce differences in the global intensity levels. the estimation of the normalization factors limits the precision of dta. we have extended dta to comparative dta (cdta), to eliminate this obstacle . cdta allows for direct comparison of rna synthesis and decay rates between samples. this is done by mixing an internal normalization standard of schizosaccharomyces pombe (sp) cells to samples of wild-type or perturbed saccharomyces cerevisiae (sc) cells. here, we present the r/bioconductor package dta. it implements all required methods to estimate rna synthesis and decay rates from pre-processed microarray or rna-seq measurements of any organisms that are obtained via the dta or the cdta protocol.the dta package delivers straightforward methods to estimate rna synthesis and decay rates from pre-processed microarray or rnaseq measurements that are obtained via the dta/cdta protocol. the dta package fulfills the high standard of the bioconductor platform, regarding documentation and usability. it can therefore be easily incorporated in r scripts for pre-processing and further statistical analysis of the results can readily be carried out by other methods within the r/bioconductor programming environment.  
