phylogenetics measuring guide-tree dependency of inferred gaps in progressive aligners motivation: multiple sequence alignments are generally reconstructed using a progressive approach that follows a guide-tree. during this process, gaps are introduced at a cost to maximize residue pairing, but it is unclear whether inferred gaps reflect actual past events of sequence insertions or deletions. it has been found that patterns of inferred gaps in alignments contain information towards the true phylogeny, but it is as yet unknown whether gaps are simply reflecting information that was already present in the guide-tree. results: we here develop a framework to disentangle the phylogen-etic signal carried by gaps from that which is already present in the guide-tree. our results indicate that most gaps are incorrectly inserted in patterns that, nevertheless, follow the guide-tree. thus, most gap patterns in current alignments are not informative per se. this affects different programs to various degrees, prank being the most sensitive to the guide-tree.multiple sequence alignments (msa) play a central role in modern molecular biology, and they are used in a broad set of applications, ranging from phylogenetic analyses to the identification of functional motifs . as the quality of an alignment will inevitably affect the quality of downstream analyses, different strategies have been proposed to improve the quality of msa. in the context of the reconstruction of phylogenetic trees to establish the evolutionary relationship among a given set of sequences, a major problem is how to extract phylogenetic information from inferred gaps. theoretically, inferred gaps in an alignment should represent past events of sequence insertions or deletions. when this is the case, a proper incorporation of gap information into phylogenetic inference has been shown to be informative . in practice, however, gaps are generally introduced, at a penalty cost, to maximize residue pairing scores. most alignment reconstruction programs use a progressive approach in which most similar sequences are aligned first, following a guide-tree. during the alignment reconstruction, optimization is based on two main components: residue pairing and gap penalties. in contrast to residue pairings, where empirical models exist, gap penalties are generally rather arbitrary, with some notable exceptions . it is unclear to which degree inferred gaps in alignments correspond real past events of insertions and deletions. as a result, highly gapped regions are commonly considered unreliable , and it is common practice to ignore them before phylogenetic analyses . a recent study has reported an unexpected accuracy of maximum parsimony trees reconstructed solely from the information contained in presence/absence patterns of inferred gaps in protein alignments . this result has been attributed to phylogenetic information contained directly in gaps introduced by alignment programs, and it would imply that current phylogenetic methods could be improved by exploiting such information. however, for this to be true, gaps should carry independent phylogenetic information, truly reflecting past evolutionary events, such as insertions and deletions. alternatively, because of the progressive nature of the alignment reconstruction, gap patterns may simply reflect information already present in the guide-tree, which is usually reconstructed from pairwise sequence distance information. if this would be the case, usage of the gap patterns in phylogenetic reconstruction would be biased towards the guide-tree, which is prone to contain errors. disentangling the two scenarios is of central importance to improve the existing multiple sequence alignment methods and to design proper strategies to exploit the potential information contained in gaps. at the same time, this task is challenging, given the lack of a proper framework to measure the effect that guide-trees have in the introduction of gaps. here, we develop a novel approach to assess whether the information contained in gap patterns reflect true evolutionary events, and whether this is different from the phylogenetic signal already present in the guide-tree. we apply such framework to several synthetic and real datasets and using five different alignment strategies that represent the main alignment approaches . our results show that most gaps are incorrectly inserted in patterns that, nevertheless, tend to follow the guide-tree. hence, gaps carry little additional information, distinct from that already present in the guide-tree. our results emphasize the role of the guide-tree when alignments of gappy data are used for evolutionary analyses. although the impact of this effect varies across datasets, some alignment algorithms are consistently more affected than others. in all cases, the errors could be reduced by either using the known true tree as a to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.  
