mecors: metagenome-enabled error correction of single cell sequencing reads we present a new tool, mecors, to correct chimeric reads and sequencing errors in illumina data generated from single amplified genomes (sags). it uses sequence information derived from accompanying metagenome sequencing to accurately correct errors in sag reads, even from ultra-low coverage regions. in evaluations on real data, we show that mecors outperforms bayeshammer, the most widely used state-of-the-art approach. mecors performs particularly well in correcting chimeric reads, which greatly improves both accuracy and contiguity of de novo sag assemblies. availability and implementation: https://github.com/metagenomics/mecorsthe vast majority of microbial species found in nature has yet to be grown in pure culture, turning metagenomics andmore recently single cell genomics into indispensable methods to access the genetic makeup of microbial dark matter . frequently, single amplified genomes (sags) and shotgun metagenomes are generated from the same environmental sample, and are methodologically combined e.g. to validate metagenome bins with single cells or to improve the sags assembly contiguity . however, a single cells dna needs to be amplified prior to sequencing, as usually accomplished by multiple displacement amplification (mda;). this amplification is heavily biased, leading to uneven sequencing depth including ultra-low coverage regions with basically no informed error correction possible (; supplementary). moreover, chimera formation occurs roughly once per 10 kbp during mda, further complicating sag assembly . while an array of error correction tools exist for a variety of use cases , only one tool was specifically designed to correct sag data: hammer , recently refined to bayeshammer . we propose a metagenome-enabled error correction strategy for single cell sequencing reads. our method takes advantage of largely unbiased metagenomic coverage, enabling it to correct positions with too low a coverage for sag-only error correction, and to correct chimeric sag reads through non-chimeric metagenome reads.  
