sequence analysis medips: genome-wide differential coverage analysis of sequencing data derived from dna enrichment experiments motivation: dna enrichment followed by sequencing is a versatile tool in molecular biology, with a wide variety of applications including genome-wide analysis of epigenetic marks and mechanisms. a common requirement of these diverse applications is a comparison of read coverage between experimental conditions. the amount of samples generated for such comparisons ranges from few replicates to hundreds of samples per condition for epigenome-wide association studies. consequently, there is an urgent need for software that allows for fast and simple processing and comparison of sequencing data derived from enriched dna. results: here, we present a major update of the r/bioconductor package medips, which allows for an arbitrary number of replicates per group and integrates sophisticated statistical methods for the detection of differential coverage between experimental conditions. our approach can be applied to a diversity of quantitative sequencing data. in addition, our update adds novel functionality to medips, including correlation analysis between samples, and takes advantage of bioconductors annotation databases to facilitate annotation of specific genomic regions. availability and implementation: the latest version of medips is available as version 1.12.0 and part of bioconductor 2.13. the package comes with a manual containing detailed description of its func-tionality and is available atdna enrichment methods are widely used for genome-wide identification of many different kinds of epigenetic marks. these techniques include chromatin-immunoprecipitation for localizing transcription factor binding sites or for revealing the genomic distribution of different histone modifications. methylated dna immuno-precipitation (medip) and methyl-cpg binding domain (mbd) protein capture are similar techniques, but target the enrichment of dna fragments containing methylated cytosines. similarly, 5-hydroxymethylcytosines can be detected by antiserum specific to cytosine-5-hydroxymethylenesulfate (cms) after treatment with sodium bisulfite . it can be expected that further affinity methods will be developed for immunoprecipitation (ip) of known or novel kinds of epigenetic marks. to provide a general framework for efficient genomewide differential coverage analysis of ip-sequencing data, we have improved the user-friendly medips package. in contrast to the previous version, the medips update is capable of processing an arbitrary number of replicates or samples per condition. furthermore, medips now integrates an elaborated statistical framework developed for the digital nature of count data, which includes a model for biological variation across replicates , and has greatly reduced runtime and memory requirements.to demonstrate the functionality of the medips package, we processed recently published medip-seq data that was generated to assess genome-wide epigenetic changes in mouse intestinal adenoma. for this study, differential methylation was inferred for the sample groups by calculating wilcoxon rank tests for the normalized count values (reads per million, rpm) of each window. differentially methylated regions (dmrs) were determined by applying filters for p-values, minimal coverage and ratios . here, we process the same data but by using the presented medips package version 1.12.0. the commented r script, showing the function calls of this analysis, can be found in the supplementary material. from the five adenoma and seven normal control mouse samples, 1422 m medip-seq reads were uniquely mapped to the mouse reference genome (ncbi37/mm9) using bowtie , of which 93 remain after replacing reads with the same position and orientation by one representative. the saturation analysis indicates sufficient sequencing depth, and the cpg coverage indicates an effective medip enrichment (seeand supplementary figs s1 and s2). comparison of the normalized relative methylation score values with bisulfite validation showed a good overall correlation of 0.690.79 with a set of bisulfite validation assays previously performed byon the same genomic samples (seeand supplementary). the edger test for differentially methylated regions finds 51.722 dmrs (p50.01), which correspond to 0.5 of the genome. correction for multiple testing leads to 110 regions at 10 false discovery rate (fdr).shows the methylation logfc versus average log methylation (ma-plot). dmrs are depicted as orange points (p50.01) and red crosses (fdr50.1). the result table containing the dmrs can be found in supplementary table s1. about 60 of the dmrs identified byoverlap with the dmrs identified by medips 1.12. a detailed comparison between the two approaches can be found in the supplementary material. although the overall number of hypo-and hypermethylated regions is balanced, preferential hypermethylation was found in functionally important subgenomic regions, such as promoters and cpg islands. in particular, cpg-rich promoters showed a substantial enrichment of hyper-over hypomethylation (5:1; see). the identification of cpg-rich promoters as preferential targets for hypermethylation may provide important leads for further wet lab experiments. for instance, the analysis can be  
