analysis of impedance-based cellular growth assays motivation: impedance-based technologies are advancing methods for measuring proliferation of adherent cell cultures non-invasively and in real time. the analysis of the resulting data has so far been hampered by inappropriate computational methods and the lack of systematic data to evaluate the characteristics of the assay. results: we used a commercially available system for impedance-based growth measurement (xcelligence) and compared the reported cell index with data from microscopy. we found that the measured signal correlates linearly with the cell number throughout the time of an experiment with sufficient accuracy in subconfluent cell cultures. the resulting growth curves for various colon cancer cells could be well described with the empirical richards growth model, which allows for extracting quantitative parameters (such as characteristic cycle times). we found that frequently used readouts like the cell index at a specific time or the area under the growth curve cannot be used to faithfully characterize growth inhibition. we propose to calculate the average growth rate of selected time intervals to accurately estimate time-dependent ic50 values of drugs from growth curves.cell proliferation assays in multiwell format have become one of the main workhorses in drug characterization and are used for cellular phenotyping . screening of thousands of compounds from drug libraries requires very costefficient approaches. classical proliferation assays like the mtt or xtt assay have a number of disadvantages. they are often not very quantitative and are typically invasive, as they require labels which influence cellular metabolism. since culturing of the cells and application of the assay is the most laborious task, typically the assay is performed only at a few time points after application of the drug. consequently, these assays may miss important kinetic information. targeted therapies and ab initio design of novel kinase inhibitors require more quantitative evaluation of drug effects on cell phenotype. kinase inhibitors typically have nontrivial pharmacodynamics that depends crucially on cell type and mutation pattern. thus, it is desired to record growth curves non-invasively and with high temporal resolution. such a method for studying cellular processes in real time was developed in the 1980s and became known as electric cell-substrate impedance sensing (ecis) . in this assay, the cell culture well bottom contains electrodes, typically a large reference electrode and one or several detection electrodes. via these electrodes, a small alternating potential is applied, and the impedance of the circuit is measured. cells that grow on thedetection electrodes increase the measured impedance, thus the impedance should correlate with the number of cells. this method has also been successfully used to study electric properties of the cell membrane, the mode of cell attachment to the ground substrate as well as cell motility and to analyze cytotoxicity .developed an assay called real-time cell electronic sensing, which is based on ecis; however, the electrode structure has been improved to allow detection of almost all cells in a culture well. assay plates are now commercially available in multiwell format. in this study, we investigated how to improve the analysis of growth curves measured by the assays. first, we compared cell index data obtained by the assay with data on confluency from microscopy. the analysis shows that the assay can be used to study proliferation quantitatively, as the measured cell index relates linearly to the cell surface of adherent colon carcinoma cell lines. next we evaluated if mathematical models can be used to describe the timeresolved measurements. we found that after seeding, adherent cells require a certain time to attach to the surface, after which they start to grow exponentially. the duration of the exponential growth phase depends critically on initial cell number and the culture well capacity, as increasing relative confluency will lead to contact inhibition of growth. after evaluating different growth models, we concluded that the different phases of the cell growth (after cell attachment) can be appropriately described by the richards growth model . parameters obtained from the model fit can be used to derive quantities that characterize cell growth, such as the doubling time of proliferating cells. besides, growth measurements are often used to determine quantitative traits of drugs, such as ic50 values. we found that the cell index, the normalized cell index or the area under the growth curve are error-prone readouts for quantification of growth. in contrast, growth can be quantified reliably by calculating average growth rates, and consequently these rates (when obtained from different inhibitor treatments) are suitable for ic50 estimation. accurate timedependent ic50 values can be obtained by sampling the average growth rate within several user-defined time intervals. from our studies, we conclude that the technology is well suited to quantify cell growth. however, the currently applied techniques of growth curve analysis (such as the ones build into the software of commercial systems) are insufficient for extracting quantitative information. in this work, we present quantitative computational methods that make use of the dynamic information.  
