structural bioinformatics megadock 4.0: an ultra–high-performance protein–protein docking software for heterogeneous supercomputers the application of proteinprotein docking in large-scale interactome analysis is a major challenge in structural bioinformatics and requires huge computing resources. in this work, we present megadock 4.0, an fft-based docking software that makes extensive use of recent heterogeneous supercomputers and shows powerful , scalable performance of 497 strong scaling. availability and implementation: megadock 4.0 is written in c+ + with openmpi and nvidia cuda 5.0 (or later) and is freely available to all academic and non-profit users at:proteinprotein interactions can provide valuable insights for understanding the principles of biological systems and for elucidating causes of incurable diseases. although many structures of interacting proteins have been determined by x-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, the structures of many protein complexes have still not been determined experimentally because of cost and technical limitations. proteinprotein docking, a computational method for predicting the structure of a protein complex from known component structures, is a powerful approach that facilitates the discovery of otherwise unattainable protein complex structures. a number of fast fourier transform (fft)-based rigid-body initial proteinprotein docking tools have been developed for predicting protein complex structures . however, faster docking tools are still required to perform large-scale interactome predictions. some applications also require a huge number of dockings, such as ensemble docking techniques using multiple conformations for flexible docking (gr unberg et al., 2004; kr ol et al., 2007), cross-docking for identification of protein interaction partners and multiple docking . to achieve these large-scale analyses, use of the supercomputing environment has become absolutely necessary. on the other hand, 35 of computing performance of supercomputers ranked in top500.org is currently achieved by hardware accelerators, such as graphics processing units (gpus), and this percentage is increasing. therefore, tools that can be used with such heterogeneous supercomputers are necessary. while some docking tools are accelerated by gpus on a node (;), heterogeneous supercomputers, which have massive numbers of nodes including multiple cpu cores and gpu cards, have not yet been used for acceleration of docking tool performance. here, we present ultrahigh-performance docking software, megadock 4.0, which makes extensive use of supercomputers equipped with gpus.  
