megahit: an ultra-fast single-node solution for large and complex metagenomics assembly via succinct de bruijn graph megahit is a ngs de novo assembler for assembling large and complex metagenomics data in a time-and cost-efficient manner. it finished assembling a soil metagenomics dataset with 252 gbps in 44.1 and 99.6 h on a single computing node with and without a graphics processing unit, respectively. megahit assembles the data as a whole, i.e. no pre-processing like partitioning and normalization was needed. when compared with previous methods on assembling the soil data, megahit generated a three-time larger assembly, with longer contig n50 and average contig length; furthermore, 55.8 of the reads were aligned to the assembly, giving a fourfold improvement. availability and implementation: the source code of megahit is freely available at https://github. com/voutcn/megahit under gplv3next generation sequencing technologies have offered new opportunities to study metagenomics and understand various microbial communities such as human guts, rumen and soil. due to the lack of reference genomes, de novo assembly of metagenomics data (short reads) is a beneficial and almost inevitable step for metagenomics analysis . this step is, however, constrained by the heavy requirement of computational resources, especially for large and complex datasets encountered in environmental metagenomics . the soil metagenomics dataset recently published by howe et al. comprises 252 gbp even after trimming low quality bases. the dataset was successfully assembled with preprocessing steps including partitioning and digital normalization. at present no de novo assembler can assemble the data as a whole using a feasible amount of computer memory. estimated memory requirement for soapdenovo2 and idba-ud to assemble the soil data is at least 4 tb. as the volume of metagenomics data keeps growing, we are motivated to develop megahit, an assembler that can assemble large and complex metagenomics data in a time-and cost-efficient manner, especially on a single-node server (current maximum memory capacity 768 gb for a 2-socket server).  
