genetics and population analysis analysis of latino populations from gala and mec studies reveals genomic loci with biased local ancestry estimation motivation: local ancestry analysis of genotype data from recently admixed populations (e.g. latinos, african americans) provides key insights into population history and disease genetics. although methods for local ancestry inference have been extensively validated in simulations (under many unrealistic assumptions), no empirical study of local ancestry accuracy in latinos exists to date. hence, interpreting findings that rely on local ancestry in latinos is challenging. results: here, we use 489 nuclear families from the mainland usa, puerto rico and mexico in conjunction with 3204 unrelated latinos from the multiethnic cohort study to provide the first empirical characterization of local ancestry inference accuracy in latinos. our approach for identifying errors does not rely on simulations but on the observation that local ancestry in families follows mendelian inheritance. we measure the rate of local ancestry assignments that lead to mendelian inconsistencies in local ancestry in trios (milanc), which provides a lower bound on errors in the local ancestry estimates. we show that milanc rates observed in simulations underestimate the rate observed in real data, and that milanc varies substantially across the genome. second, across a wide range of methods, we observe that loci with large deviations in local ancestry also show enrichment in milanc rates. therefore, local ancestry estimates at such loci should be interpreted with caution. finally, we reconstruct ancestral haplotype panels to be used as reference panels in local ancestry inference and show that ancestry inference is significantly improved by incoroprating these reference panels. availability and implementation: we provide the reconstructed reference panels together with the maps of milanc rates as a public resource for researchers analyzing local ancestry in latinos at http:// bogdanlab.during the past decade, studies of recently admixed populations (e.g. latinos, african americans) have been used to detect associations of genomic regions with disease risk and for the inference of population genetic parameters . these populations emerge from the mixing of genetically diverged ancestral populations for a relatively small number of generations (typically 520). owing to crossover recombination events, the chromosome of any admixed individual is a mosaic of chromosomal regions originating from the ancestral populations. identifying the ancestral origin of each of these regions is the goal of local ancestry inference. local ancestry inference has proven to be an extremely valuable resource for medical genetics in detecting genes associated with disease through admixture mapping or through a combination of genome-wide association, admixture mapping and resequencing studies . to whom correspondence should be addressed.accurate local ancestry inference in latinos forms an important component of disease and population genetic studies in these populations. biases in local ancestry estimation would lead to false positive associations thereby invalidating the scientific results reported in these analyses. in this work, we quantified the accuracy of local ancestry inference at each location in the genome using real genotype data over 44000 latino individuals. our study provides the first comprehensive evaluation of local ancestry methods using external information taken from family data and thereby overcomes the simplifying assumptions of simulation-based assessments. we provide a direct analytic relation between the sample size, the milanc and the error rates of ancestry inference. we estimated the milanc rates for a number of state-of-the-art local ancestry methodsalloy , lamp-ld , pcadmix and winpop . all methods exhibit qualitatively similar behavior. first, we observe that the milanc rates associated with each of these methods vary considerably across the genome. we construct genomic maps of milanc rates for different local ancestry inference methods that can be used to aid researchers in interpreting the results of studies of local ancestry in latinos. second, we find that loci with increased deviation in local ancestry inference show increased mendelian inconsistency rates in local ancestry inference in latinos. our results strongly suggest that local ancestry estimates at these loci are biased. this is important for studies of local ancestry in latinos such as case-only admixture mapping or studies of natural selection that aim at identifying loci with large deviations in local ancestry. the genomic maps of milanc rates could serve as a valuable tool to distinguish true signals from loci where the local ancestry estimates are inaccurate. for example, we find 12 loci as putative for natural selection in the gala mexican data (more than 3 standard deviations increase in the eur local ancestry). we observe an average milanc rate of 6.5 at these loci, significantly higher than the average genomic rate of 3.2. this suggests that an alternate explanation for part of the enrichment of eur ancestry at these loci is error/bias of local ancestry inference. as future work, we propose to incorporate the newly inferred error rates in robust association statistics that model the variation in error rates across the genome in addition to unbiased local ancestry inference methods. our results also show that currently available genotype data from latinos can be used to build better reference panels to be used as proxies for local ancestry inference in latinos; this motivates the need for improved methodologies for recovery of ancestral haplotypes from admixed populations. in practice, to obtain high resolution map of the locus-specific error rates, our analysis should be replicated with a considerably larger sample size. however, even with the current sample size, we show a significant correlation between the milanc results and the average ancestry, as well as a statistically significant reduction in milanc rates when an improved reference panel is available. we observe this phenomenon when using a denser set of snps as a reference panel, as well as when using a closer population (e.g. spanish instead of ceu). it is therefore crucial to construct highly accurate reference panels, and as a first step toward this goal, we show that a reference panel can be reconstructed by extracting the ancestral haplotypes from an admixed population. clearly, another potentially viable approach may be to sequence a large number of nam, eur and afr samples and use those as a reference.  
