genome analysis meme-chip: motif analysis of large dna datasets motivation: advances in high-throughput sequencing have resulted in rapid growth in large, high-quality datasets including those arising from transcription factor (tf) chip-seq experiments. while there are many existing tools for discovering tf binding site motifs in such datasets, most web-based tools cannot directly process such large datasets. results: the meme-chip web service is designed to analyze chip-seq peak regionsshort genomic regions surrounding declared chip-seq peaks. given a set of genomic regions, it performs (i) ab initio motif discovery, (ii) motif enrichment analysis, (iii) motif visualization, (iv) binding affinity analysis and (v) motif identification. it runs two complementary motif discovery algorithms on the input datameme and dremeand uses the motifs they discover in subsequent visualization, binding affinity and identification steps. meme-chip also performs motif enrichment analysis using the ame algorithm, which can detect very low levels of enrichment of binding sites for tfs with known dna-binding motifs. importantly, unlike with the meme web service, there is no restriction on the size or number of uploaded sequences, allowing very large chip-seq datasets to be analyzed. the analyses performed by meme-chip provide the user with a varied view of the binding and regulatory activity of the chip-ed tf, as well as the possible involvement of other dna-binding tfs.the genomic regions identified as bound by a transcription factor (tf) in a chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (chip-seq) experiment are a rich source of information about transcriptional regulation. these regions are defined by mapping the sequence tags to the genome, which identifies peaks of (direct or indirect) binding by the chip-ed factor typically to a resolution of about 100 bp. this high resolution is of obvious utility for identifying which genes a tf regulates, but the genomic regions surrounding the peaks are typically highly enriched for binding sites of the chip-ed tf and other tfs. hence, these regions can be mined to whom correspondence should be addressed. computationally to understand the roles, interactions and functions of the chip-ed tf and its regulatory partners. we describe here a web service called meme-chip that automatically performs five types of analysis on chip-seq regions.(i) ab initio motif discovery identifies novel sequence patterns (motifs) in the chip-seq regions that may be due to tf binding sites. (ii) motif enrichment analysis looks for enrichment of known tf dna-binding motifs in the data. (iii) motif visualization displays the relative locations and binding strengths of tf binding sites in the input regions. (iv) motif binding strength analysis computes an estimate of the total dna-binding affinity of each input region for the tf corresponding to each discovered motif. (v) motif identification compares the ab initio motifs to known tf dnabinding motifs. the output of meme-chip is thus a multifaceted view of the identities, prevalence, dna-binding patterns and potential interactions of the chip-ed tf and its regulatory partners. ab initio motifs discovered in chip-seq data give an unbiased view of the in vivo dna-binding propensities of tfs binding alone or in protein complexes. meme-chip employs two motif discovery algorithms with complementary characteristics. the meme algorithm uses expectation maximization (em) to discover probabilistic models of dna-binding by single tfs or tf complexes. meme motifs can provide accurate thermodynamic models of tf binding. meme is complemented by dreme , which uses a simpler, non-probabilistic model (regular expressions) to describe the short binding motifs characteristic of single eukaryotic tfs. dreme is often able to detect very short motifs that are not found by meme. meme-chip also attempts to identify the motifs found by meme and dreme by comparing them to a database of known tf motifs using the tomtom algorithm. motif discovery thus identifies novel binding motifs and tfs that are regulatory partners of the chip-ed tf. motif enrichment analysis can identify additional regulatory motifs whose enrichment in the chip-seq regions is too slight to be detected by ab initio motif discovery. it achieves higher sensitivity by limiting the search for motifs to a set of previously known tf dna-binding motifs. meme-chip uses the ame algorithm for motif enrichment analysis. for motif visualization and binding strength analysis, memechip utilizes the mast and ama algorithms, respectively. mast uses a threshold-based approach to identify a putative set of nonoverlapping binding sites in the chip-seq regions for all the motifs discovered by meme (or dreme). this allows associations among the locations of the different motifs (tf binding sites) to be seen by eye. the ama algorithm computes a thermodynamic estimate of the average binding affinity of the tf (as described by the motif) for the each chip-seq sequence region.  
