sequence analysis meme-lab: motif analysis in clusters genome-wide expression analysis can result in large numbers of clusters of co-expressed genes. although there are tools for ab initio discovery of transcription factor-binding sites, most do not provide a quick and easy way to study large numbers of clusters. to address this, we introduce a web tool called meme-lab. the tool wraps meme (an ab initio motif finder), providing an interface for users to input multiple gene clusters, retrieve promoter sequences, run motif finding and then easily browse and condense the results, facilitating better interpretation of the results from large-scale datasets. availability: meme-lab is freely accessible at: http://wsbc.warwick. ac.uk/wsbctoolswebpage/.analyzing microarray expression data using cluster analysis is a common and frequently performed task in functional genomics. typically, a large number of clusters are produced, each containing a large number of genes (e.g. 50 clusters of 200 genes). each cluster is predicted to contain a set of genes that are co-expressed and as such would be expected to share common regulatory features, such as transcription factor-binding sites (tfbss). there are established methods and tools for predicting known tfbss (such as athena, o), but ab initio motif discovery remains an important aspect to consider. several tools exist to perform this task, and meme in particular is a well-recognized suite for motif discovery , but the meme web suite offers limited usage on large numbers of clusters and subsequent navigation and post-processing of the results. machanick and bailey (2012) provide a web tool (meme-chip) that is specifically tailored towards chip-seq data, providing a useful expansion in memes functionality. here, we describe a web tool called meme-lab (meme launcher and browser), which wraps the meme tool in ways that are ideally suited to the task of ab initio motif finding in co-expressed gene clusters: (i) users can input multiple gene clusters at once. (ii) promoter sequences are automatically retrieved from a local database or from a user-specified file. (iii) meme is run on all clusters simultaneously, and the results are presented in a condensed and navigable format. (iv) identified motifs are compared for similarity with known tfbs motifs.  
