memhdx: an interactive tool to expedite the statistical validation and visualization of large hdx-ms datasets motivation: with the continued improvement of requisite mass spectrometers and uhplc systems, hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (hdx-ms) workflows are rapidly evolving towards the investigation of more challenging biological systems, including large protein complexes and membrane proteins. the analysis of such extensive systems results in very large hdx-ms datasets for which specific analysis tools are required to speed up data validation and interpretation. results: we introduce a web application and a new r-package named memhdx to help users analyze, validate and visualize large hdx-ms datasets. memhdx is composed of two elements. a statistical tool aids in the validation of the results by applying a mixed-effects model for each peptide, in each experimental condition, and at each time point, taking into account the time dependency of the hdx reaction and number of independent replicates. two adjusted p-values are generated per peptide, one for the change in dynamics and one for the magnitude of d , and are used to classify the data by means of a logit representation. a user-friendly interface developed with shiny by rstudio facilitates the use of the package. this interactive tool allows the user to easily and rapidly validate, visualize and compare the relative deuterium incorporation on the amino acid sequence and 3d structure, providing both spatial and temporal information. availability: memhdx is freely available as a web tool at the project home page http://memhdx.hydrogen deuterium exchange followed by mass spectrometry (hdx-ms) is a biophysical tool in structural biology capable of probing protein/ligand interactions, conformational changes, and protein folding and dynamics. despite an increased number of applications , the expansion of the technology has been slowed by its intrinsic technical and analytical complexity (i.e., digestion at ph 2.5 and rapid hplc separation at 0c). with recent advancements in sample preparation robotics, refrigerated ultra-high performance liquid chromatography systems and high resolution mass spectrometers, hdx-ms has surged in popularity and is now emerging from the academic benchtop to the expanse of the pharmaceutical sector .the use of improved hdx-ms workflows enables the structural analysis of larger protein systems such as antigenantibody complexes ( 180 kda) or integral membrane proteins, in a more routine way. the characterization of such systems results in very complex hdx-ms datasets, for which specific non-commercial analytical software (e.g.,), as well as commercial platforms (e.g., dynamx and hdexaminer), have been developed. such software extract deuterium incorporation information from (un)processed raw m/z data files and produce deuterium uptake curves that can pinpoint regions of interest on protein 3d structures. however, many of these tools do not integrate statistical approaches and use the absolute difference of deuterium uptake to evaluate the significance between conditions. hydra (or mass spec studio) was the first standalone application to introduce a students t-test and p-values to statistically evaluate the difference across hdx-ms experiments. alternatively, houde and co-workers calculated confidence limits based on the experimental uncertainty of measuring deuterium uptake across replicates. in this context, two distinct confidence limits were calculated manually using either the differences of deuterium uptake, or the summed value of hdx differences measured for each peptide, in each condition, and at each time point. lastly, hdx workbench includes a two-tailed ttest and tukey multiple comparison procedure for the statistical cross-comparison of two or more datasets. despite significant efforts to design requisite statistical tools, the aforementioned software solutions are suitable to analyze hdx-ms data at one time point only, failing to account for the time-dependency of the hdx-ms reaction. thus, liu and coworkers proposed a multiple regression or ancova model. by deriving a statistical test based on the model parameters, they evaluated the significant difference between two groups under comparison, for all peptides in the dataset, and across all independent replicates. expanding on this, we introduce a web application named memhdx (mixed-effects model for hdx experiments) to aid in the rapid statistical validation and visualization of large hdx-ms datasets. memhdx uses a linear mixed-effects model where replicates are considered as random effects. this accounts for both the time dependency and the variability across replicates. moreover, instead of testing the variation in global deuterium exchange between two experimental conditions, we propose to calculate two individual p-values for each peptide. firstly, the difference between conditions is measured (p-value for the magnitude of delta deuterium (d) ), followed by the evolution of the deuterium uptake behavior over the time course of the experiment (p-value for the change in dynamics ). memhdx therefore allows the clustering of each peptide in the dataset based on these two respective pvalues. a user-friendly interface developed with shiny by rstudio facilitates the use of the application, allowing the user to easily visualize and compare the relative deuterium incorporation across the entire protein sequence and 3d structure. as a test system, we used the receptor-binding repeat-in-toxin (rtx) domain of cyaa produced by bordetella pertussis, the causative agent of whooping cough, to pinpoint regions undergoing structural and conformational changes upon calcium binding .  
