genome analysis mendel-gpu: haplotyping and genotype imputation on graphics processing units motivation: in modern sequencing studies, one can improve the confidence of genotype calls by phasing haplotypes using information from an external reference panel of fully typed unrelated individuals. however, the computational demands are so high that they prohibit researchers with limited computational resources from haplotyping large-scale sequence data. results: our graphics processing unit based software delivers haplo-typing and imputation accuracies comparable to competing programs at a fraction of the computational cost and peak memory demand. availability: mendel-gpu, our opencl software, runs on linux platforms and is portable across amd and nvidia gpus. users can down-load both code and documentation atimputation of untyped genotypes is a critical preliminary in modern genetic association studies. the intuition behind haplotype-based imputation is that typed markers situated on haplotypes in key individuals can be leveraged probabilistically to impute untyped markers at the same position in other individuals of similar ethnicity. if an imputed single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) correlates better to a causal variant than neighboring typed snps, then imputation can improve statistical power to detect association. in haplotyping and imputation, computational demands escalate quadratically as the number of reference haplotypes increases. the computational burdens of current datasets are so onerous that most genotyping centers divide their data into small subsets and process each subset on a different node of a computer cluster. for instance, impute2 documentation recommends this strategy . genotyping by second-generation sequencing is quickly becoming costcompetitive with traditional snp genotyping. unfortunately, the massive amounts of data generated by sequencing will exacerbate problems and stress traditional computing clusters to the breaking point. graphics processing units (gpus) offer one solution to this dilemma. gpus have been used in recent years to solve several high-dimensional problems in computational biology amenable to fine-grained parallelization. in this article, we introduce mendel-gpu, a software application that addresses the practical need to efficiently impute genotypes on large-scale datasets. further details on implementation and additional analyses can be found in the supplementary information.we have described software to meet the challenges of imputation in whole-genome sequencing data. mendel-gpu supports the use of dense reference haplotypes and genotype penetrances as reported by variant calling pipelines. as the two examples illustrate, mendel-gpu enjoys similar accuracies to the most highly regarded programs available, while requiring only a fraction of their time and memory demands. the fine-grained parallel algorithms of mendel-gpu effectively harness the computational efficiency and memory bandwidth of hundreds of gpus. although beagle appears to have an edge in accuracy in the scenarios tested, the speed and memory advantages of mendel-gpu outweigh, in our opinion, its slight losses in accuracy. as gpu devices increase in sophistication and we further tune the code of mendel-gpu, we expect to see greater gains. even as things now stand, mendel-gpu will prove helpful. for researchers interested in testing rare variants coordinated with the kgp, our simulations highlight potential gains for study data consisting of a few hundred subjects sequenced at modest coverage. for example, whole-genome imputation of low-pass sequencing data on 545 study subjects would complete in $6.8 days on a machine equipped with a single nvidia tesla c2050 gpu. the same analysis using impute2 would require $2.7 years on a single cpu machine. this difference puts small laboratories back in contention with the sequencing factories. enabling small projects will ripple productively through the entire fabric of genomics research.  
