data and text mining meshable: searching pubmed abstracts by utilizing mesh and mesh-derived topical terms medical subject headings (mesh v r) is a controlled vocabulary for indexing and searching biomedical literature. mesh terms and subheadings are organized in a hierarchical structure and are used to indicate the topics of an article. biologists can use either mesh terms as queries or the mesh interface provided in pubmed v r for searching pubmed abstracts. however, these are rarely used, and there is no convenient way to link standardized mesh terms to user queries. here, we introduce a web interface which allows users to enter queries to find mesh terms closely related to the queries. our method relies on co-occurrence of text words and mesh terms to find keywords that are related to each mesh term. a query is then matched with the keywords for mesh terms, and candidate mesh terms are ranked based on their relatedness to the query. the experimental results show that our method achieves the best performance among several term extraction approaches in terms of topic coherence. moreover, the interface can be effectively used to find full names of abbreviations and to disambiguate user queries. availability and implementation: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/iret/meshable/ contact: sun.kim@nih.govpubmed is the most comprehensive bibliographic database of biomedicine and life sciences. as pubmed continues to grow, it becomes more difficult to discover what one is looking for. but what if we could search and browse pubmed through subject areas? searching documents by subjects not only can help focus the search, but can also help explore the landscape for a subject of interest. many studies have pointed out the usefulness of finding subjects in search results . the common approach in these studies is to group the search results on the fly; many methods make use of ontological information provided by the medical subject headings (mesh) resource for grouping. our goal is to provide a convenient way to use the mesh resource at query time. there are a few options for doing this. one is by directly querying with a mesh term, e.g. otitis. this, however, does not appear to be the most convenient way for accessing the information because mesh is a controlled vocabulary with a specific syntax. more frequently the mesh resource is used indirectly by expanding a text query with the related mesh term. for example, the query ear infection is automatically expanded to include the mesh term otitis. however, such expansions are limited to terms listed as synonyms or variants for a given mesh term. an alternative way to search using mesh terms is by starting from the mesh interface (http://www.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/mesh) and using the pubmed query builder. then again this approach is not intuitively available at the pubmed search page and may only be known to more experienced users. in this study, the goal is to search pubmed abstracts through the lens of the mesh vocabulary. the key question we address here is how to link a text query with relevant mesh concepts and we approach it by setting a supervised task as follows. first, for every mesh term we define the mesh-doc set as the group of documents assigned the mesh term. we then identify significant terms appearing in the mesh-doc set based on the occurrence frequency of these terms in the set versus the rest of pubmed. we refer to these terms as topic terms associated with the particular mesh term. as a result, topic terms along with corresponding weights are computed for every mesh term. at query time, mesh concepts are ranked based on how they weight the terms in the query.  
