mesh: a window into full text for document summarization motivation: previous research in the biomedical text-mining domain has historically been limited to titles, abstracts and metadata available in medline records. recent research initiatives such as trec genomics and biocreative strongly point to the merits of moving beyond abstracts and into the realm of full texts. full texts are, however, more expensive to process not only in terms of resources needed but also in terms of accuracy. since full texts contain embellishments that elaborate, contextualize, contrast, supplement, etc., there is greater risk for false positives. motivated by this, we explore an approach that offers a compromise between the extremes of abstracts and full texts. specifically, we create reduced versions of full text documents that contain only important portions. in the long-term, our goal is to explore the use of such summaries for functions such as document retrieval and information extraction. here, we focus on designing summarization strategies. in particular, we explore the use of mesh terms, manually assigned to documents by trained annotators, as clues to select important text segments from the full text documents. results: our experiments confirm the ability of our approach to pick the important text portions. using the rouge measures for evaluation, we were able to achieve maximum rouge-1, rouge-2 and rouge-su4 f-scores of 0.4150, 0.1435 and 0.1782, respectively, for our mesh term-based method versus the maximum baseline scores of 0.3815, 0.1353 and 0.1428, respectively. using a mesh profile-based strategy, we were able to achieve maximum rouge f-scores of 0.4320, 0.1497 and 0.1887, respectively. human evaluation of the baselines and our proposed strategies further corroborates the ability of our method to select important sentences from the full texts. contactinformation systems in the biomedical domain, serving goals such as information extraction and retrieval, have historically been designed in the context of medline records. these records, limited to titles and abstracts and some metadata, are very different from full text documents. recent papers in bmc bioinformatics elaborate on these differences . moreover, recent research initiatives in bioinformatics such as trec genomics (http://ir.ohsu.edu/genomics/) and biocreative (http://www.biocreative.org/) strongly point to the merits of moving beyond abstracts and taking advantage of full texts. but full texts are more expensive to process not only in terms of their much to whom correspondence should be addressed. larger sizes and their often varying structural characteristics but also in terms of what it takes to achieve high levels of accuracy. since full texts contain embellishments that elaborate, contextualize, contrast, supplement, etc., the core ideas of a paper, there is greater opportunity for false positives. for example in a retrieval context, a full text may be retrieved because of query terms being present in (relatively) unimportant sections. in an information extraction context a gene, though correctly identified in a document, may be of low interest in terms of the documents core emphasis. in this article, we explore document summarization as a compromise between the two extremes of abstracts versus full texts. specifically, we create a reduced version of each full text document that contains only its important portions. this reduced version may be viewed as a summary but our interest is not to generate a human readable summary, rather it is to have an intermediate representation that may later be used for algorithmic functions such as to serve text retrieval and information extraction. our approach for full text reduction is novel, particularly in the context of various document summarization methods that have been explored. we capitalize on the mesh terms present in medline records. our hypothesis is that mesh terms may be used to identify the important portions of full text documents. in essence, we suggest that the mesh indexing, accomplished by trained indexers, offers a useful window into full text. we treat mesh terms as high-quality hooks used to select important text segments in the full document. this idea, if it works, will give us a general strategy for reducing biomedical documents to their core portions. our long-term motivation for building reduced versions of full texts is to use these as document representations in biomedical systems designed for retrieval, information extraction and other high-level functions. several use cases may be identified in the bioinformatics arena. one obvious use case is document retrieval. indeed our own efforts with genedocs , a document retrieval system for gene queries, and our efforts in biocreative iii , motivate this research. these also offer retrieval test beds for follow-up research. another use case is in information extraction, an area that has attracted significant attention. a third use case is in text mining, particularly mining for new ideas and hypotheses. again, our algorithms here offer test beds for future work . our document summarization methods are also general enough to be applied to any biomedical domain that employs mesh indexing. so it may be tested and utilized by other researchers in the context of their text-based biomedical applications. given the successful efforts of archival organizations such as pubmed central and the open access initiative, our goal is to explore a new basis for biomedical systems; one that utilizes reduced versions of full texts that contain only their core portions. we hope topage: i121 i120i128our research goal was to test a mesh-based approach for reducing full text documents and constructing summaries. we explore two approaches: mesh term and mesh profile approaches. in the latter, the mesh terms are expanded with free-text terms. in both cases, the mesh terms are used to select portions of the full text and thereby create summaries. we compare these with the abstract using several i126page: i127 i120i128  
