systems biology metabonetworks, an interactive matlab-based toolbox for creating, customizing and exploring sub-networks from kegg metabonetworks is a tool to create custom sub-networks in matlab using main reaction pairs as defined by the kyoto encyclopaedia of genes and genomes and can be used to explore transgenomic interactions, for example mammalian and bacterial associations. it calculates the shortest path between a set of metabolites (e.g. biomarkers from a metabonomic study) and plots the connectivity between metabolites as links in a network graph. the resulting graph can be edited and explored interactively. furthermore, nodes and edges in the graph are linked to the kyoto encyclopaedia of genes and genomes compound and reaction pair web pages. availability and implementation: metabonetworks is available frominvestigating the dynamic metabolic responses in living systems because of external perturbations gives complementary information to genomic and/or proteomic approaches. this field is known as metabonomics and provides a top-down view of the living system to show global changes instead of cell-specific interactions between genes, proteins and/ or metabolites. metabolic pathway information can aid the interpretation of biological changes indicated by significant differences in metabolite concentration identified in metabonomic studies. the effective transformation of metabolic spectroscopy data to biological knowledge presents a significant bioinformatics challenge. in particular, the increased interest in clinical applications of metabolic phenotyping makes practical data visualization in a biological/medical framework of great importance. the kyoto encyclopaedia of genes and genomes (kegg) is an online resource where the interaction information of genes, proteins and metabolites is integrated and it can be used to investigate molecular networks in specific organisms or for all . kegg provides many static pathways and metabolic reaction networks as well as a global metabolic map. the standalone application neat can be used to draw custom metabolic reaction sub-networks for a specific organism. however, it is useful to have the ability to edit graphs, as can be done for pathways e.g. using keggparser in matlab. metabonetworks aims to fill this gap for metabolic reaction networks and combine the ability to draw custom maps and being able to edit them. rarely do metabolic networks and programs consider that the typical mammal is not a single organism, but a system comprising of a combination of mammalian, bacterial and potential parasitic organisms. specifically, there is symbiosis between a host organism and its gut microbiota, and that gut microbes have functions and enzymes that are not found in mammalian organisms . therefore, it is important to be able to combine metabolic reaction networks for different organisms. metabonetworks has the option to include data from multiple organisms and investigates if reactions can occur in any of the selected organisms. in the present study, we have illustrated the new approach using an nmr-based toxicological biomarker input dataset. this is an area of particular importance as metabolic phenotyping has shown to be particularly useful for studying toxicological processes as models for human disease . metabonetworks only requires the basic version of matlab (the mathworks, natick, ma, usa) and does not require any additional toolbox. although the matlabbgl toolbox has a number of graph layout algorithms in mex/c code that can be used to speed up the calculation of large graphs in metabonetworks, all metabonetworks functionalities are implemented using a simple graphical user interface and matlab code.  
