metacca: summary statistics-based multivariate meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies using canonical correlation analysis downloaded from motivation: a dominant approach to genetic association studies is to perform univariate tests between genotype-phenotype pairs. however, analyzing related traits together increases statistical power, and certain complex associations become detectable only when several variants are tested jointly. currently, modest sample sizes of individual cohorts, and restricted availability of individual level genotype-phenotype data across the cohorts limit conducting multivariate tests. results: we introduce metacca, a computational framework for summary statistics-based analysis of a single or multiple studies that allows multivariate representation of both genotype and phenotype. it extends the statistical technique of canonical correlation analysis to the setting where original individual level records are not available, and employs a covariance shrinkage algorithm to achieve robustness. multivariate meta-analysis of two finnish studies of nuclear magnetic resonance metabolomics by metacca, using standard univariate output from the program snptest, shows an excellent agreement with the pooled individual-level analysis of original data. motivated by strong multivari-ate signals in the lipid genes tested, we envision that multivariate association testing using metacca has a great potential to provide novel insights from already published summary statistics from high-throughput phenotyping technologies. availability and implementation: code is available at https://most human diseases and traits have a strong genetic component. genome-wide association studies (gwas) have proven effective in identifying genetic variation contributing to common complex disorders, including type 2 diabetes , cardiovascular disease , schizophrenia (schizophrenia working group of the psychiatric genomics), and quantitative traits, such as lipid levels (global lipids) and metabolomics . a dominant approach to gwas is to test one single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) at a time against one quantitative phenotype measure or a binary disease indicator. this univariate approach is unlikely to be optimal when millions of snps and a growing number of phenotypes, including serum metabolomic profiles , three-dimensional images , and gene expression data become available simultaneously. indeed, a recent comparison demonstrated that utilizing multivariate phenotype representation increases statistical power, and leads to richer findings in the association tests compared to the univariate analysis . moreover, some complex genotype-phenotype correlations can be detected only when testing several genetic variants simultaneously , and multi-genotype tests are common practice in rare variant association studies, where statistical power to detect any single variant is very small . unfortunately, restricted availability of complete multivariate individual-level records across the cohorts currently limits multivariate analyses. often, only the univariate gwas summary statistics, i.e. univariate regression coefficients with their standard errors, from individual cohorts are publicly available. hence, a major question is how we can use these univariate association results to carry out a multivariate meta-analysis of gwas , which is crucial to increase the power to identify novel genetic associations. recently, two kinds of multivariate testing approaches operating on univariate summary statistics have been introduced: (i) one snp against multiple traits and (ii) multiple snps against one trait . we propose a new framework, metacca, that unifies both of the existing approaches by allowing canonical correlation analysis (cca) of multiple snps against multiple traits based on univariate summary statistics and publicly available databases. cca is a well-established statistical technique for identifying linear relationships between two sets of variables, and has been successfully applied to gwas . our metacca method extends cca to the setting where original individual-level measurements are not available. instead, metacca works with three pieces of the full data covariance matrix, and applies a covariance shrinkage algorithm to achieve robustness. we demonstrate the performance of metacca using snp and metabolite data from three finnish cohorts. in summary, this paper makes the following contributions. @bullet to our knowledge, we provide the first computational framework for association testing between multivariate genotype and multivariate phenotype, based on univariate summary statistics from single or multiple gwas. our implementation is freely available. @bullet we demonstrate how to accurately estimate correlation structures of phenotypic and genotypic variables without an access to the individual-level data. @bullet we avoid false positive associations by a covariance shrinkage algorithm based on stabilization of the leading canonical correlation. @bullet our approach, metacca, is a general framework to conduct cca when full data are not available, and therefore it is widely applicable also outside gwas.a detailed discussion on the relationship between metacca and previously published multivariate association methods can be found in supplementary data.the advantage of multivariate testing of genetic association is well reported in the literature , and also demonstrated in our results (e.g. cetp in supplementary table s4 that has multivariate p-value 13 orders of magnitude smaller than any of the univariate p-values). optimal use of correlated traits is becoming increasingly important as high-throughput phenotyping technologies are being more widely applied to individual study cohorts and large biobanks . we introduced metacca, a computational approach for the multivariate meta-analysis of gwas by using univariate summary statistics and a reference database of genetic data. thus, our framework circumvents the need for complete multivariate individuallevel records, and tackles the problem of low sample sizes in individual cohorts by a built-in meta-analysis approach. to our knowledge, metacca is the first summary statistics-based framework that allows multivariate representation of both genotypic and phenotypic variables. in large meta-analytic efforts, the ability to work with summary statistics is beneficial, even when there is an access to the individuallevel data. for example, with a study design of the global lipids genetics consortium (2013), we estimate that the reduction in the size of input data between metacca and standard cca could be over 750-fold (supplementary).apoe, 23.77 for cetp, 9.64 for gckr, 6.58 for pcsk9 and 0.97 for nod2. the values are summarized with details in supplementary table s4. the number of tests in each gene is 1 for multi-snp, g for single-snpmulti-trait, and 9 g for single-snpsingle-trait tests, where g is the number of snps in that gene  
