metacluster 5.0: a two-round binning approach for metagenomic data for low-abundance species in a noisy sample motivation: metagenomic binning remains an important topic in metagenomic analysis. existing unsupervised binning methods for next-generation sequencing (ngs) reads do not perform well on (i) samples with low-abundance species or (ii) samples (even with high abundance) when there are many extremely low-abundance species. these two problems are common for real metagenomic datasets. binning methods that can solve these problems are desirable. results: we proposed a two-round binning method (metacluster 5.0) that aims at identifying both low-abundance and high-abundance species in the presence of a large amount of noise due to many extremely low-abundance species. in summary, metacluster 5.0 uses a filtering strategy to remove noise from the extremely low-abundance species. it separate reads of high-abundance species from those of low-abundance species in two different rounds. to overcome the issue of low coverage for low-abundance species, multiple w values are used to group reads with overlapping w-mers, whereas reads from high-abundance species are grouped with high confidence based on a large w and then binning expands to low-abundance species using a relaxed (shorter) w. compared to the recent tools, toss and metacluster 4.0, metacluster 5.0 can find more species (especially those with low abundance of say 6 to 10) and can achieve better sensitivity and specificity using less memory and running time. availability: http://i.cs.hku.hk/alse/metacluster/ contact: chin@cs.hku.hkmetagenomics is the study of genomes of multiple species from environmental samples, such as soil, sea water and the human gut. successful metagenomic projects provide deeper insight into the microbial world. for example, the diversity of microbes in the human gut has been found to be related to common diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease (ibd) and gastrointestinal disturbance . high-throughput next-generation sequencing (ngs) techniques can sequence reads (short dna fragments) from a sample containing genomes of multiple species. an important step in metagenomic analysis is grouping reads from similar species together, which is known as binning. existing binning algorithms fall into two main categories, supervised methods and unsupervised methods. supervised methods align reads to known genomes and group reads aligned to similar genomes to whom correspondence should be addressed. together. since up to 99 of bacteria found in environmental samples are unknown or cannot be cultured and separated in laboratories , most reads cannot be aligned and binned. instead of aligning reads to known genomes directly, some semi-supervised methods use taxonomic markers [e.g. reca, rpob and 16s rrna ] to classify reads into different groups. however, the precision of these methods may be low because species may contain multiple markers and different species may share markers . moreover, since only a small part (1) of the genome (or reads) contains these taxonomic markers , most of the reads cannot be binned by these methods. when the corresponding genomes are unknown, unsupervised methods usually bin reads based on three observations: (a) the k-mer frequency from reads of a genome is usually linearly proportional to that of the genomes abundance ; (b) sufficiently long w-mers are usually unique in each genome and (c) the short q-mer frequency distributions (or q-mer distributions in short) of individual sufficiently long reads sampled from the same genome or similar genomes are similar . abundancebin groups reads based on observation (a) but fails when the species in the sample have similar abundance. toss bins reads based on observations (a) and (b), and since toss relies on abundancebin to handle genomes with different abundances, it carries all the shortcomings of abundancebin. metacluster 4.0 has three phases: phase 1 groups reads together based on observation (b); phase 2 derives the q-mer distribution of each group and phase 3 merges the groups of reads based on observation (c) by the well-known k-means clustering approach. metacluster 4.0 handles high-abundance species (with different abundances) in phase 1 by having similar numbers of groups for each species (high-abundance species will have more reads in their groups). metacluster 4.0 works reasonably well for those species whose abundance (sequencing depth) of at least 10, even in a sample with 100 species. for easy discussion, we classify the abundances into three categories: (i) high abundance: at least 10; (ii) low abundance: 6 to 10; and (iii) extremely low abundance: at most 5. there are at least two problems that metacluster 4.0 fails to address.(i) interference from extremely low-abundance species: metacluster 4.0 does not perform well even for high-abundance species when there are many extremely low-abundance species in the sample.shows an example of 20 species in a sample with only five extremely low-abundance species, for which metacluster 4.0 is not able to bin any of the low-abundance species. in fact, none of the existing binning tools can handle these two problems, which are common in real datasets. for example, in samples from real applications, there are usually many reads (can be 50 of the total reads) sampled from extremely low-abundance genomes and there is usually a portion of low-abundance species that may be significant to the biological system (e.g.). an ideal binning solution should be able to identify all species regardless of their abundance. however, it is very difficult to bin extremely lowabundance species and we leave it as an open problem to identify all these extremely low-abundance species. in this article, we aim at identifying low-abundance species, in addition to indentifying highabundance species when there is interference from the extremely low-abundance species. we first discuss why the aforementioned two problems are difficult to solve.we evaluate the performance of metacluster 5.0 on simulated data and real data. metacluster 4.0, abundancebin and toss. (the software tool of toss was obtained through a private communication with the authors of the article.) are the latest unsupervised binning tools for ngs reads. however, toss and abundancebin are very slow. toss (based on output of abundancebin) cannot finish any of the datasets in a week. abundancebin can only finish the smallest dataset with 8.3 million reads from 20 species, but the result is not satisfactory and all the reads grouped together even though the species are of uneven abundance. since the performance of toss relies on abundancebin results, it is likely that toss may not perform well for species with similar abundance. as metacluster 4.0 outperforms abundancebin and toss in many situations , we mainly compare the performances of metacluster 5.0 and metacluster 4.0. all experiments were performed on a unix machine with 4cpu of intel xeon x5650@2.4ghz.metagenomics binning remains a crucial step in metagenomics analysis. existing unsupervised binning algorithms fail to bin reads from low-abundance species or cannot bin reads from highabundance species when there are many reads from extremely low-abundance species. in this article, we introduce metacluster 5.0 that overcomes these two problems by binning the reads in two rounds with a filtering step to remove noise from extremely lowabundance species. metacluster 5.0 outperforms existing binning algorithms for both simulated and real biological datasets.  
