metacycle: an integrated r package to evaluate periodicity in large scale data detecting periodicity in large scale data remains a challenge. while efforts have been made to identify best of breed algorithms, relatively little research has gone into integrating these methods in a generalizable method. here, we present metacycle, an r package that incorporates arser, jtk_cycle and lomb-scargle to conveniently evaluate periodicity in time-series data. metacycle has two functions, meta2d and meta3d, designed to analyze two-dimensional and three-dimensional time-series datasets, respectively. meta2d implements n-version programming concepts using a suite of algorithms and integrating their results. availability and implementation: metacycle package is available on the cran repository (https:// cran.r-project.identifying periodic signals in time-series data is important in studying oscillatory systems, such as the circadian clock or cell cycle. researchers have devised and evaluated many methods (see a short list in), each with strengths and weaknesses (e.g.). for example, lombscargle and jtk_cycle can differentiate between periodic and non-periodic profiles for cosine curves with high noise or low sampling rate . on the other hand, some popular methods, including fishers g test and arser , fail without complete, evenly sampled time series data. to avoid such mode failure and capture the most value from data, one could choose the best algorithm for each experiment. however, for any single experiment the choice of optimal algorithm is often unclear and may depend on unknown features of the data, such as the shape of the oscillatory patterns or the nature of the noise. alternatively, a fault-tolerant method that avoids mode failure would have wider applicability, insulating the user from tricky decisions. here, we present metacycle, an n-version programming (nvp) method to explore periodic data. nvp is a concept from the aeronautics industry. aircraft guidance systems employ multiple independent algorithms and a voting scheme to integrate their results. a method that performs poorly in a particular condition will be outvoted by other methods that better accommodate that condition. nvp has three elements: (i) an initial specification that addresses the problem to be solved, data formats, and methods of integrating specified variables from n-version programs, (ii) two or more independent algorithmic approaches (n-version software, or nvs) to solve the problem and (iii) an execution environment (n-version executive, or nvx) that runs nvs and provides decision algorithms . metacycle incorporates these concepts into its meta2d mode, which analyzes data from a single time series. using the same input file, metacycle::meta2d implements arser (ars), jtk_cycle (jtk) and lomb-scargle (ls), from dramatically different disciplines, computer science, statistics and physics, respectively. after running these algorithms, meta2d integrates their results in a common output file in the (r) environment. we show that metacycle::meta2d avoids mode failure while providing robust power in rhythm detection and accurate phase estimations. further, researchers often want to integrate results from multiple individuals, preserving individual contributions to an overall result. for analyzing data from multiple time series (e.g. several individuals), metacycle provides another mode, metacycle::meta3d, a convenient and efficient tool to integrate multiple large-scale time series datasets from individual subjects.  
