genome analysis metagenetack: ab initio detection of frameshifts in metagenomic sequences frameshift (fs) prediction is important for analysis and biological interpretation of metagenomic sequences. since a genomic context of a short metagenomic sequence is rarely known, there is not enough data available to estimate parameters of species-specific statistical models of protein-coding and non-coding regions. the challenge of ab initio fs detection is, therefore, two fold: (i) to find a way to infer necessary model parameters and (ii) to identify positions of frameshifts (if any). here we describe a new tool, metagenetack, which uses a heuristic method to estimate parameters of sequence models used in the fs detection algorithm. it is shown on multiple test sets that the metagenetack fs detection performance is comparable or better than the one of earlier developed program fraggenescan. availability and implementation: metagenetack is available as a web server atmetagenomic sequences are obtained from environmental microbial communities. the short sequences are usually sequenced using next generation sequencing (ngs) platforms such as roche 454 and illumina or traditional sanger sequencing. each platform produces reads of different lengths and has different error models. 454 sequencing platforms produce reads of $450 nt; errors are usually insertions and deletions (indels) in homopolymer regions. illumina platform currently generates sequences of length $150 nt with substitutions constituting almost all errors. sanger sequencing produces reads that may contain both types of errors, and the read length is $900 nt. before gene calling, quality control methods are used to reduce errors on raw reads (e.g. trimming the error-prone 2025 nt in illumina 3 0 read ends). short reads are assembled into longer (shotgun) sequences and contigs. in assembled sequences, the per-nucleotide error rate can be reduced from 0.5 in raw reads to as low as 0.005. still, errors may affect $3 to $4.5 of genes in assembled sequences . even several thousand nucleotides long metagenomic sequences do not carry enough sequence data to accurately estimate parameters of statistical models for protein-coding and non-coding regions. moreover, the performance of conventional tools of gene prediction and annotation are impaired by indels in protein-coding regions . on the other hand, tools of comparative genomics that have certain power in detection of frameshifts interrupting evolutionary conserved regions rely entirely on comparison with sequences from existing databases; these tools would not help to analyse novel genes and genes having low similarity with known genes . previously we have developed an algorithm and software program genetack , an ab initio tool for finding frameshifts in prokaryotic genomes. since genetack requires a species-specific statistical model, it cannot work with sequences shorter than several hundred kilobases. the long enough sequence is necessary for self-training of genemarks , the gene finder providing model parameters and gene predictions to genetack. here we introduce an ab initio frameshift finder, metagenetack, designed for metagenomic sequences. metagenetack uses a heuristic method to infer model parameters suitable for analysis of a short sequence at hand (e.g. 400 nt). a recently developed ab initio gene finder, fraggenescan , is also able to detect frameshifts in short sequences. we have assessed the performance of metagenetack in tests on short sequences from 18 prokaryotic species. we have shown that metagenetack performs comparably or better in frameshift detection than fraggenescan.using a to denote the number of all fs predictions, t to denote the number of predicted true positives and s to denote the number of simulated frameshifts, we calculated sensitivity, sn t s and specificity sp t a. note that this definition of specificity, accepted in bioinformatics literature, corresponds to the definition of precision in machine learning publications. accuracy of metagenetack was compared with accuracy of fraggenescan (version 1.15, downloaded from http://omics.informatics.indiana. edu/fraggenescan/). fraggenescan requires users to select a sequencing method likely used for generating the input sequence along with indication of approximate sequencing error rate. we chose the option sanger sequencing with 0.5, as it yielded the best results of fraggenescan among all available options. the sn and sp values averaged on the whole set of genomes are shown in. to give an example of genome specific values of sn and sp, we provide supplementaryfor the set of 400 nt fragments with 20 containing fss. results are averaged between sets of fragments with fs made by insertions and fs made by deletions (see also). in terms of (sn sp)/2, metagenetack performed better than fraggenescan by 712. the values of fraggenescan sn and sp differed by $55 percentage points, whereas for metagenetack, this gap was much smaller. the differences were likely due to different methods of derivation of sequence models and differences in the hidden markov model architectures. to assess how effective the filters were, we evaluated metagenetacks performance produced with various combinations of filters and compared with performance of fraggenescan on fragment sets with insertion fs and sets with deletion fs . here we show results for 600 nt-long sequences with 20 fragments containing frameshifts. without filters, the sn of metagenetack was close to. the standard deviation is 10.3 and 12.6 for metagenetack and fraggenescan, respectively.the new software program, metagenetack, addresses the challenging question of predicting frameshifts in protein-coding regions of metagenomic sequences without extrinsic knowledge. an advantage of ab initio approach is the ability to detect frameshifts in genes of orphan proteins that do not have known homologs. we have shown that the accuracy of metagenetack is comparable or better than the accuracy of the ab inito gene prediction tool fraggenescan. most of the frameshifts predicted by metagenetack are supposed to result from sequencing errors; still like genetack, the program is also able to detect frameshifts caused due to indel mutations and ones related to recoding (programmed frameshifts involved in gene regulation). metagenetack could be integrated into pipelines of metagenomic sequence annotation.  
