metalpredator: a web server to predict iron–sulfur cluster binding proteomes motivation: the prediction of the ironsulfur proteome is highly desirable for biomedical and biological research but a freely available tool to predict ironsulfur proteins has not been developed yet. results: we developed a web server to predict ironsulfur proteins from protein sequence(s). this tool, called metalpredator, is able to process complete proteomes rapidly with high recall and precision. availability and implementation: the web server is freely available at: http://metalweb.cerm.unifi. it/tools/metalpredator/.metalloproteins are widespread in living organisms and essential for many biological processes . misregulation of levels and usage of metal ions in cells is associated with major diseases. thus, identifying potential metalloproteins is a crucial task not only for the functional characterization of proteins but also for applications in biomedical research and drug design. furthermore, knowledge on the complete ensemble of proteins that bind a specific metal, i.e. each specific metalloproteome, permits the study of how organisms evolved to adapt to different metal availability in their environments. the experimental identification of metal-binding sites can be quite difficult and costly, especially when attempted at the whole proteome scale. consequently, various bioinformatics approaches have been developed to predict the metal-binding sites in a single sequence but they do not allow metalloproteomics data analyses. some of the authors of the present article developed an initial prototype of a tool to predict metalloproteomes , which however lacked a user-friendly interface. we propose a novel computational tool, called metalpredator, to predict metal-binding sites in protein sequence(s) at the whole proteome scale. the tool integrates an existing domain-based approach with a new one designed to search for metal-binding motifs found in proteins with known structure. metalpredator uniquely combines global and local searches to define whether a protein is a potential metalloprotein. to validate our general methodology, here we focused on the prediction of the ironsulfur (fes) proteome, which has recently been the subject of an extensive body of experimental work worldwide . fes clusters are among the most ancient biological metal cofactors and proteins that bind them (ironsulfur proteins, isp hereafter) play crucial roles in many cellular processes. metalpredator is, to our knowledge, the only available tool that performs fes protein/proteome prediction via a web interface. it featured a very good performance in terms of precision and recall. metalpredator is available at http://metalweb. cerm.unifi.it/tools/metalpredator/. functional sites (mfss) stored in metalpdb into fragments. each fragment is a continuous stretch of protein sequence containing at least one metal ligand. the library (1) was built as described in . it contains the profiles of both pfam domains for which the fes cluster ligands are known and domains annotated as fes cluster binding but lacking information on the ligands. to build the library (2) each isp in metalpdb was compared to uniref50 representative sequences using psi-blast. all the hits with conserved ligands were used to build a sequence profile. from this profile we extracted the profiles of the distinct fragments corresponding to the mfs(s) in the initial input sequence. metalpredator uses the hmmscan tool to match every input sequence to the profiles contained in the libraries. an input sequence is identified as a potential isp if at least one of these conditions applies:(a) the profile of a domain with associated ligands (library 1) matches the sequence with an e-value lower than 10 5 and ligands are conserved in the sequence (domain search with pattern filter).(b) the profile of a domain with no information on ligands available (library 1) matches the sequence with an e-value lower than 10 7 (domain search without pattern filter).(c) all fragment profiles of a given mfs (library 2) match the sequence with an e-value lower than 10 3 and the corresponding ligands are conserved in the sequence (mfs search,).(d) at least one fragment profile of a given mfs (library 2) matches the sequence with an e-value lower than 10 3 and the corresponding fragment ligands are conserved in the sequence (fragment search,). we adjusted the above e-value thresholds to have the best f 0.5 measure for each criterion (see supplementary). this measure weighs precision more than recall, thus reducing the number of false positives in the output as well as the experimental effort needed to validate the predictions. for the calibration we used two datasets of sequences (positives and negatives), taken from a subset of the protein data bank filtered at a sequence identity level of 25 (pdb25). the positive dataset included all 163 isps in pdb25. the negative dataset included 2607 pdb25 sequences that are not homologous to isps, and either bind a metal ion different from iron in metalpdb or are not metalloproteins but contain at least four cys.  
