metamp: combining amplicon data from multiple markers for otu analysis motivation: we present a novel method and corresponding application, metamp, to combine amplicon data from multiple genomic markers into operational taxonomic units (otus) for microbial community analysis, calibrating the markers using data from known microbial genomes. when amplicons for multiple markers such as the 16s rrna gene hypervariable regions are available, metamp improves the accuracy of otu-based methods for characterizing bacterial composition and community structure. metamp works best with at least three markers, and is applicable to non-bacterial analyses and to non 16s markers. our application and testing have been limited to 16s analysis of microbial communities. results: we clustered standard test sequences derived from the human microbiome mock community test sets and compared metamp and other tools with respect to their ability to recover otus for these benchmark bacterial communities. metamp compared favorably to qiime, uparse and mothur using amplicons from one, two, and three markers. availability and implementation: metamp is available athigh-throughput sequencing technologies allow researchers to characterize microbial community composition and structure without first cultivating the microbes. there are two current techniques for analyzing microbial communities: metagenomic and genomic marker sequencing. metagenomic analysis fragments and sequences all dna in a sample, and then optionally assembles and maps genes into annotated genomes. one often uses metagenomic analysis to characterize metabolic potential. marker sequencing amplifies and sequences conserved but variable genomic regions, usually hypervariable regions of the essential 16s rrna gene. one then clusters these sequences, known as amplicons, into operational taxonomic units (otus). this approach can handle unknown and highly diverged populations, provided that the otus correspond with sufficient accuracy to relevant ecological units. metagenomic and amplicon analysis therefore answer different research questions. metamp targets only amplicon analysis. most marker based studies use amplicons of just one marker, and it is difficult to know which marker to select a priori. amplicons from different markers in a given sample, or even from a single species, can cluster differently, giving very different pictures of the underlying microbial community. different markers may also lead to very different phylogenies and taxonomies, which can differ substantially from those deduced from known genomes. unfortunately, current bioinformatics techniques assume a single marker. this is true of the best currently available software for amplicon otu analysis, such as uparse , qiime and mothur . we introduce the meta-amplicon analysis technique, metamp, which makes it possible to clusters and analyze amplicons from multiple markers.  
