systems biology metannogen: annotation of biological reaction networks motivation: semantic annotations of the biochemical entities constituting a biological reaction network are indispensable to create biologically meaningful networks. they further heighten efficient exchange, reuse and merging of existing models which concern present-day systems biology research more often. two types of tools for the reconstruction of biological networks currently exist: (i) several sophisticated programs support graphical network editing and visualization. (ii) data management systems permit reconstruction and curation of huge networks in a team of scientists including data integration, annotation and cross-referencing. we seeked ways to combine the advantages of both approaches. results: metannogen, which was previously developed for network reconstruction, has been considerably improved. from now on, metannogen provides sbml import and annotation of networks created elsewhere. this permits users of other network reconstruction platforms or modeling software to annotate their networks using metannogens advanced information management. we implemented word-autocompletion, multipattern highlighting, spell check, brace-expansion and publication management, and improved annotation, cross-referencing and team work requirements. unspecific enzymes and transporters acting on a spectrum of different substrates are efficiently handled. the network can be exported in sbml format where the annotations are embedded in line with the miriam standard. for more comfort,the first version of metannogen was used exclusively to reconstruct metabolic networks as in the case of whole-cell model hepatonet . the program to whom correspondence should be addressed. features of this early version are comparable to other programs like the recently published metnetmaker or memosys . however, limitations became apparent with respect to information management, exchange of networks and representation of unspecific transport processes in eukaryotic cells which forced us to substantially improve metannogen.from all currently available tools for network reconstruction such as biologicalnetworks celldesigner, cytoscape, metnetmaker, memosys, meta-all, ondex, semanticsbml, sycamore, vanted, probably metannogen represents unspecific enzymes and transmembrane transport carriers most efficiently. therefore, it is suitable for compartmentalized metabolic models of eukaryotic cells where many carriers transport not just one but several different substrates. to our knowledge, it provides the most advanced management for information attached to individual reactions. to use it, modellers do not need to take metannogen as the primary network reconstruction tool, but can annotate biological networks created in any other program that provides sbml export. importing networks: the metannogen demo session which can be web-started on the download page automatically contains the following three large-scale metabolic networks: kegg , recon1 and ehmn. in addition, any other network given in sbml can be imported either from a local file or from online resources. metannogen provides direct access to the models stored in the biomodels database and jws online by model id. all networks and their annotations can be viewed using browsable graphical trees. kegg provides pathway maps and images of metabolite structures. cross-references between different networks: to cross-reference equivalent reactions from different networks, metannogen defines two reactions as identical if they have identical metabolites in the left and right side of the biochemical equation, irrespectively of the order. however, different identifier systems hinder automated workflows . here, metannogen works with dictionaries, to synchronize different metabolite identifier vocabularies and to interchange compounds assumed to be different due to ph-dependent protonation (e.g. carbon dioxide versus hydrogen carbonate) or due to different ontology levels (e.g. -d-glucose versus d-glucose).  
