metapathways v2.5: quantitative functional, taxonomic and usability improvements next-generation sequencing is producing vast amounts of sequence information from natural and engineered ecosystems. although this data deluge has an enormous potential to transform our lives, knowledge creation and translation need software applications that scale with increasing data processing and analysis requirements. here, we present improvements to metapathways, an annotation and analysis pipeline for environmental sequence information that expedites this transformation. we specifically address pathway prediction hazards through integration of a weighted taxonomic distance and enable quantitative comparison of assembled annotations through a normalized read-mapping measure. additionally, we improve last homology searches through blast-equivalent e-values and output formats that are natively compatible with prevailing software applications. finally, an updated graphical user interface allows for keyword annotation query and projection onto user-defined functional gene hierarchies, including the carbohydrate-active enzyme database. availability and implementation: metapathways v2.5 is available on github: http://github.com/hal-lamlab/metapathways2. contact:since the publication of metapathways , a modular annotation and analysis pipeline that enables construction of environmental pathway/genome databases using pathway tools and metacyc , there have been improvements to the software via the knowledge engine data structure, a graphical user interface (gui) for data management and browsing and a masterworker model for task distribution on grids and clouds . version 2.5 features faster and more accurate quantitative functional and taxonomic inference. inspired by the pathway-centric analysis of the hawaii-ocean time-series , a weighted taxonomic distance (wtd) has been integrated to detect taxonomic divergence of predicted metacyc pathways. next, because it is difficult to determine relative open reading frame (orf) abundance in assembled datasets, we adopt reads per kilobase per million mapped (rpkm) to provide a quantitative measure of sequence-coverage on a per-orf basis . additionally, the last code has been modified to calculate blastequivalent bit-score and e-value statistics (we benchmarked the implemented improvements described earlier using illumina-sequenced marine metagenomic samples.). the wtd distribution can be used as an informative tool to place pathways into different taxonomic hazard classes based on their order statistics . protein annotations of blast and last are highly correlated in terms of e-value , suggesting roughly equivalent results, but with last being significantly faster. although there is a positive correlation between rpkm score and orf count, variance about the regression line indicates rpkm makes a correction in many instances .  
