metapsicov: combining coevolution methods for accurate prediction of contacts and long range hydrogen bonding in proteins motivation: recent developments of statistical techniques to infer direct evolutionary couplings between residue pairs have rendered covariation-based contact prediction a viable means for accurate 3d modelling of proteins, with no information other than the sequence required. to extend the usefulness of contact prediction, we have designed a new meta-predictor (metapsicov) which combines three distinct approaches for inferring covariation signals from multiple sequence alignments , considers a broad range of other sequence-derived features and, uniquely, a range of met-rics which describe both the local and global quality of the input multiple sequence alignment. finally, we use a two-stage predictor, where the second stage filters the output of the first stage. this two-stage predictor is additionally evaluated on its ability to accurately predict the long range network of hydrogen bonds, including correctly assigning the donor and acceptor residues. results: using the original psicov benchmark set of 150 protein families, metapsicov achieves a mean precision of 0.54 for top-l predicted long range contactsaround 60 higher than psicov, and around 40 better than ccmpred. in de novo protein structure prediction using fragfold, metapsicov is able to improve the tm-scores of models by a median of 0.05 compared with psicov. lastly, for predicting long range hydrogen bonding, metapsicov-hb achieves a precision of 0.69 for the top-l/10 hydrogen bonds compared with just 0.26 for the baseline metapsicov. availability and implementation: metapsicov is available as a freely available web server atdetermining protein structure from its amino acid sequence remains an unsolved problem within bioinformatics . in order to make this notoriously complex goal more tractable, one simplification which can be made is to reduce the problem to identifying pairs of interacting residue pairs within the native structure, termed contacts. for many years, accurate contact prediction was hampered by the effects of the relatedness of homologous sequences and the inability to extract correct residue pairings from vastly intertwined networks of contacts . recently, there has been considerable progress in reducing the effects of these two sources of noise, allowing for superior prediction accuracy . current methods for contact prediction use large multiple sequence alignments to identify interacting residues through correlated mutation analysis. extracting contacts using correlated mutation v c the author 2014. published by oxford university press.although recent developments in algorithms to determine coevolution patterns in large multiple sequence alignments have created a lot of excitement in structural bioinformatics, coevolution alone is clearly not enough to derive all of the likely contacts in a protein structure. although it is an impressive feat to deduce distance constraints purely from a statistical analysis of a multiple sequence alignment, it is evident that other sources of information can also contribute to producing more accurate-predicted contact maps. it makes no sense to limit ones analysis solely to one source of information and ignore other sources, albeit sources that are weaker predictors in their own right. metapsicov is an effective hybrid of a fairly standard machine learning-based contact prediction method with three state-of-the-art coevolution-based methods. the neural network is able to make a balanced decision between the coevolution signals and the generic structural features that provide orthogonal information on the likelihood of residue pairs making a contact. for target proteins with poor quality or sparse multiple sequence alignments, the appropriate strategy is to de-emphasize coevolution in favour of generic structural features, but where sufficient homologous sequences are available, the overwhelming value of coevolution is clear. compared with the best single coevolution method, metapsicov achieves a precision that is 38 higher than the best individual coevolution method (ccmpred) for the top-l long range contacts. furthermore, the mean precision for metapsicov of 0.54 indicates that correct predicted contacts are more likely than incorrect contacts, which is an important performance threshold in terms of accurate 3d model building from predicted contacts . one of the more interesting observations has been the apparent effect of redundancy in predicted contacts. by constructing a twostage classifier it is possible to produce a more accurate contact predictor, but at the expense of biasing the distribution of contacts to regions of the protein where adjacent contacts are made (beta sheets). although benchmarks clearly show that more correct contacts are predicted by the second stage of the metapsicov, the added bias in fact results in generally poorer 3d models when the contacts are used for de novo structure prediction using fragfold. better contact constraint scoring functions, which more evenly weight contact constraints according to both sequence separation and neighbourhood density, are needed to deal with this problem. comparing metapsicov to pconsc, another published coevolution-based consensus contact predictor, metapsicov, evidently outperforms the earlier method on the same benchmark set. however, there are interesting aspects of pconsc that are not currently considered within the metapsicov feature set, e.g. features from sampling more than one sequence alignment from different methods or alignment parameters. consequently, even better hybrid methods may be envisaged by considering even larger feature spaces. finally we show that it is possible to apply metapsicov to predicting not just contacting residue pairs, but explicitly identifying donor/acceptor pairings in beta sheets. by combining the accurate prediction of side chain contacts with this much more discriminating structural information, it should be possible to greatly enhance the quality of de novo modelling in beta-sheet rich target proteins.  
