metaquery: a web server for rapid annotation and quantitative analysis of specific genes in the human gut microbiome microbiome researchers frequently want to know how abundant a particular microbial gene or pathway is across different human hosts, including its association with disease and its co-occurrence with other genes or microbial taxa. with thousands of publicly available metagenomes, these questions should be easy to answer. however, computational barriers prevent most researchers from conducting such analyses. we address this problem with metaquery, a web application for rapid and quantitative analysis of specific genes in the human gut microbiome. the user inputs one or more query genes, and our software returns the estimated abundance of these genes across 1267 publicly available fecal metagenomes from american, european and chinese individuals. in addition, our application performs downstream statistical analyses to identify features that are associated with gene variation, including other query genes (i.e. gene co-variation), taxa, clinical variables (e.g. inflammatory bowel disease and diabetes) and average genome size. the speed and accessibility of metaquery are a step toward democratizing metagenomics research, which should allow many researchers to query the abundance and variation of specific genes in the human gut microbiome. availability and implementation: http://metaquery.a number of large-scale shotgun metagenomics projects have been made publicly available, enabling researchers to investigate the functional composition of microbial communities from the human body and how microbial functions correlate with disease or other traits . a common goal of many microbiome studies is to quantify the abundance of specific genes across these publicly available datasets. in most cases, this task involves (1) downloading metagenomes from public repositories, (2) mapping reads to a reference database and (3) estimating gene abundances. for example, this was the approach used byto estimate the abundance of 14 000 biosynthetic gene clusters in the human microbiome. however, this approach is timeconsuming and computationally demandingrequiring large amounts of storage space and processing powerand is therefore not practical for many research groups. in an attempt to address this issue, several microbiome studies have made their functional annotations publicly available. for example, the human microbiome  
