database and ontologies metarep: jcvi metagenomics reports—an open source tool for high-performance comparative metagenomics jcvi metagenomics reports (metarep) is a web 2.0 application designed to help scientists analyze and compare annotated metagenomics datasets. it utilizes solr/lucene, a high-performance scalable search engine, to quickly query large data collections. furthermore, users can use its sql-like query syntax to filter and refine datasets. metarep provides graphical summaries for top taxonomic and functional classifications as well as a go, ncbi taxonomy and kegg pathway browser. users can compare absolute and relative counts of multiple datasets at various functional and taxonomic levels. advanced comparative features comprise statistical tests as well as multidimensional scaling, heatmap and hierarchical clustering plots. summaries can be exported as tab-delimited files, publication quality plots in pdf format. a data management layer allows collaborative data analysis and result sharing. availability: web siterecent advances in sequencing technologies have boosted microbial ecology research by allowing cost-effective sequencing of microbial communities directly from their natural environment. as of today, 210 microbial metagenomes sampled from diverse environments such as the ocean, acid mine drainage, soil, bovine rumen and the human body have been reported (http://www.genomesonline.org/). such studies promise to reveal new insights into how microbes adapt to their abiotic and biotic environment. to distill such information from metagenomic sequences, computational methods are being used to identify and analyze their functional and taxonomic signatures. metagenomic annotation pipelines have been developed that help researchers to identify such information . to make higher level inferences from such annotated data, computational biologists have developed various analysis tools. megan, for example, allows users to import blast outputs to generate taxonomic and functionala variety of metagenomics analysis tools are provided either as standalone or via the web. the strength of our web-based approach is a generic data model indexed by a high-performance search engine in combination with a user-friendly web 2.0 interface. jcvis annotated metagenomes as well as other selected public datasets can be accessed at www.jcvi.org/metarep. users that wish to analyze their own metagenomics data must install the software and import their own annotations. we invite interested programmers to contribute to the metarep open-source project hosted at http://github.com/jcvi/metarep. finally, users are encouraged to suggest additional features of interest.  
