analyzing taxonomic classification using extensible markov models motivation: as next generation sequencing is rapidly adding new genomes, their correct placement in the taxonomy needs verification. however, the current methods for confirming classification of a taxon or suggesting revision for a potential misplacement relies on computationally intense multi-sequence alignment followed by an iterative adjustment of the distance matrix. due to intra-heterogeneity issues with the 16s rrna marker, no classifier is available for sub-genus level, which could readily suggest a classification for a novel 16s rrna sequence. metagenomics further complicates the issue by generating fragmented 16s rrna sequences. this article proposes a novel alignment-free method for representing the microbial profiles using extensible markov models (emms) with an extended karlinaltschul statistical framework similar to the classic alignment paradigm. we propose a log odds (lods) score classifier based on gumbel difference distribution that confirms correct classifications with statistical significance qualifications and suggests revisions where necessary. results: we tested our method by generating a sub-genus level classifier with which we re-evaluated classifications of 676 microbial organisms using the ncbi ftp database for the 16s rrna. the results confirm current classification for all genera while ascertaining significance at 95. furthermore, this novel classifier isolates heterogeneity issues to a mere 12 strains while confirming classifications with significance qualification for the remaining 98. the models require less memory than that needed by multi-sequence alignments and have better time complexity than the current methods. the classifier operates at sub-genus level, and thus outperforms the naive bayes classifier of the rna database project where much of the taxonomic analysis is available online. finally, using information redundancy in model building, we show that the method applies to metagenomic fragment classification of 19 escherichia coli strains. availability and implementation: source code and binaries freely available for download at http://lyle.smu.edu/ida/emmsa/, implemented in java and supported on ms windows.many different techniques have been proposed for microbial classification. most current approaches for classification are based on similarity between the organism to be classified and known correctly classified organisms. this similarity may be based on cell shape or structure, biochemical characteristics, g + c content, nucleic acid hybridization, etc. more recent techniques have been based on molecular sequence comparisons.presents an excellent review of available tools for microbial classification and emphasizes that currently available tools are not satisfactory. he argues for more algorithmic approaches. due to the ubiquitous nature of 16s rrna, it is often used as the sequence for comparison. sub-genus classification is considered a challenge due to lack of resolution if only the 16s rrna is used. use of alternate gene markers and whole genomes have been suggested , but 16s rrna still retains its position as the most commonly used marker . in fact, we show that only a small percentage of organisms or strains (2) require markers and methods outside of the 16s rrna. a common characteristic of most sequence-based classification techniques is the requirement for sequence alignment that is extremely computationally expensive. initial taxonomy evaluations were done with heat-maps generated using distance matrices from multiple sequence alignments . the alignments and tools have been recently improved using rna secondary structures and probabilistic models in; however, reliance on subjective selection of gene copies and expensive sequence alignment may be avoided with alternative methods. this is exactly what we do in this article. our approach uses all copies of 16s and completely avoids alignment while still achieving high classification accuracy at the species level. statistical signatures created from base composition frequencies offer an alternative to using classic alignment. these alignment free methods reduce complexity and processing. lempel-ziv (lz) complexity and emm-based distance measures look promising for whole genome phylogenies as the current methods do not scale well. however, it is desirable to avoid a resource intense all against all distance measurement in a fast growing taxonomy. hidden markov model-based profiles offer a solid probabilistic basis and their application is well tailored to dna or protein analyses. however, the base model needed to be extended for rna. the later extensions account for co-variability of base pairs in the rna sequences due to watsoncrick complementarityin this work, we expanded on the alignment-free alternative to using classic alignment methods and statistics in sequence analysis. with the goal of improving data representation and complementing classification with significance, we explored profile models for predicting microbial taxonomy. though 16s rrna is the marker of choice for the majority of microbial classification, its heterogeneity, due to multiple copies of the gene, usually requires a method to select some and discard others based on some criteria. our proposed sequence analysis approach uses all the available sequence copies of 16s rrna of a microbial organism by reducing similar sequence regions into fewer nodes in the model. in this work, we showed that a compact model that includes the complex intra-sequence order can be built using an emm . such compact models are called emm signatures and transforming organisms with all their 16s rrna sequences to emm signatures creates a signature library. the library can then be used for homology assessment within each taxa hierarchy to derive member significance. four experiments were carried out to demonstrate the space compression and classification accuracy down to strain level. in all, except the lowest classification levels, i.e. species and strain classifications, the current classifications and those by our method are in perfect agreement. we showed, for species level, 12 ambiguities that occur due to the heterogenity issues of the 16s rrna; however, achieving 98 accuracy with identification of ambiguities that require multi-locus methods is reasonable. furthermore, same technique applied at strain level, i.e. when diagnostic identification is attempted, either identifies a single strain or a small number of strains that share one or more exact copies of the 16s rrna. the rank function output offers feedback for immediate correction in case of taxonomic placement errors, which could auto-update profile models thus eliminating the need for a distance matrix-based correction. future work will address this. several approaches for curative analysis of microbial taxonomy based on the 16s rrna are in existence, but all of them either require extensive multi-sequence alignment and/or do not use all of the available sequence information. yet, new approaches are emerging proposing the use of the whole genome and/or other markers such as reca, rpob, 23s rrna, etc., in order to improve clarity across species. we have shown in our article that by using improved statistical signature methods, classification, significance analysis and homology assessment can be performed effectively with less memory and computation.  
