metatt: a web-based metabolomics tool for analyzing time-series and two-factor datasets time-series and multifactor studies have become increasingly common in metabolomic studies. common tasks for analyzing data from these relatively complex experiments include identification of major variations associated with each experimental factor, comparison of temporal profiles across different biological conditions, as well as detection and validation of the presence of interactions. here we introduce metatt, a web-based tool for time-series and two-factor metabolomic data analysis. metatt offers a number of complementary approaches including 3d interactive principal component analysis, two-way heatmap visualization, two-way anova, anova-simultaneous component analysis and multivariate empirical bayes time-series analysis. these procedures are presented through an intuitive web interface. at the end of each session, a detailed analysis report is generated to facilitate understanding of the results. availability: freely available atmetabolomics involves the study of multiple small-molecule compounds in a biological system. biofluids (i.e. urine, blood) are by far the most commonly used sample type in metabolomic studies. these samples can be collected conveniently and relatively non-invasively, and are often used in longitudinal studies such as monitoring disease progression, tracking nutritional interventions or observing drug toxicity. biofluids have also been increasingly used in cross-sectional studies for biomarker discovery. one important lesson learned from these studies is that metabolic profiles of many biofluids are very sensitive to multiple factors such as diet, age, gender, etc. . therefore, one often needs to consider other factors together with the biological condition of interest during data analysis. specially designed statistical approaches have been developed to deal with the multifactor issues as well as for time-series studies, such as parallel factor analysis (parafac) , anova-simultaneous component analysis (asca) , multivariate empirical bayes time-series analysis (meba) and multivariate multiway analysis of multisource data . however, most of  
