databases and ontologies an apn model for arrhythmic beat classification motivation: changes in the normal rhythm of a human heart may result in different cardiac arrhythmias, which may be immediately fatal or cause irreparable damage to the heart sustained over long periods of time. therefore, the ability to automatically identify arrhyth-mias from ecg recordings is important for clinical diagnosis and treatment. in this article, classification by using associative petri net (apn) for personalized ecg-arrhythmia-pattern identification is proposed for the first time in literature. results: a rule-based classification model and reasoning algorithm of apn are created for ecg arrhythmias classification. the performance evaluation using mit-bih arrhythmia database shows that our approach compares well with other reported studies.heart disease is an umbrella term for a number of different diseases which affect the heart such as arrhythmia, myocardial ischemia and myocardial infarction . as of 2007, it is also one of the leading causes of death in the world, and especially according to the american heart association, one american is dying in every 34 s because of this disease . changes in the normal rhythm of a human heart may result in different cardiac arrhythmias, which may be immediately fatal or cause irreparable damage to the heart when sustained over long periods of time. electrocardiogram (ecg) is an important routine clinical practice for continuous monitoring of cardiac activities. since ecg signals vary greatly for different individuals and within patient groups , ecg-pattern recognition is a difficult problem even with the aid of a computer. while normal sinus rhythm originates from the sinus node of heart, arrhythmias have various origins and indicate a wide variety of heart problems. same symptoms of arrhythmia produce different morphologies due to their origins such as premature ventricular contraction . for effective diagnostics, the study of ecg pattern and heart-rate-variability signal may have to be carried out over several hours. thus, computer-based analysis and classification of diseases can be very helpful in diagnostics (guer and u beyli, 2005;). a number of methods have been proposed to classify ecg-heartbeat patterns based on the features extracted from ecg signals. apns have knowledge representation ability and could be translated into production rule systems. in addition, the apn formalism also is a graphical and mathematical tool for design, specification, simulation and verification of systems. therefore, apn can be widely used in computer, knowledge-based systems, process control, decision making as well as other kinds of engineering applications. in this article, classification of ecg arrhythmias by using associative petri net (apn) is proposed for the first time in the literature and is compared with several pioneering studies for arrhythmias detection.we have proposed a methodology for the detection of ecg arrhythmia using a generalized apn model in this article. the performance evaluation using mit-bih arrhythmia database inshows that our approach compares well with other reported studies. the experimental results strongly suggest that our proposed apn model can help doctors in the diagnosis of ecg arrhythmia and may applied to other symptom decision field. in the future, an applicable decision system for the clinical diagnosis of ecg arrhythmias can developed based on our provided apn model. and, the health care practitioners can be aware of typesan apn model for arrhythmic beat classification of cardiac arrhythmias and give early treatment to reduce deterioration. apn is a powerful method for representing knowledge and logic reasoning in the domain of decision support systems. unlike other petri net model, apn model has a systematic procedure in model construction. the reasoning path of expert systems can be reduced to simple sprouting trees if apn-based reasoning algorithms can be applied. however, there still drawbacks exist in apn such as state explosion and no hierarchy concepts. we shall overcome all these drawbacks in the near future.  
