methods for time series analysis of rna-seq data with application to human th17 cell differentiation motivation: gene expression profiling using rna-seq is a powerful technique for screening rna species landscapes and their dynamics in an unbiased way. while several advanced methods exist for differential expression analysis of rna-seq data, proper tools to anal.yze rna-seq time-course have not been proposed. results: in this study, we use rna-seq to measure gene expression during the early human t helper 17 (th17) cell differentiation and t-cell activation (th0). to quantify th17-specific gene expression dynamics, we present a novel statistical methodology, dynb, for analyzing time-course rna-seq data. we use non-parametric gaussian processes to model temporal correlation in gene expression and combine that with negative binomial likelihood for the count data. to account for experiment specific biases in gene expression dynamics, such as differences in cell differentiation efficiencies, we propose a method to rescale the dynamics between replicated measurements. we develop an mcmc sampling method to make inference of differential expression dynamics between conditions. dynb identifies several known and novel genes involved in th17 differentiation. analysis of differentiation efficiencies revealed consistent patterns in gene expression dynamics between different cultures. we use qrt-pcr to validate differential expression and differentiation efficiencies for selected genes. comparison of the results with those obtained via traditional timepoint-wise analysis shows that time-course analysis together with time rescaling between cultures identifies differentially expressed genes which would not otherwise be detected. availability: an implementation of the proposed computational methods will be available ata rna-seq experiment provides a snapshot of rna content within a cell population. the observed data is in a form of millions of short nucleotide sequences, which can be used to construct a de novo transcriptome or aligned against known reference genome and transcriptome. to quantify expressions of known genes, a common approach is to count the reads which are aligned to different genes. the discrete nature of count data led researchers to model the sequencing data using poisson distribution (see e.g.). recently, it has been shown that the poisson distribution is insufficient for modeling sequencing data because it tends to underestimate the variance for highly expressed genes. an extension of the poisson distribution, the negative binomial distribution, has gained popularity in modeling gene expression data from rna-seq (or other sequencing-based count data) because it can account for this over-dispersion. two commonly used approaches which use the negative binomial distribution to detect differential expression are deseq and edger . another method called bayseq uses an empirical bayesian method to estimate the posterior probabilities that a gene is, or is not, differentially expressed . profiling gene expression over time provides information about the dynamical behavior of the genes.presented a method that can analyze time series microarray data in order to assess the differential expression from whole time series as opposed to the traditional methods, which analyze timepoints independently. more recently,presented a methodology that uses gaussian processes (gps) to model gene expression over time and to identify the time intervals when each gene is differentially expressed. we have further extended the gp approach to quantify condition-specific differential expression among multiple time-course experiments ( aij o). these methodologies are not optimal for analyzing count data due to the different statistical characteristics and, to our knowledge, next-masigpro is the only methodology capable of taking into account the temporal dimension of rna-seq time series. in addition, by taking into account temporal correlation makes it possible to carry out more detailed analysis of the observed dynamics, e.g. to quantify similarities and differences between the observed kinetics. to that end, gps have been used for modeling temporally or spatially varying likelihood parameters in other fields, e.g. to model the rate parameter of the poisson distribution temporally and the stochastic process that is produced is called as the gaussian cox process . similar approaches have also been popular in geostatistics . since the discovery of an interleukin 17 producing t-cell subset, this t helper 17 (th17) cell lineage has been a focus of great research interest . th17 cells have been shown to play an important role in autoimmune diseases and inflammation. recent studies have identified transcription factor genes rorc and stat3 as the key regulators of the early th17 differentiation in murine (see a review in). na ve human t cells are activated through the t-cell receptor (tcr) by cd3 and cd28 and th17 cells are polarized to whom correspondence should be addressed the author 2014. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ 3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com. from the activated t cells by exposing the cells to tgf-, il-1 and il-23. the goal of gene expression profiling in the early phase of th17 differentiation is to gain insight into the process of differentiation by unraveling dependencies between key factors and to understand how the differentiation signal propagates through various pathways and gene regulatory networks. this knowledge could potentially prove useful in identifying biomarkers for immune-related diseases and in design of therapeutic interventions. we present a methodology, dynb that is built on the negative binomial likelihood and gps. non-parametric gp regression is used to model gene expression over time and the model inference is carried using the bayesian reasoning. we demonstrate the applicability of dynb by analyzing rna-seq time-series datasets. we also show how dynb can be used to study relative differentiation efficiencies between biological samples. the differentially expressed genes detected by dynb as well as estimated differences in differentiation efficiencies for selected genes are validated using qrt-pcr.  
