sequence analysis methylcoder: software pipeline for bisulfite-treated sequences motivation: methylcoder is a software program that generates per-base methylation data given a set of bisulfite-treated reads. it provides the option to use either of two existing short-read aligners, each with different strengths. it accounts for soft-masked alignments and overlapping paired-end reads. methylcoder outputs data in text and binary formats in addition to the final alignment in sam format, so that common high-throughput sequencing tools can be used on the resulting output. it is more flexible than existing software and competitive in terms of speed and memory use. availability: methylcoder requires only a python interpreter and a c compiler to run. extensive documentation and the full source code are available under the mit license at: https://github.com/brentp /methylcode.whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (bs-seq) is used to determine the methylation levels at each cytosine. in dna that has been treated with bisulfite, unmethylated cytosines are converted to uracil and then to thymine following pcr amplification. methylated cytosines are not converted; so an epigenetic mark is visible in the genetic code. in order to determine nucleotide-resolution methylation levels, bisulfite-treated reads must be re-aligned to the reference genome. since some of the cytosines (c) in each read may have been converted to thymines (t), direct alignment is not possible because conversions will appear as mismatches. our approach is to artificially (in silico) convert remaining cs to ts in the reads and the reference genome. a short-read aligner can then be used to map the converted reads to the converted genome. for each alignment, the original read and reference sequence can be recovered. a reference c that is aligned to a t in a read can be considered as converted, or unmethylated. previous software for aligning bs-seq data used a variety of methods (see huss, 2010 for a more complete list). bisulfite sequence mapping program uses a bit mask (that treats cs and ts identically) and hashing to map bisulfite-treated reads. earlier tools such as cokusalignment use strategies that are slower than current aligners. bs-seeker and bismark use a similar strategy to the one described here. bs-seeker is memory intensive, and does not support paired-end reads. both bismark and bs-seeker to whom correspondence should be addressed. are limited to the bowtie aligner and do not support color space reads. bisulfite-treated reads analysis tool (brat;) also uses a hashing approach and is the only other aligner that avoids double-counting overlapping paired-end reads. we introduce methylcoder, a fast, memory-efficient bs-seq pipeline. it supports both paired-and single-end reads in color space or nucleotide formats. methylcoder provides a single entry point and common output formats for the bowtie and genomic short-read nucleotide alignment program (gsnap) aligners. each of these aligners has different strengths; gsnap has no limitation on the size of the reference, but does not consider quality information with the reads. bowtie can only map to references 4 gb in total length, but considers quality and can map color space reads. utilizing these short-read aligners, while providing access to their arguments, ensures that methylcoder is flexible and accessible. as with aligners for genomic dna, there are many viable choices available for bs-seq mapping. we introduce a resource to benchmark the time, memory use and number of mapped reads for the bs-seq aligners mentioned above.  
