methylflow: cell-specific methylation pattern reconstruction from high-throughput bisulfite-converted dna sequencing motivation: dna methylation aberrations are now known to, almost universally, accompany the initiation and progression of cancers. in particular, the colon cancer epigenome contains specific gen-omic regions that, along with differences in methylation levels with respect to normal colon tissue, also show increased epigenetic and gene expression heterogeneity at the population level, i.e. across tumor samples, in comparison with other regions in the genome. tumors are highly heterogeneous at the clonal level as well, and the relationship between clonal and population heterogeneity is poorly understood. results: we present an approach that uses sequencing reads from high-throughput sequencing of bisulfite-converted dna to reconstruct heterogeneous cell populations by assembling cell-specific methylation patterns. our methodology is based on the solution of a specific class of minimum cost network flow problems. we use our methods to analyze the relationship between clonal het-erogeneity and population heterogeneity in high-coverage data from multiple samples of colon tumor and matched normal tissues. availability and implementation:dna methylation (dnam) is a gene regulatory mechanism where silencing of gene expression is established by the chemical bond of methyl groups to dna at specific genomic regions . it is the best understood heritable mechanism for gene regulation that does not involve direct modification of dna sequence itself. high-throughput sequencing of bisulfite-converted dna is used to measure dnam modifications at base-pair level. this approach has led to deeper understanding of the methylomes organization and its role in development and disease . while single-cell methods to sequence bisulfite-converted dna are currently under development , the most reliable current method to measure dnam at the base-pair level across the entire methylome is to bisulfite-convert and sequence dna from a population of cells. a number of existing computational methods may then be used to calculate the percentage of dna fragments that harbor a dnam modification at specific genomic loci . in many normal human tissues, for example, these percentages vary from the expected levels in a population of diploid cells with identical dnam modifications: 100 (where all cells in the population are methylated at a specific locus), 0 (where all cells in the population are unmethylated) or 50 (where only one chromosome in all cells in the population are methylated). for example, in the normal colon methylome, the majority of the methylome is partially methylated at a level of roughly 7080 . similar patterns are observed in other human tissues , and tissues in other eukaryotes. an obvious observation that follows from this is that cell populations in normal tissues are composed of epigenetically heterogenous cells. furthermore, when comparing dnam across different tissues, for example, colon normal tissue and colon tumor,, or a population of stem cells to a population of somatic cells, e.g. fibroblast , differences in dnam percentages at a specific locus is indicative of a shift in the epigenetic composition of these cell populations. computational and statistical methods to study the epigenetic composition of cell populations have been proposed based on the analysis of dnam modifications at multiple consecutive genomic loci spanned by single sequencing reads , where they analyzed dnam modifications at each group of four contiguous cpg dinucleotides using sequencing reads that span all four cpgs. they then calculate the proportion of reads compatible with each of the 2 4 possible dnam modifications over these four positions. they summarize these 2 4 proportions to define the epipolymorphism of each set of four contiguous cpgs. while these approaches have yielded great insight into how cell populations differ epigenetically across different tissues, they only provide a general summary of the epigenetic composition of these cell populations. for instance, distinguishing between the two types of cell population shifts illustrated in 1 is limited to those differences observed over four contiguous cpgs. to perform a comprehensive analysis of these cell population shifts, the ability to reconstruct cellspecific methylation patterns over longer genomic spans is required. in this article, we present methylflow, a novel computational method to reconstruct cell-specific patterns using reads obtained from sequencing bisulfite-converted dna based on network flow algorithms. we report on a simulation study characterizing the behavior of our method. we then present an application of this method using ultra-high coverage targeted sequence in a colon cancer study , and on whole genome sequencing of fully differentiated b-cells and ksl and clp progenitor cells (kieffer). we also perform a validation study using bisulfiteconverted dna from single cells . we believe that this method will allow for increased understanding of the role of epigenetic heterogeneity at the cell population level in gene regulation.  
