genome analysis methylsig: a whole genome dna methylation analysis pipeline motivation: dna methylation plays critical roles in gene regulation and cellular specification without altering dna sequences. the wide application of reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (rrbs) and whole genome bisulfite sequencing (bis-seq) opens the door to study dna methylation at single cpg site resolution. one challenging question is how best to test for significant methylation differences between groups of biological samples in order to minimize false positive findings. results: we present a statistical analysis package, methylsig, to analyse genome-wide methylation differences between samples from different treatments or disease groups. methylsig takes into account both read coverage and biological variation by utilizing a beta-binomial approach across biological samples for a cpg site or region, and identifies relevant differences in cpg methylation. it can also incorporate local information to improve group methylation level and/or variance estimation for experiments with small sample size. a permutation study based on data from enhanced rrbs samples shows that methylsig maintains a well-calibrated type-i error when the number of samples is three or more per group. our simulations show that methylsig has higher sensitivity compared with several alternative methods. the use of methylsig is illustrated with a comparison of different subtypes of acute leukemia and normal bone marrow samples. availability: methylsig is available as an r package at http://sartorlab. ccmb.dna methylation (5-methylcytosine) is the most intensively studied and one of the best understood epigenetic marks in mammalian cells, having important roles in imprinting, genome stability and regulation of gene expression without altering the dna sequence itself . in mammalian cells, cytosine methylation occurs almost exclusively at cpg dinucleotides, with the exception of embryonic stem cells, where non-cpg methylation is a frequent occurrence . dna methylation is essential for normal development and cell differentiation due to its roles in regulating gene expression. for example, unmethylated cpgs in promoter regions can allow binding of specific transcription factors (tfs) while methylated cpgs in these regions can prevent binding . furthermore, extensive crosstalk occurs between dna methylation and chromatin modifying histone marks . dysregulation of dna methylation is a hallmark of cancer, with overall genomic demethylation and gene-specific hypermethylation, most notably in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes . treatment of dna with sodium bisulfite deaminates unmethylated cytosines to uracil while methylated cytosines are resistant to this conversion, thus allowing for sequence-specific discrimination between methylated and unmethylated cpg sites . sodium bisulfite pre-treatment of dna coupled with next-generation sequencing has facilitated genome-wide quantitative dna methylation to be studied at single cytosine site resolution . the high cost of whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (bis-seq), and the uneven distribution of cpg sites in the genome motivated the development of modified approaches such as reduced representation bis-seq (rrbs) and enhanced rrbs (errbs) . these methods have the advantage of requiring fewer sequencing reads by enriching for cpg dense regions of the genome. bis-seq, rrbs and errbs facilitate the study of dna methylation patterns across the genome in multiple samples and between sample groups. recently, errbs was used to identify and describe distinct dna methylation patterns associated with specific forms of acute myeloid leukemias (aml) . aml is a highly heterogeneous disease both from the clinical and molecular standpoints, with many distinct molecular subtypes defined by genetic abnormalities; several of these target key epigenetic regulators. an estimated 2025 of all amls are associated with heterozygous somatic mutations of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 or 2 (idh1 or 2), or ten-eleven translocation 2 (tet2) . any one of these mutations results in an impairment of dna demethylation pathways and leads to the establishment of a dna hypermethylation phenotype . a separate class of amls, constituting $15 of all aml cases, are identified by the presence of the t(8;21) translocation giving rise to the aml1/eto fusion oncoprotein . several methods have been published for analysing genomewide methylation levels. bsmooth , which is targeted to analyse bis-seq data, uses a smoothing approach across the genome within each sample to increase the accuracy of the estimated methylation level for a single cpg site. bsmooth identifies differentially methylated regions (dmrs) by combining top ranked differentially methylated cytosines (dmcs) found using a t-statistics approach with either a quantile or direct t-statistic cutoff. methylkit offers useful annotation features and provides a statistical test by pooling sequencing reads among the individuals in each group. when multiple samples are present, logistic regression with a binary predictor is used, which can be formulated as a binomial-based test. however, methylation levels often vary significantly across individuals, as observed in cancer samples . pooling of reads among individuals may result in inflated type-i error rates when testing for group differences. non-parametric tests such as the wilcoxon rank-sum test have also been used to test for dmcs ; however, these tests suffer from a lack of statistical power for experiments with small sample sizes. to overcome current limitations, we developed methylsig, a genome-wide dna methylation analysis pipeline for use with bis-seq, rrbs or errbs data. methylsig utilizes a betabinomial model across the samples in each defined group for each cpg site or region to identify either dmcs or dmrs. it can also incorporate local information across a chromosome to improve estimates of variances and/or methylation levels. methylsig offers annotation functions to map dmcs/dmrs to gene structures and a unique data visualization approach to view several aspects of the data simultaneously across the genome, providing a platform from which to process, analyse and visualize genome-wide methylation data.statistical analysis of genome-wide bis-seq experiments with multiple biological samples per group is challenging due to heterogeneous read coverage and methylation levels, relatively small sample sizes and the large number of tests required for a site-specific analysis. appropriately applying a statistical method to adjust for biological variation, and using information from nearby cpg sites to improve estimation, can significantly reduce the false positive findings while maximizing power. here, we introduced methylsig, a genome-wide dna methylation analysis pipeline for bis-seq or rrbs/errbs data that estimates biological variation using a beta-binomial approach and maintains a well-calibrated type-i error rate. methylsig is able to incorporate local information to improve the estimation of variances and group methylation levels. our simulation results show that in terms of sensitivity, methylsig outperforms both standard statistical tests such as the t-test and wilcoxon rank test, as well as bsmooth and the binomial test of methylkit under a variety of realistic scenarios. our method reduces false positive findings by filtering out sites that have a high difference in percent methylation, but are too heterogeneous or have very low of coverage in many samples to be of biological relevance. our analyses using errbs methylation data from aml and nbm samples showed that methylsig can lead to statistically and biologically relevant results. one subgroup of aml samples had mutations in either idh1 or idh2. nearly all of the dmcs in cancers with neomorphic idh1/2 mutations are expected to be hypermethylated, because they lead to abnormally high levels of 2-hydroxyglutarate, which is a direct inhibitor of the tet dna demethylases required to convert 5 mc to 5 hmc . similarly, loss-of-function mutations in tet2 result in impaired dna demethylation . although most of the dmcs in the tet2 mutant subgroup are also expected to be hypermethylated, this occurs to a lesser degree than for the idh1/2 group due to the possible partial compensation by other tet proteins. the great majority of dmcs identified by methylsig in these two subgroups were hypermethylated. compared to methylkit, which uses a binomial model without adjusting for biological variation, we demonstrated that our approach performs favorably in terms of type-i error rate, and correlation between significance and percent methylation change. recently, more sophisticated methods based on bayesian hierarchical models have been published . although these methods also make use of a betabinomial model, they differ from methylsig by using priors for the methylation levels or dispersion parameters based on the entire data; methylsig, in contrast, incorporates local information for methylation levels and/or dispersion parameters. for sites that are highly heterogeneous in both groups, methylsig may not be able to identify regions that are important for a subgroup of samples. this is similar to other traditional statistical methods that test for significant group differences. in this case, a test for a significant subgroup, such as cancer outlier profile analysis used for expression data and implemented in oncomine , may be more appropriate. in cases where one of the groups (e.g. controls) is more homogeneous, users may estimate variance based only on that group in order to identify regions potentially important in a subset of the diseased samples, which are likely more heterogeneous overall. methylsig can also be used to analyse alternative cytosine methylation contexts. finally, the methylsig r package provides a unique visualization approach and useful annotation functions.  
