databases and ontologies metitree: a web application to organize and process high-resolution multi-stage mass spectrometry metabolomics data identification of metabolites using high-resolution multi-stage mass spectrometry (ms n) data is a significant challenge demanding access to all sorts of computational infrastructures. metitree is a user-friendly, web application dedicated to organize, process, share, visualize and compare ms n data. it integrates several features to export and visualize complex ms n data, facilitating the exploration and interpretation of metabolomics experiments. a dedicated spectral tree viewer allows the simultaneous presentation of three related types of ms n data, namely, the spectral data, the fragmentation tree and the fragmentation reactions. metitree stores the data in an internal database to enable searching for similar fragmentation trees and matching against other ms n data. as such metitree contains much functionality that will make the difficult task of identifying unknown metabolites much easier. availability: metitree is accessible atmetabolite identification is a challenging but essential step for the interpretation and understanding of many biological processes for an increasing number of applications such as biomarker discovery, drug discovery or nutritional studies. the feasibility of using multi-stage mass spectrometry (ms n ) for identification of metabolites has been shown before . the complexity of the data generated demands new computational infrastructures to organize the data and to extract relevant information. recently, databases have been set up for storing fragmentation spectra such as ms n data (e.g. massbank;), and tools have been developed to process ms n data (e.g. the mef tool; rojas-chertot al., 2011), or to compare ms n data (e.g. mass frontier; thermo fisher scientific). in this article we present a web application called metitree with the novelty that it combines the processing of high-resolution ms n data with a personal local library to organize the fragmentation data. furthermore, it allows the comparison of ms n data to help the researcher with the identification of metabolites. metitree is available at http://www.metitree.nl together with some test ms n data.the growing interest in metabolite identification has increased the need to create computational and visual tools for ms n analysis. metitree, which gathers several in-house developed tools, is an easy-to-use web application that combines processing, sharing, visualizing and querying ms n data to help researches to identify metabolites of interest and decrease the time-consuming task of identifying metabolites.. overview of the metitree process flow. after the user submits ms n spectra, metitree will process these according to a set of parameters. afterwards, the processed data can be stored in an internal library and labeled as a reference compound using the inchi identifier. the results are presented in different formats and viewers, which facilitates the exporting of text and figures for their use in reports and publications (a). finally, ms n data can be queried to find similar ms n data in the library (b) and the query results are presented in a list  
