metmsline: an automated and fully integrated pipeline for rapid processing of high-resolution lc–ms metabolomic datasets metmsline represents a complete collection of functions in the r programming language as an accessible gui for biomarker discovery in large-scale liquid-chromatography high-resolution mass spectral datasets from acquisition through to final metabolite identification forming a backend to output from any peak-picking software such as xcms. metmsline automatically creates subdirectories, data tables and relevant figures at the following steps: (i) signal smoothing, normalization, filtration and noise transformation (preproc.qc.lsc.r); (ii) pca and automatic outlier removal (auto.pca.r); (iii) automatic regression, biomarker selection, hierarchical clustering and cluster ion/artefact identification (auto.mv.regress.r); (iv) biomarkerms/ms fragmentation spectra matching and fragment/neutral loss annotation (auto.ms.ms.match.r) and (v) semi-targeted metabolite identification based on a list of theoretical masses obtained from public databases (dbannotate.r). availability and implementation: all source code and suggested parameters are available in an un-encapsulated layout on http://wmbedmands.github.io/metmsline/. readme files and a synthetic dataset of both x-variables (simulated lcms data), y-variables (simulated continuous variables) and metabolite theoretical masses are also available on our github repository.untargeted metabolite profiling is a promising approach to discover novel risk factors for chronic diseases and biomarkers for disease diagnosis . liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry (lchrms) instrumentation is being more routinely used for dataacquisition for metabolomic analyses in large-scale studies (e.g. 300 samples). raw data need to be processed via computational tools to extract relevant information and meaningful biological conclusions. processing of lchrms raw data is currently facilitated by softwares such as xcms, mzmine, metaboanalyst and maven . however, an automated software pipeline with minimal manual interaction for efficient, reproducible and objective large-scale metabolomic data analysis is also desirable. software tools can systematically perform all downstream aspects of metabolomic analysis following peak-picking. development of such a workflow in the r language can offer several advantages such as availability of modular packages for functional programming and graphics and the ease of accessibility of a gui for non-specialists. we have developed novel software, metmsline, coded in the r language which automates the process of untargeted metabolomic data analyses of large datasets from acquisition of data from lchrms platforms through to unknown biomarker identification.an overview of data processing steps that are integrated by metmsline is shown in. use of the software via gui requires a clear understanding of data processing steps in metabolomics.metmsline presents a complete data processing method; it is easy to use as a gui and should be very beneficial to researchers to rapidly process large-scale lchrms dataset. it potentially requires minimal manual interaction with the software, when compared with the high-manual interaction required by commonly used softwares for lchrms datasets such as metaboanalyst, maven, aplcms, mzmine and ideom . the rapidity of the process allows great scope for parameter optimization and the subsequent ability to dedicate more time to result interpretation.  
