systems biology metnetmaker: a free and open-source tool for the creation of novel metabolic networks in sbml format an application has been developed to help with the creation and editing of systems biology markup language (sbml) format metabolic networks up to the organism scale. networks are defined as a collection of kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg) ligand reactions with an optional associated enzyme classification (ec) number for each reaction. additional custom reactions can be defined by the user. reactions within the network can be assigned flux constraints and compartmentalization is supported for each reaction in addition to the support for reactions that occur across compartment boundaries. exported networks are fully sbml l2v4 compatible with an optional l2v1 export for compatibility with old versions of the cobra toolbox. availability and implementation: the software runs in the free microsoft access 2007 runtime (microsoft inc.), which is included with the installer and works on windows xp sp2 or better. full source code is viewable in the full version of access 2007 or 2010. users must have a license to use the kegg ligand database (free academic licensing is available). please go to www.bioinformatics.leeds.ac.uk/pytf/metnetmaker for software download, help and tutorials. contact: pytf@leeds.ac.ukflux-balance analysis (fba), as described in, with an updated description inand clarified in a primer by, seeks flux solutions corresponding to steady-state metabolite concentrations, s v = 0, where s is the stoichiometric matrix of a reconstructed metabolic network and v is a vector of the flux through each reaction in the network. stoichiometric matrices typically have more reactions (columns of s) than metabolites (rows of s) meaning that a solution v can be any linear combination of many vectors in the null space of s. the linear combination of these vectors that gives a single optimal vector can be found by linear programming; often by maximizing the creation, in the correct proportions, of the metabolites defined in an experimentally measured biomass function, or more generally maximizing or minimizing any other chosen objective function. additional constraints on the flux through certain reactions can be addedoften with reference to known uptake rates of carbon and nitrogen sourcesproviding a further link between the computational model and experimental results. the cobra toolbox , which applies techniques to whom correspondence should be addressed. set out in, is a commonly used tool for fba. in addition to many other features, this software can perform constraints-based fba on systems biology markup language (sbml;) format metabolic networks containing additional information on reaction flux contraints. many existing whole-organism metabolic network reconstructions have been created using the pathway tools software based on the biocyc pathway genome database collection and the metacyc compound/reaction/pathway naming convention . these reconstructions are often unsuitable for fba, since they contain holes due to a lack sufficient manual curation. manipulation of these networks, such as adding new transport reactions or adding/removing pathways, and quickly exporting sbml format models is cumbersome and limits the usefulness of the software for rapid network design and testing. fba-ready metabolic network models are generally recreated, as outlined in thiele and palsson (2010). recent examples of this approach are for the pathogens: leishmania major and salmonella typhimurium both of which were built in simpheny (genomatica inc.), a well developed but closed source and expensive software package that uses a custom compound/reaction naming convention.  
