metrics for rapid quality control in rna struc-ture probing experiments motivation: the diverse functionalities of rna can be attributed to its capacity to form complex and varied structures. the recent proliferation of new structure probing techniques coupled with high-throughput sequencing has helped rna studies expand in both scope and depth. despite differences in techniques, most experiments face similar challenges in reproducibility due to the stochastic nature of chemical probing and sequencing. as these protocols expand to transcriptome-wide studies, quality control becomes a more daunting task. general and efficient methodologies are needed to quantify variability and quality in the wide range of current and emerging structure probing experiments. results: we develop metrics to rapidly and quantitatively evaluate data quality from structure probing experiments, demonstrating their efficacy on both small synthetic libraries and transcriptome-wide datasets. we use a signal-to-noise ratio concept to evaluate replicate agreement, which has the capacity to identify high-quality data. we also consider and compare two methods to assess variability inherent in probing experiments, which we then utilize to evaluate the coverage adjustments needed to meet desired quality. the developed metrics and tools will be useful in summarizing large-scale datasets and will help standardize quality control in the field.rna plays an integral role in many biological processes, spanning an enormous range of functionalities , whose root often lies in structure. discerning structure is thus of paramount importance, but it remains a challenging task, as traditional methods such as crystallography are time consuming whereas computational approaches struggle to correctly predict it by sequence alone. the recent advent of affordable and efficient high-throughput structure probing experiments has helped address these deficiencies . furthermore, their outputs can be used to constrain structure prediction algorithms and improve prediction accuracy or utilized in other applications . probing experiments use reagents, such as shape and dms, which modify rna residues in a structure-dependent manner . modifications are detected via reverse transcription, which terminates at modified sites. noise due to random terminaas structure probing experiments increase in scope and complexity, analytical tools must keep pace to ensure efficient processing and reliable results. whereas manual inspection of data was once sufficient, the extent of newer experiments precludes such approaches. the quantitative tools and framework we presented here are a first step in addressing this deficiency, providing quality controls that are standardized, generally applicable, automatable, and scalable. we envision these tools to be used in design and analysis of new and emerging large-scale experiments. to evaluate reproducibility, we used the concept of snr as well as developed a new metric, cqi, which predicts coverage levels needed to achieve a desired fluctuation level. both metrics involve straightforward calculations; yet they are informative at both the replicate and transcript levels. one favorable characteristic of snr is its flexibility to handle multiple replicates, experimental or simulated. while it is a useful quantification at both the residue and whole-transcript levels, the mean snr statistic has the advantage of distilling reproducibility information across any number of residues into a single number, allowing for rapid preliminary screening of large-scale datasets. more elaborate summarizations of residue snr distributions or subsets thereof, such as boxplot and categorical chart analyses, may complement this approach as means of inspecting borderline outcomes, detecting regions of special interest, or accommodating alternative criteria for overall reproducibility. cqi performs a similar task, aggregating coverage information across a transcript into three indices. this metric has similar advantages as snr: it serves as rapid quantification with a clear quality threshold and is easily automated. it provides a preliminary estimate of the coverage increase necessary to limit variability, and can be subsequently finetuned via resampling. importantly, the variability we simulated does not encapsulate all sources of noise; thus, recommendations by cqi should be seen as a minimum recommended coverage increase rather than a fixall solution. this metric builds off of our formula-based estimate, which explicitly links coverage to data variability. it thereby demonstrates the usefulness of this classical approach compared to modern resampling methods. the formula also has the added benefit of rapid estimation compared to bootstrap, though the latter may be more accurate at low coverage. nonetheless, the tandem of bootstrap and formula provide a computational way to quantitatively evaluate data quality. the data summarization we employed here is readily generalizable to other proposed quality measures . one common strategy in microarrays is to report the ratio of signal to background . we derived a formula for this ratios variability (see supplementary information). while this may be a good way to evaluate enrichment, it did not perform as well as the mean snr as summary statistic when correlated with coverage or modification rate (not shown). the ratio measure is also not as broadly applicable, as it is limited to single residues/transcripts. the presented methods are relatively straightforward and by no means address all issues, but are a first step towards ensuring high-quality data. as the field continues to grow, effort must be spent on both pioneering new techniques as well as analysis and visualization tools . one plausible avenue for improvement is to combine rpe with paired-end sequencing for better consistency in recovering local coverage information. our methods attempt to unify how researchers quality-control their data. we kept our work simple and accessible, to make its adoption as painless and fruitful as possible. we aim to establish a foundation for more sophisticated platforms, which will ultimately bridge differences among protocols and expedite the fields maturation.  
