data and text mining metriculator: quality assessment for mass spectrometry-based proteomics quality control in mass spectrometry-based proteomics remains subjective, labor-intensive and inconsistent between laboratories. we introduce metriculator, a software designed to facilitate long-term storage of extensive performance metrics as introduced by nist in 2010. metriculator features a web interface that generates interactive comparison plots for contextual understanding of metric values and an automated metric generation toolkit. the comparison plots are designed for at-a-glance determination of outliers and trends in the datasets, together with relevant statistical comparisons. easy-to-use quantitative comparisons and a framework for integration plugins will encourage a culture of quality assurance within the prote-omics community. availability and implementation: available under the mit license atas omics-level experiments increase in size and complexity, assessing the quality of a dataset can be a laborious undertaking. this is particularly true of mass spectrometry (ms)-based proteomics, where the spectrometer and associated chromatography exhibit variableand sometimes erraticperformance. researchers would like to analyze more samples and in greater depth (i.e. fractionation), but maintaining high quality across the setand knowing that the set is of high qualityis a mounting challenge in proteomics. typically, highly trained technicians spend significant time adjusting capillary plumbing, working to achieve stable nanoelectrospray and calibrating and tuning the mass spectrometer. the quality of a large analysis is then assessed by visual inspection of the 2d or 3d ion trace. assessing reproducibility is particularly challenging when datasets involve runs collected over a period of weeks or months. furthermore, human assessment of quality is both time-consuming and a potential source of bias . software tools to aid in quality assessment are needed and can improve confidence in published proteomic datasets . an extensive set of quality/performance metrics was introduced by nist to begin to assess data quality in ms proteomics . these 284 metrics include measures of chromatographic performance, ion source stability, ion signal intensity and data-dependent sampling efficiency. these measures can significantly augment manual interpretation of data quality, but their utility depends on contextual comparisons between datasets. comparing metrics over time is the key to leveraging them for quality assessment. subsequent work has attempted to expand metrics across vendor platforms, and to provide curated metrics, such as those demonstrated by quameter , indicating the value of metrics to the proteomics community. a similar suite of software designed to monitor lock mass and quality control evaluation at the instrument and identification level, called simpatiqco, was recently released . it provides a similar web-based interface designed to assist instrument operators in monitoring quality control samples, yet it lacks interactive graphing and comparison capabilities, which enable applicability to any questions of performance differences, as well as augmentation to existent workflows. additionally, there is a commercial product, massqc, which provides a utility for submitting metric information for longitudinal comparison, but does not provide automation. there remains a need for an open-source configurable method for tracking and comparing performance metrics, as well as integration into a proteomics workflow.  
