metscape 2 bioinformatics tool for the analysis and visualization of metabolomics and gene expression data motivation: metabolomics is a rapidly evolving field that holds promise to provide insights into genotypephenotype relationships in cancers, diabetes and other complex diseases. one of the major informatics challenges is providing tools that link metabolite data with other types of high-throughput molecular data (e.g. transcriptomics, proteomics), and incorporate prior knowledge of pathways and molecular interactions. results: we describe a new, substantially redesigned version of our tool metscape that allows users to enter experimental data for metabolites, genes and pathways and display them in the context of relevant metabolic networks. metscape 2 uses an internal relational database that integrates data from kegg and ehmn databases. the new version of the tool allows users to identify enriched pathways from expression profiling data, build and analyze the networks of genes and metabolites, and visualize changes in the gene/metabolite data. we demonstrate the applications of metscape to annotate molecular pathways for human and mouse metabolites implicated in the pathogenesis of sepsis-induced acute lung injury, for the analysis of gene expression and metabolite data from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, and for identification of the candidate metabolites involved in cancer and inflammation. availability: metscape is part of the national institutes of health-supported national center for integrative biomedical informatics (ncibi) suite of tools, freely available atlarge-scale omics studies have been successful at revealing differences in gene expression, protein and metabolite abundance and post-translational protein modifications, thus providing different level views of the molecular processes that lead to disease phenotypes. molecular pathway databases and metabolic maps that contain computationally predicted and literature-derived information provide a path to connecting these views together. while many tools have been developed for the analysis of gene expression and proteomics data, to date there are few that allow the user to analyze metabolomics data and to link them with other omics data. high-quality genome scale metabolic reconstructions represent a critical component in developing such a tool. the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg) was one of the first database to provide information about biological pathways in conjunction with gene data from a range of different organisms . over 50 organism-specific metabolic reconstructions were published, providing excellent sources of information about metabolic pathways, genes encoding metabolic enzymes, reactions catalyzed by them and the compounds that participate in these reactions . in addition to the information about the components of metabolic pathways, databases like kegg, biocyc and smpd provide data visualization in the form of individual pathway charts or the overall view of metabolic pathways . the pathway charts are actively used by many researchers to help interpret their data, formulate new hypotheses and present the results. however, as the data input volume and complexity grow, such manual analysis is becoming increasingly difficult. efforts have been made to visualize the experimental data over the static pathways charts or make these charts interactive . one recently developed tool, paintomics, provides the ability to load gene expression and metabolite measurements and visualize them over kegg pathway maps . a more interactive tool, vanted, has been developed for the explorationfirst, we describe the features of metscape 2. next we demonstrate several potential workflows with three applications. we show that metscape was useful in visualizing the data, linking them to prior knowledge of metabolic pathways and helpful for generating new hypotheses, thereby contributing to the overall understanding of the underlying biological processes.visualization of genes, enzymes, metabolites, pathways and their relationships proved is an important step in biological interpretation of high-throughput omics experiments and understanding molecular mechanisms of diseases. the ability to link different types of biological data and examine them within the same framework further enhances this understanding. while there is an abundance of tools for visualizing molecular pathways, few currently offer the level of interactivity desired by many researchers. we have  
