systems biology metscape: a cytoscape plug-in for visualizing and interpreting metabolomic data in the context of human metabolic networks metscape is a plug-in for cytoscape, used to visualize and interpret metabolomic data in the context of human metabolic networks. we have developed a metabolite database by extracting and integrating information from several public sources. by querying this database, metscape allows users to trace the connections between metabolites and genes, visualize compound networks and display compound structures as well as information for reactions, enzymes, genes and pathways. applying the pathway filter, users can create subnetworks that consist of compounds and reactions from a given pathway. metscape allows users to upload experimental data, and visualize and explore compound networks over time, or experimental conditions. color and size of the nodes are used to visualize these dynamic changes. metscape can display the entire metabolic network or any of the pathway-specific networks that exist in the database. availability: metscape can be installed from within cytoscape 2.6.x under network and attribute i/o category. for more information, please visit http://metscape.ncibi.org/tryplugin.htmlmetabolomics is a rapidly emerging field that is joining other high-throughput omics, such as proteomics and transcriptional profiling. it promises to be a powerful systems approach for studying metabolic profiles pertinent to a variety of normal and disease states. transcriptional profiling and proteomics have established data analysis tools; a metabolomics analytical toolkit is yet to be developed. an important step in metabolomic data analysis is examining experimental data in the context of metabolic networks. a number of tools have been developed for the interactive exploration of metabolic pathways (; to whom correspondence should be addressed.). several databases describing human metabolic networks have been published (kegg, ehmn, hmdb). visual analysis has been shown to be effective in facilitating human cognition in exploratory analysis with bioinformatics tools . cytoscape is a highly popular java-based open source software tool that is used by biomedical researchers to visualize and dynamically analyze gene/protein interaction networks . cytoscape is a powerful stand-alone tool, but its strength is even more apparent when it is coupled with databases. a number of plug-ins (mimi plug-in, pathway commons, etc.) have been developed to interact with various databases. here we describe metscape, a cytoscape plug-in for visualizing and interpreting metabolomic data in the context of human metabolic networks.metscape (see supplementary material for the comparison of metscape and other tools) provides a bioinformatics framework for the analysis and interpretation of metabolomic data. metabolomic data from humdb, ehmn and kegg are integrated and stored in a database at ncibi. metscape provides users an interface to query the database. visualizing a compound network helps users to trace connections between metabolites and genes, and understand the relationships between compounds, reactions, enzymes, genes and pathways. visualizing metabolites with node color and size changes in a network at a series of time points can help users to predict functions of metabolites. linking compounds and reactions to well-known metabolomic data sources helps researchers to verify and better understand the presented metabolites. since march 2009 when the first version of metscape was released, we have had 200 unique ips (users/user groups), and the number is still growing. for future work, we plan to integrate more data from additional databases and provide more information like enzyme activators and inhibitors from databases such as brenda .  
