mfasd: a structure-based algorithm for discriminating different types of metal-binding sites motivation: a large number of proteins contain metal ions that are essential for their stability and biological activity. identifying and characterizing metal-binding sites through computational methods is necessary when experimental clues are lacking. almost all published computational methods are designed to distinguish metal-binding sites from non-metal-binding sites. however, discrimination between different types of metal-binding sites is also needed to make more accurate predictions. results: in this work, we proposed a novel algorithm called mfasd, which could discriminate different types of metal-binding sites effectively based on 3d structure data and is useful for accurate metal-binding site prediction. mfasd captures the characteristics of a metal-binding site by investigating the local chemical environment of a set of functional atoms that are considered to be in contact with the bound metal. then a distance measure defined on functional atom sets enables the comparison between different metal-binding sites. the algorithm could discriminate most types of metal-binding sites from each other with high sensitivity and accuracy. we showed that cascading our method with existing ones could achieve a substantial improvement of the accuracy for metal-binding site prediction. availability and implementation: source code and data used are freely available fromproteins usually execute their functions by interacting with other components, including macromolecules such as dna and proteins as well as small cofactors among which metals are most frequently used. approximately, one-third of all proteins contain at least one metal ion according to the data in protein data bank (pdb;). binding of metal ions is known to have profound effect on the overall protein conformation, where metals contribute significantly to proteins stability and biochemical activity. on one hand, metals are often directly involved in chemical reactions by serving as redox centers or electrophilic reactants in catalysis and helping to bring reactive groups into correct orientations for reactions . on the other hand, metals play a significant role in signal transduction and conformational changes of proteins by switching from state to state since they have different valence states . thus, identifying metal-binding sites could be a key step in understanding the function mechanisms of metal-binding proteins. experimental approaches to detect whether a protein binds a specific metal ion include atom absorption spectroscopy (reed and v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 1938doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv044  
