genetics and population analysis mgas: a powerful tool for multivariate gene-based genome-wide association analysis downloaded from motivation: standard genome-wide association studies, testing the association between one phenotype and a large number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), are limited in two ways: (i) traits are often multivariate, and analysis of composite scores entails loss in statistical power and (ii) gene-based analyses may be preferred, e.g. to decrease the multiple testing problem. results: here we present a new method, multivariate gene-based association test by extended simes procedure (mgas), that allows gene-based testing of multivariate phenotypes in unrelated individuals. through extensive simulation, we show that under most trait-generating genotype phenotype models mgas has superior statistical power to detect associated genes compared with gene-based analyses of univariate phenotypic composite scores (i.e. gates, multiple regression), and multivariate analysis of variance (manova). re-analysis of metabolic data revealed 32 false discovery rate controlled genome-wide significant genes, and 12 regions harboring multiple genes; of these 44 regions, 30 were not reported in the original analysis. conclusion: mgas allows researchers to conduct their multivariate gene-based analyses efficiently , and without the loss of power that is often associated with an incorrectly specified geno-typephenotype models. availability and implementation: mgas is freely available in kgg v3.0 (http://statgenpro.psych iatry.hku.hk/limx/kgg/download.php). access to the metabolic dataset can be requested at dbgap (https://dbgap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). the r-simulation code is available from http://ctglab.nl/people/ sophie_van_der_sluis.standard genome-wide association studies (gwas) involve the univariate regression of one trait on a large number of genetic variants (single nucleotide polymorphisms, i.e. snps), while adapting the nominal a criterion level for the extensive multiple testing (typically a 5 10 8 ). this analysis is limited in two important ways. first, genes, not snps, are the functional unit in the genome . although snps may have different allele frequencies and linkage disequilibrium (ld) structure across human populations, genic function is highly consistent. furthermore, analysing genes rather than snps decreases the multiple testing problem, and relaxing the significance threshold in gene-based analyses improves the statistical power of gwas studies . second, traits of interest are often multivariate in nature, i.e. multiple phenotypes are measured to cover the full extent of a trait. for instance, cognitive ability is usually measured through test batteries covering various cognitive abilities (e.g. vocabulary, memory). similarly, diagnostic interviews and clinical questionnaires cover a collection of symptoms to deal with the symptomatic heterogeneity. in the gwas context, this multivariate information is generally reduced to a univariate score, i.e. a univariate full-scale iq score, or a binary casecontrol index. reducing multivariate to univariate data nearly always results in loss of information. specifically, whether univariate composite scores exhaustively summarize all information in the multivariate data (i.e. are sufficient statistics) depends on the true trait-generating genotypephenotype model, i.e. the model that describes how the multiple phenotypes and genes jointly generate the observed trait . (specifically, in factor analytic terms, sum scores are only sufficient statistics if (a) all correlations between the phenotypes are explained by one latent trait or factor, (b) all phenotypes have identical factor loadings, (c) all phenotypes have identical residual variances [i.e. the phenotypes adhere to a so-called, and the genetic effect is on the latent factor (illustrated in). in all other cases, the sum score is not a sufficient statistic and conducting association analysis on the sum score will result in a considerable loss in power to detect genetic effects . noteworthy: the variancecovariance structure of data generated through a network model may closely mimic the variancecovariance structure of data generated through a 1-factor model , implicating that factor analytic results are not sufficient to determine the true trait-generating model.) various simulation studies have shown that overreliance on the unidimensional trait-generating model, and the associated use of univariate composite scores, can result in considerable loss of statistical power to detect genetic variants . gene-based methods for the univariate trait setting are available (e.g. gates, vegas, jag,), as are multivariate methods for the genome-wide snp-based setting [e.g. multiphen, canonical correlation analysis (cca), i.e. multivariate analysis of variance (manova) with the snp-effect treated as covariate, tates and jamp:; http://ctglab.nl/software/]. however, to date, only two recently published methods incorporates both. in fact, the rapid multivariate multiple linear regression (rmmlr) method proposed byis essentially equivalent to the multivariate gene-based cca/ manova proposed by tang and ferreira, leaving only one manova-based method. manova (and thus rmmlr), however, is known to be powerful specifically if the genetic variant affects only one or a few of multiple correlated phenotypes, but power decreases when the variant affects all or many of the phenotypes . here, we present a multivariate gene-based genome-wide analysis tool that is based on an extended simes test , mgas (multivariate gene-based association test by extended simes procedure). mgas combines p-value information obtained in standard univariate genome-wide snp-based association software to arrive at a multivariate genebased p-value p mgas. the standard gwas can thus be considered an mgas preprocessing step. mgas is implemented in knowledgebased mining system for genome-wide genetic studies (kgg v3.0), is freely available (http://statgenpro.psychiatry.hku.hk/limx/kgg/ download.php), and has a user-friendly graphical interface for loading p-value files and genetic and phenotypic correlational information, and for visualizing results and annotating sequence variants and interesting genes.we have shown that the new multivariate gene-based method mgas has correct type i error rate and performs well under a variety of trait-generating genotypephenotype models. with respect to power, mgas often outperforms other gene-based methods that do not require permutation, like the univariate methods gates, multiple regression and the multivariate manova [which, with our simulation settings, is equivalent to cca and rmmlr (. mgas, based on p-value information obtained in standard software like plink, has several important advantages. first, simultaneous analysis of phenotypes that have different measurement scales (e.g. continuous, ordered categorical, dichotomous) is unproblematic. second, standard gwas software deals with quality control in a genome-wide setting, covariates and population structure or stratification. mgas, subsequently using the p-values resulting from these specialized packages, benefits from the strengths of such software. third, mgas is relatively fast as the method does not require permutation. fourth, for the simulated genotypephenotype models, mgas often proved the most powerful gene-based methods, especially for the detection of pleiotropic genes (and c). only when the gene affects that part of one specific phenotype that shows no relation to other phenotypes in the analysis (i.e. geneeffect on the residual,) is mgas outperformed by gates-manova. as a powerful method, mgas more easily detects genes that show relatively weak associations with one or multiple traits. this was nicely illustrated by our real data example, in which we identified 30 regions that were not reported in the original analysis. it is important to note that, like all other multivariate gene-based methods included in our simulations, mgas has difficulty detecting genes that harbor multiple dsl in high ld, with contrasting effects (scenarios 5 and 7 in supplementary tables s2s7). although contrasting effects of snps in high ld, located within one gene, may indeed exist, e.g. as a balancing mechanism, the scope of this scenario, and thus of this shortcoming, is probably limited. yet, multivariate gene-based methods that can detect such contrasting effects are currently lacking. we close with some final remarks concerning the practical use of mgas. first, mgas, like tates, cannot be used to analyse data collected in multiple, non-overlapping samples (e.g. trait a was measured in sample i, and trait b in sample ii) because the resulting p-values will not show the expected correlations resulting from both the phenotypic correlations and the ld structure in the genome. also, those p-values might be based on samples of different size, obtained using variable recruitment strategies, and might originate study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. conflict of interest: none declared.  
