systems biology mia: non-targeted mass isotopolome analysis mia detects and visualizes isotopic enrichment in gas chromatography electron ioniza-tion mass spectrometry (gcei-ms) datasets in a non-targeted manner. it provides an easy-to-use graphical user interface that allows for visual mass isotopomer distribution analysis across multiple datasets. mia helps to reveal changes in metabolic fluxes, visualizes metabolic proximity of isotopically enriched compounds and shows the fate of the applied stable isotope labeled tracer. availability and implementation: linux and windows binaries, documentation, and sample data are freely available for download at http://massisotopolomeanalyzer.lu. mia is a stand-alone application implemented in c and based on qt5, ntfd and the metabolitedetector framework.stable isotope assisted metabolomics is widely applied to analyze metabolism and to determine reaction mechanisms . however, current approaches are usually highly targeted and only take into account a small set of metabolites. we recently demonstrated the potential of non-targeted stable isotope labeling in the analysis of hypoxic cancer cells to detect hypoxia-induced metabolic flux changes in a non-targeted manner . there have been tools available for the non-targeted and quantitative detection of isotopic enrichment in complex samples analyzed by gc-ms or lc-ms . these tools provide the isotopic enrichment of all detected compounds in the form of mass isotopomer distributions (mids), which represent the relative abundances of the different isotopic isomers (isotopologues) grouped by their masses. however, such metabolome-wide stable isotope labeling data has barely been analyzed to extract biological information in a truly non-targeted manner. one reason is, that there is still a lack of adequate software to facilitate the analysis of such datasets. without proper data analysis tools, a global mass isotopolome analysis and its biological interpretation is tedious. until recently, there was neither free nor commercial software available that sufficiently supported the biological analysis of global stable isotope labeling datasets beyond the mere detection of isotopic enrichment. to this end, we developed mia, an easy-to-use software tool to determine, visualize and analyze mass isotopomer distributions across multiple gcei-ms datasets in a non-targeted manner .non-targeted stable isotope labeling analysis is a versatile tool for metabolic research. however, it has not yet reached its full potential due to the lack of appropriate data analysis software. mia helps the user to quickly visualize and analyze this complex data and to gain new biological insights eventually. a more in-depth description of the implemented workflows and a case study applying the described workflows are available in weindl et al.  
