micc: an r package for identifying chromatin interactions from chia-pet data chia-pet is rapidly emerging as an important experimental approach to detect chroma-tin long-range interactions at high resolution. here, we present model based interaction calling from chia-pet data (micc), an easy-to-use r package to detect chromatin interactions from chia-pet sequencing data. by applying a bayesian mixture model to systematically remove random li-gation and random collision noise, micc could identify chromatin interactions with a significantly higher sensitivity than existing methods at the same false discovery rate. availability and implementation:high-throughput sequencing technologies aiming to detect chromatin interactions are rapidly developing these years. among them, chia-pet can genome-widely detect chromatin interactions that are associated with the protein of interest. it is suitable for studying physical interactions between regulatory elements, such as enhancerpromoter interactions. however, chiapet experiment suffers from high levels of noises caused by chromatin random collision events and random ligation in solution. therefore, it needs effective computational methods to process raw chia-pet data. up to now, there are few tools in hand to deal with chia-pet data. chia-pet tool is the first one freely available to the public, which combines p-values from hyper-geometric test and an arbitrary and strict threshold for no less than 3 paired-end tags (pets) to identify chromatin interactions. however, this strategy does not consider random collision noise, and the cut-off for pet-count may result in losing some relatively weaker but nonrandom interactions. recently, another method called chiasig tries to take chromatin random collision events into account. the authors showed an improvement than chia-pet tool by comparing with 5c data. however, chiasig is much too conservative, thus suffers from high false negative rate. here we present micc, an easy-to-use r package to process chia-pet data. it aims to detect chromatin interactions at a high sensitivity while controlling false discovery rate (fdr) at a reasonable level. the input of micc is raw pet clusters derived from chia-pet data. the final output of micc includes: (i) a list of posterior probabilities that describe the pet clusters as true interaction clusters and (ii) the corresponding fdr. micc can always detect significantly more interactions than chia-pet tool and chiasig at the same fdr on different datasets. the interactions detected by micc are also more consistent between biological replicates. cluster (tipc), a random collision pet cluster (rcpc) or a random ligation pet cluster (rlpc), we used three types of features: (i) pet-count c ab between anchor regions a and b, (ii) total pet-count c a c b in anchor region a (b) and (iii) genomic distance d ab between anchor regions a and b (d ab 1 if a and b are in different chromosomes). if (a, b) is an rlpc, c ab is modeled to follow a hyper-geometric distribution . if (a, b) is a tipc or rcpc, we modeled it as a discrete pareto distribution, i.e. zeta distribution since c ab follows power-law when c ab is sufficiently large (c ab !3) (supplementary). the parameters of the zeta distributions depend on d ab (supplementary) and we set it as a quadratic fractional function. it is noticed that logc a c b is significantly larger for reproducible pet 3 clusters between replicates than that of those non-reproducible ones (supplementary). thus we used c a and c b as features to estimate the prior probability of an rcpc. the feature d ab is then used to describe the prior probability for observing an rlpc to filter out random ligation noise (supplementary). the full model consists of three components, each of which is the conditional probability distribution of pet-count for tipc, rcpc and rlpc, respectively. the prior probability and parameters for each component can be described by total pet-count in anchor regions and the genomic distance between two anchors.we proposed a new method, micc, to call significant chromatin interactions from chia-pet data. compared with chia-pet tool, micc recovered a significantly greater fraction of interactions detected in higher-depth sequencing library using a much lower-depth sequencing library. it also gives a more consistent ranking for the pet clusters, thus can improve the reproducibility between experimental replicates. by comparing with 5c data, we showed that micc can detect significantly more validated interactions than chiasig. besides, the interactions with low pet-count detected bypet interactions validated by 5c (left), and fraction of total 5c validated chia-pet interactions that are predicted by either computational methods (right)micc have a significant fraction of overlapping with 5c data, suggesting micc is feasible to search for weak interactions. these features make micc superior over other existing tools especially when processing chia-pet data with less sequencing depth.  
