sequence analysis microindel detection in short-read sequence data motivation: several recent studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of resequencing and single nucleotide variant (snv) detection by deep short-read sequencing platforms. while several reliable algorithms are available for automated snv detection, the automated detection of microindels in deep short-read data presents a new bioinformatics challenge. results: we systematically analyzed how the short-read mapping tools maq, bowtie, burrows-wheeler alignment tool (bwa), novoalign and razers perform on simulated datasets that contain indels and evaluated how indels affect error rates in snv detection. we implemented a simple algorithm to compute the equivalent indel region eir, which can be used to process the alignments produced by the mapping tools in order to perform indel calling. using simulated data that contains indels, we demonstrate that indel detection works well on short-read data: the detection rate for microindels (4 bp) is 90. our study provides insights into systematic errors in snv detection that is based on ungapped short sequence read alignments. gapped alignments of short sequence reads can be used to reduce this error and to detect microindels in simulated short-read data. a comparison with microindels automatically identified on the abi sanger and roche 454 platform indicates that microindel detection from short sequence reads identifies both overlapping and distinct indels.microinsertions and microdeletions (indels) constitute a class of genetic mutations that play an important role in human genetic disease . the reliable detection of microinsertions and microdeletions is thus a prerequisite for current efforts to assess the medical relevance of genetic variation including small indels across the human genome. structural variations on the order of kilobases, whose prevalence has long been underestimated because of the lack of appropriate methods of detection, have been recently shown to be responsible for more polymorphism than single nucleotide variants (snvs) as measured by nucleotide content per genome . therefore, we hypothesized that also on the scale of only a few nucleotides, the frequency of microindels might have been underestimated.performed an analysis on sequences amplified by long-range pcr to compare three next-generation sequencing (ngs) platforms , illumina ga, roche 454 flx and abi solid, to the de facto gold standard of abi sanger sequencing. all three ngs platforms showed high sensitivity (95) in variant calling for sequence sites covered to saturation. however, for microindel detection, they only compared the results of the automated microindel detection pipeline of the roche 454 platform to abi sanger sequencing. currently only few software solutions for microindel detection in short read sequence data are available and they do not yet meet the need for unambiguous microindel positioning. in addition, the evaluation of automated microindel detection on ngs data remains difficult, as a gold standard is lackingon the abi sanger platform the automated detection of heterozygous microindels remains highly error prone . in the targeted sequence analyzed in, 11 indels were identified by abi sanger, whereas 43 additional indels that were not found by abi sanger were called by roche 454. on the other hand, there were five singlebase indels in homopolymers that were called by abi sanger but not by roche 454. this illustrates that the existing approaches to automated detection of microindels remain a technological challenge with presumably high false positive and negative rates. because of the high error rates of automated indel detection with the abi sanger platform and the roche 454 technology, we were motivated to study the potential to identify microindels in short-read sequence data produced on ngs platforms. we introduce a simple indel calling algorithm that is based on the efficient mapping of short reads and which takes into account the fact that short sequence reads containing indels may often not be unequivocally aligned to the reference genome due to the surrounding sequence. our microindel calling algorithm makes use of gapped alignments produced by efficient short-read mapping tools, such as burrows-wheeler alignment tool (bwa), novoalign or razers, in order to call snvs and indels. as the true distributions and frequencies of microindels in genomic sequences remain unknown due to technological shortcomings, we use a simulation approach to perform an analysis for varying microindel sizes and frequencies and study the effect on snvpage: 723 722729due to the large amount of short-read data that ngs platforms produce, efficient read mapping tools quickly narrow down the candidate regions where a read possibly maps. in this candidate region, local alignment algorithms are used to minimize the mismatched nucleotides and inserted gaps. an alignment score is finally used to report the best matching alignment. generally two different terms contribute to the alignment score, a penalty from mismatched bases and a penalty in case of gap insertions. the exact values of and depend, on the one hand, on global settings of the alignment algorithm that is on the applied similarity matrices and on gap opening and extension penalties. quality values of the aligned nucleotides as well as their positions in the reads can be taken into account. on the other hand, the alignment score is locally influenced by the surrounding sequence. it is crucial to understand that the optimal alignment score that is reported for a read depends on the algorithmic parameters as well as on the sequence context . this explains why one and the same read may be aligned to the very same starting and ending positions by twodifferent mapping tools and yet their alignment shapes and score may differ. a read that covers a certain microindel of a certain size, may also be aligned with a gap in one sequence context, or with mismatches in another, depending on the neighboring nucleotides . if the position of the inserted or deleted sequence is located at the beginning or end of the short sequence read or if the surrounding nucleotides are similar to the indel sequence an alignment with partially mismatched bases might yield a better alignment score and thus lead to a false alignment with respect to the true sample sequence.the genome-wide frequency of small base pair insertions and deletions might have been previously underestimated for a simple reason: traditional sequencing techniques are simply not overly good at automated detection of short indels, especially if they are heterozygous. in, the abi sanger and roche 454 platforms were used for automated indel detection. only 1 out of 36 microindels (5 bp) was detected by both platforms, suggesting high false negative and false positive rates of both page: 728 722729technologies. the pyrosequencing technology of roche 454 uses the fluorescent signal strength of incorporated nucleotides in a homopolymer to estimate its length. however the signal strength for homopolymer stretches is only linear for up to eight consecutive nucleotides, resulting in a higher error rate for larger homopolymer stretches . five indels detected by abi sanger but not by roche 454 and one indel detected by roche 454 but not by abi sanger are flanked by such homopolymers. another issue is whether indels detected in the targeted sequence are actually present in the genomic dna of the individual, or are artifacts of the long-range pcr amplification process. especially sites with short tandem repeats exhibit higher mutation rates in pcr reactions due to dna slippage . mutations that occurred during the sample amplification will thus be present at frequencies far below 100. seven of the 30 indels only detected by roche 454 are such extensions or contractions of short tandem repeats. interestingly four of these seven indels could also be seen in alignments of illumina short-reads, however they were not called as indels by our approach, as their frequency did not pass the frequency threshold of 10. this might indicate that some indels detected by roche 454 and other ngs platforms are actually false positives, due to the sample preparation. this error rate might be reduced if dna enrichment techniques are used that are not based on an in vitro amplification step. we analyzed the performance of a indel calling algorithm that uses an unambiguous definition of an indel region on simulated datasets containing indels with frequencies ranging from f indel = 0.1/kb to f indel = 10/kb and demonstrated that the sensitivity and positive predictive value are almost constant over a range of two orders of magnitude.our study has provided insight into systematic errors in snv detection that is based on short-read sequence alignments. false positive error rates in snv detection can be markedly reduced by using mapping tools that enable gapped alignments. microindel detection in short-read alignments using a simple algorithm to calculate the equivalent indel region was shown to be technically feasible in simulated datasets. the sensitivity of automated indel detection from short reads is comparable with automated indel detection methods on abi sanger or the roche 454 platform. continued improvements in our understanding of the technical issues of ngs platforms will allow the development of more sophisticated analysis methodologies.  
