mimeanto: profiling functional rna in mutational interference mapping experiments the mutational interference mapping experiment (mime) is a powerful method that, coupled to a bioinformatics analysis pipeline, allows the identification of domains and structures in rna that are important for its function. in mime, target rnas are randomly mutated, selected by function, physically separated and sequenced using next-generation sequencing (ngs). quantitative effects of each mutation at each position in the rna can be recovered with statistical certainty using the herein developed user-friendly, cross-platform software mimeanto (mime analysis tool). availability and implementation: mimeanto is implemented in c using the boost library as well as qt for the graphical user interface and is distributed under gpl (http://www.gnu.org/li cences/gpl). the libraries are statically linked in a stand alone executable and are not required on the system. the plots are generated with gnuplot. gnuplot-iostream (https://github.com/dstahlke/ gnuplot-iostream) serves as gnuplot interface. standalone executables including examples and source code can be downloaded from https://github.com/maureensmith/mimeanto.rna has long been believed to mainly serve as a blueprint for proteins. however, a large diversity of so called noncoding rnas have been discovered lately to regulate virtually all cellular processes . characterizing functional domains and structurefunctionrelationships in rna is a major challenge as classical experimental approaches are time-consuming and require substantial investigator expertise. to overcome these obstacles we recently developed mime , where rna is randomly mutated, selected-byfunction (e.g. binding to a protein), physically separated and sequenced using ngs. consequently, quantitative effects of mutations at every nucleotide position can be recovered after a single experiment. the mutation frequencies (recovered from ngs) in the functionally selected vs. non-selected pools contain information about the function and structural commitment of each nucleotide within the analyzed rna: i.e. a mutation that does not affect selection is not required for the function of the rna. since ngs-reads r from the mime experiment are confounded by errors introduced during library preparation and sequencing (see; allowing the relative dissociation constant of mutation m at nucleotide position i, kd m =kd w i, to be re-computed in a jackknifelike fashion for each position j 2 jni. above, r m;w i; j denotes the number of reads that carry a mutation m at position i and a wildtype residue at position j 6 i and e j j w!m i denotes the expected probability of falsely detecting a wild type at position i as a mutant m, which is used for error-correction. in this note, we present the user-friendly cross-platform software mimeanto, which evaluates mime data, following error-correction, statistical ascertainment and quality assessment. mathematical foundations and a user-manual are provided as supplementary texts. mimeanto has a wizard-like graphical user interface, guiding through the data analysis procedure in three steps: (i) data input and assessment, (ii) sequencing and reverse transcription error correction and (iii) quantification of raw effects and quality filtering. note because rna is structurally flexible, our method is unique as it allows to characterize functionally relevant structure(s) of the rna, which can inform fundamental research, as well as drug design.  
