gene expression mimsg: a target enrichment algorithm for predicted mir–mrna interactions based on relative ranking of matched expression data motivation: algorithms predicting microrna (mir)mrna interactions generate high numbers of possible interactions, many of which might be non-existent or irrelevant in a certain biological context. it is desirable to develop a transparent, user-friendly, unbiased tool to enrich mirmrna predictions. results: the mimsg algorithm uses matched mir/mrna expression data to enrich mirmrna predictions. it grades interactions by the number, magnitude and significance of misplacements in the combined ranking profiles of mir/mrna expression assessed over multiple biological samples. mimsg requires minimal user input and makes no statistical assumptions. it identified 921 out of 56 262 interactions as top scoring and significant in an actual germ cell cancer dataset. twenty-eight mirmrna pairs were deemed of highest interest based on ranking by mimsg and supported by current knowledge about validated interactions and biological function. to conclude, mimsg is an effective algorithm to reduce a high number of predicted interactions to a small set of high confidence interactions for further study. availability and implementation: matlab source code and datasets available at www.martinrijlaarsdam.nl/mimsgmicrornas (mirs) are a subclass of a large group of noncoding rnas that play an important role in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression, crucially influencing development and physiology . in addition, mirs also contribute to initiation and progression of diseases, including cancer . around 2000 mirs have been identified in mammals so far, each possibly regulating (protein levels of) hundreds of different mrnas according to available prediction algorithms . much research has been done to elucidate the regulation of mrna levels by mirs. initial results showed that in plants mrna degradation occurs by fully complementary binding of mirs to open reading frames . in animals, mirs were hypothesized to predominantly repress translation by binding of partially complementary sequences to their targets mrnas 3 0-untranslated region, hence not leading to mrna degradation . however, mrna degradation as a consequence of mir binding has also been demonstrated in animals . in general, induction of mir expression results in reduced levels of their mrna targets, while depletion of a specific mir will lead higher target levels . inactivation of the mir processing pathway also leads to higher overall levels of mrna targets . therefore, the current dogma acknowledges that both translational repression and mrna degradation are present in plants and animals . these effects on mrna levels are also detectable in gene expression data . degradation of mrnas by mirs can be detected in highthroughput expression data and can be successfully applied to enrich the many possible interactions suggested by sequencebased prediction algorithms , e.g. targetscan , miranda or pictar . in this article, a novel method (mimsg) will be presented to enrich predicted mirmrna interactions within a specific biological context. the algorithm uses matched high-throughput mir and mrna expression data of biological samples. the mimsg algorithm is based on relative ranking (rr) profiles of the expression data and does not directly assess the absolute expression levels. therefore, the algorithm can be applied to detect small effects of mirs on to whom correspondence should be addressed. mrna, inferring power by detecting patterns over multiple biological samples. in recent literature, various other computational methods have been applied to matched mrna and mir expression data including regression, correlation analysis and bayesian learning algorithms [detailed comparison and review of previously published related methods is provided in supplementary data a and (. in comparison, mimsg is independent of the methods used to measure expression levels and the statistical properties of the data. it also only needs a minimal number of user-defined parameters and has built-in quality control. finally, it yields a result that is directly related to the observed expression patterns and also supplies a visualization tool for individual interactions. mimsg is extensively benchmarked against other methods using 16 different (sub)sets of cancer-related expression data. benchmarking shows that non-parametric correlation methods are inferior to the other algorithms tested. for the remaining algorithms, results vary strongly depending on the dataset, and overlap is minimal, identifying mimsg as a valuable alternative. as a proof of principle, mimsg is applied to germ cell tumor (gct) data, investigating mrna degradation, as most mir have an inhibitory effect on mrna/protein levels. in this deregulated (cancer) context, mimsg identified validated relevant interactions and mirs/mrnas.  
