minimal cut sets in a metabolic network are elementary modes in a dual network motivation: elementary modes (ems) and minimal cut sets (mcss) provide important techniques for metabolic network modeling. whereas ems describe minimal subnetworks that can function in steady state, mcss are sets of reactions whose removal will disable certain network functions. effective algorithms were developed for em computation while calculation of mcss is typically addressed by indirect methods requiring the computation of ems as initial step. results: in this contribution, we provide a method that determines mcss directly without calculating the ems. we introduce a duality framework for metabolic networks where the enumeration of mcss in the original network is reduced to identifying the ems in a dual network. as a further extension, we propose a generalization of mcss in metabolic networks by allowing the combination of inhomogeneous constraints on reaction rates. this framework provides a promising tool to open the concept of ems and mcss to a wider class of applications.modeling and analysis of complex metabolic networks is a central area of research in systems biology. stoichiometric or constraintbased modeling relying on the assumption of steady state in the metabolites has become a key methodology to analyze functional properties of large-or even genome-scale metabolic networks . one of these approaches is flux balance analysis (fba), which uses linear programming in conjunction with a linear objective function to compute particular stationary flux vectors, corresponding e.g. to optimal growth . another approach for metabolic network and pathway analysis is based on elementary modes (ems), which are steady-state flux vectors involving a minimal set of reactions . ems analysis allows identification of balanced metabolic pathways and cycles and to study a multitude of functional network properties to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. co-senior authors.[for a review see. one important application of ems is the computation of intervention strategies, e.g. for metabolic engineering . a particular approach for rational (re)design of metabolic networks built upon ems is the computation of minimal cut sets (mcss). in the original work , mcss were introduced as minimal sets of reactions whose deletion will block the operation of a given objective or target reaction; i.e. removal of an mcs implies a zero flux for the target reaction in steady state. generalizations of this definition were presented afterwards, e.g. for blocking the operation of arbitrary sets of ems or/and for accounting for side constraints . the problem of computing ems results in the computation of extreme rays of convex polyhedral cones and is well studied in systems biology. although a full enumeration is still not possible for most genome-scale models, considerable algorithmic improvements could be achieved over the last years (;;), and the computation of tens of millions of ems is now, in principle, possible. regarding the enumeration of mcss, three different approaches have been proposed so far (; upper half). the first is based on an a priori calculation of ems with subsequent calculation of the minimal hitting sets of the (target) ems. this approach is also known as computing a hypergraphs transversals: the support patterns of the target ems give rise to an undirected hypergraph and the minimal hitting sets (which are then the mcss) correspond to those transversals whose entire set spans another hypergraph, the transversal hypergraph. the algorithm introduced inrepresents one variant for computing all transversals of the hypergraph of a given set of ems. however, this algorithm requires the enumeration of many partial solutions, which leads to an extensive running time and memory usage. as shown in, the computation of mcss as minimal hitting sets from a set of ems can significantly be accelerated by using berges algorithm , which is a fast method to compute hypergraph transversals.presented also a completely different approach to compute mcss, which is based on the joint-generation algorithm and generates both the ems and the mcss simultaneously. however, both techniqueshypergraph transversal (minimal hitting sets) as well as joint-generation algorithmeither need the ems of the metabolic network or generate them as a byproduct although they might not be of interest.here we propose a method to compute mcss directly without knowing the ems. a brute-force procedure to achieve this could be to use fba to test systematically all 1-,2-,3-,.... combinations of knock-outs for their ability to imply the desired blocking of targeted flux vectors . however, such an approach again becomes quickly prohibitive for mcss with larger cardinalities. a slightly different concept are minimal direction cuts introduced by. these cuts allow to cancel only one direction of reversible reactions, which can also be embedded in the model of mcss by splitting reversible directions and target one of them. however, the concept of minimal direction cuts allows for a direct computation by means of the farkas lemma . the enumeration of all minimal cuts is accomplished by solving iteratively (general) mixed integer linear programs. in contrast, our approach relies on the notion of a dual network whose stoichiometric matrix is basically given by the transposed stoichiometric matrix of the original system. based on the farkas lemma, we will show that the computation of mcss is equivalent to finding the ems in the dual network . in particular, the duality implies also the other way around: ems in the original metabolic network correspond to mcss in the dual. additionally, our duality framework enables us to expand the concept of ems and mcss (originally defined for homogeneous constraints only) for systems with inhomogeneous constraints that can model e.g. boundaries for the reaction rates or for linear combinations of fluxes. the computation of ems and mcss remain the same in this generalization while the expressive power highly increases.  
