minimap and miniasm: fast mapping and de novo assembly for noisy long sequences motivation: single molecule real-time (smrt) sequencing technology and oxford nanopore technologies (ont) produce reads over 10 kb in length, which have enabled high-quality genome assembly at an affordable cost. however, at present, long reads have an error rate as high as 10 15. complex and computationally intensive pipelines are required to assemble such reads. results: we present a new mapper, minimap and a de novo assembler, miniasm, for efficiently mapping and assembling smrt and ont reads without an error correction stage. they can often assemble a sequencing run of bacterial data into a single contig in a few minutes, and assemble 45-fold caenorhabditis elegans data in 9 min, orders of magnitude faster than the existing pipelines , though the consensus sequence error rate is as high as raw reads. we also introduce a pair-wise read mapping format and a graphical fragment assembly format, and demonstrate the inter-operability between ours and current tools. availability and implementation:high-throughput short-read sequencing technologies, such as illumina, have empowered a variety of biological researches and clinical applications that would not be practical with the older sanger sequencing. however, the short read length (typically a few hundred basepairs) has posed a great challenge to de novo assembly as many repetitive sequences and segmental duplications are longer than the read length and can hardly be resolved by short reads even with paired-end data . although with increased read length and improved algorithms we are now able to produce much better short-read assemblies than a few years ago, the contiguity and completeness of the assemblies are still not as good as sanger assemblies . the pacbios smrt technology were developed partly as an answer to the problem with short-read de novo assembly. however, due to the high per-base error rate, around 15, these reads were only used as a complement to short reads initially , untildemonstrated the feasibility of smrt-only assembly. since then, smrt is becoming the preferred technology for finishing small genomes and producing high-quality eukaryotic genomes . oxford nanopore technologies (ont) has recently offered another long-read sequencing technology. although the per-base error rate was high at the early access phase , the latest data quality has been greatly improved.confirmed that we can achieve high-quality bacterial assembly with ont data alone. published long-read assembly pipelines all include four stages:(i) all-vs-all raw read mapping, (ii) raw read error correction, (iii) assembly of error corrected reads and (iv) contig consensus polish. stage (iii) may involve all-vs-all read mapping again, but as the error rate is much reduced at this step, it is easier and faster than stage (i).shows the tools used for each stage. notably, our tool minimap is a raw read overlapper and miniasm is an assembler. we do not correct sequencing errors, but instead directly produce unpolished and uncorrected contig sequences from raw read overlaps. the idea of correction-free assembly was inspired by talks given by gene, each stage can be achieved with multiple tools. although we have successfully combined tools into different pipelines, we need to change or convert the input/output formats to make them work together. another contribution of this article is the proposal of concise mapping and assembly formats, which will hopefully encourage modular design of assemblers and the associated tools.  
