minimum curvilinearity to enhance topological prediction of protein interactions by network embedding motivation: most functions within the cell emerge thanks to proteinprotein interactions (ppis), yet experimental determination of ppis is both expensive and time-consuming. ppi networks present significant levels of noise and incompleteness. predicting interactions using only ppi-network topology (topological prediction) is difficult but essential when prior biological knowledge is absent or unreliable. methods: network embedding emphasizes the relations between network proteins embedded in a low-dimensional space, in which protein pairs that are closer to each other represent good candidate interactions. to achieve network denoising, which boosts prediction performance , we first applied minimum curvilinear embedding (mce), and then adopted shortest path (sp) in the reduced space to assign likelihood scores to candidate interactions. furthermore, we introduce (i) a new valid variation of mce, named non-centred mce (ncmce); (ii) two automatic strategies for selecting the appropriate embedding dimension ; and (iii) two new randomized procedures for evaluating predictions. results: we compared our method against several unsupervised and supervisedly tuned embedding approaches and node neighbourhood techniques. despite its computational simplicity, ncmce-sp was the overall leader, outperforming the current methods in topological link prediction. conclusion: minimum curvilinearity is a valuable non-linear framework that we successfully applied to the embedding of protein networks for the unsupervised prediction of novel ppis. the rationale for our approach is that biological and evolutionary information is imprinted in the non-linear patterns hidden behind the protein network topology, and can be exploited for predicting new protein links. the predicted ppis represent good candidates for testing in high-throughput experiments or for exploitation in systems biology tools such as those used for network-based inference and prediction of disease-related functional modules.detection of new interactions between proteins is central to modern biology. its application in protein function prediction, drug delivery control and disease diagnosis has developed alongside a deeper understanding of the processes that occur within the cell. one key task in systems biology is the experimental detection of new proteinprotein interactions (ppis). however, such experiments are time consuming and expensive. because of this, researchers have developed computational approaches for predicting novel interactions , intended also to guide wet lab experiments. the topological prediction of new interactions is a novel and useful option based exclusively on the structural information provided by the ppi network (ppin) topology. this option for prediction is particularly convenient when the available biological information on the proteins being tested for interaction (seed proteins) is incomplete or unreliable. one of the most efficient approaches is the functional similarity weight (fsw) . such method belongs to the large and well-established family of predictors that are referred to as node neighbourhood techniques , because to assign a likelihood score to any candidate interaction (i.e. a pair of non-connected proteins in the observed ppin), they rely on the topological properties of the seed proteins neighbours. the set of candidate interactions is then ranked. the main problem with these techniques is that their performance is poor when applied to sparse and noisy networks .proposed a method for geometric denoising of ppins. the algorithm is based on the use of multidimensional scaling (mds) to preserve the shortest paths (sp) between nodes in a low dimensional space. the predicted interactions are scored according to their euclidean distance (ed) in the low dimensional space, following the principle that the closer two proteins are, the higher the likelihood that they interact . although it is not explicitly mentioned in the article, the embedding method adopted byis equivalent to isomap . in an independent study,proposed a hybrid strategy based on network embedding to assign prediction scores to candidate interactions. they exploited the notion that a ppinor theoretically, any networklies on a low dimensional manifold shaped in a high-dimensional space. the shape of the manifold and the associated topology are determined by the constraints imposed on the protein interactions through biological evolution. you et al. used a renowned manifold-embedding algorithm, isomap , to to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
