mintbase: a framework for the interactive exploration of mitochondrial and nuclear trna fragments motivation: it has been known that mature transfer rnas (trnas) that are encoded in the nuclear genome give rise to short molecules, collectively known as trna fragments or trfs. recently, we reported that, in healthy individuals and in patients, trfs are constitutive, arise from mitochondrial as well as from nuclear trnas, and have composition and abundances that depend on a persons sex, population origin and race as well as on tissue, disease and disease subtype. our findings as well as similar work by other groups highlight the importance of trfs and presage an increase in the communitys interest in elucidating the roles of trfs in health and disease. results: we created mintbase, a web-based framework that serves the dual-purpose of being a content repository for trfs and a tool for the interactive exploration of these newly discovered molecules. a key feature of mintbase is that it deterministically and exhaustively enumerates all possible gen-omic locations where a sequence fragment can be found and indicates which fragments are exclusive to trna space, and thus can be considered as trfs: this is a very important consideration given that the genomes of higher organisms are riddled with partial trna sequences and with trna-lookalikes whose aberrant transcripts can be mistaken for trfs. mintbase is extremely flexible and integrates and presents trf information from multiple yet interconnected vantage points (vistas). vistas permit the user to interactively personalize the information that is returned and the manner in which it is displayed. mintbase can report comparative information on how a trf is distributed across all anti-codon/amino acid combinations, provides alignments between a trna and multiple trfs with which the user can interact, provides details on published studies that reported a trf as expressed, etc. importantly, we designed mintbase to contain all possible trfs that could ever be produced by mature trnas: this allows us to report on their genomic distributions, anticodon/amino acid properties, alignments, etc. while giving users the ability to at-will investigate candidate trf molecules before embarking on focused experimental explorations. lastly, we also introduce a new labeling scheme that is trf-sequence-based and allows users to associate a trf with a universally unique label (trf-license plate) that is independent of a genome assembly and does not require any brokering mechanism. availability and implementation: mintbase is freely accessible attransfer rna (trna) molecules serve as the bridge between the messenger rna that is being translated and the newly synthesized polypeptide chain, and, thus, are an integral part of the translation process, as described by the central dogma of biology . not surprisingly, trnas have long been considered to serve as housekeeping molecules. in recent years, the use of next generation sequencing to investigate cellular transcriptomes has uncovered ample evidence that a trna can also be a source of a rich repertoire of non-coding rnas (ncrnas) . these derivative molecules are referred to as trna-derived fragments or trfs, are generally short, correspond to segments of variable length and their functions are largely unknown. it is important to note that trfs are not restricted to human biology; indeed, they have been reported in multiple organisms . earlier work recognized four structural types of molecules originating from the mature trna: 5 0-halves, 3 0-halves, 5 0-trfs and 3 0-trfs . the 5 0-halves and 3 0-halves result from angiogenin cleavage of the mature trna at the anticodon loop, and are typically 33 nucleotides (nt) in length. the 5 0-trfs and 3 0-trfs are of variable length, shorter than halves ( 30 nt) and originate from cleavage of the mature trna at the d and t arms, respectively. in recent work, we described a previously unreported fifth structural type of trfs, the internal trfs or i-trfs . the sequences of i-trfs are wholly contained within the span of the mature trna sequence . in terms of length, i-trfs are atypical in that they can be as short as 5 0-trfs/3 0-trfs (e.g. 17-mers) and at least as long as 5 0-halves/3 0-halves (e.g. 33-mers) . we also found that the 5 0-trf and 3 0-trf types have richer diversity than previously known, comprising molecules with many distinct and quantized lengths. in addition, we showed that the trnas of the mitochondrial genome (mitochondrially encoded) are a very rich source of both halves and trfs, just like the trnas that are encoded by the nuclear genome (nuclearly encoded). interestingly, the length distribution and other properties of all five structural types of fragments that are derived from mitochondrially encoded trnas differ from those of the fragments arising from nuclearly encoded trnas . in terms of function, trfs are diverse. not only has loading on argonaute (ago) and participation in transcriptional repression been associated with trfs , but it is also a cell-type-dependent process as we reported in . the regulation of translation initiation , the formation of stress granules , and the displacement of mrnas from rna-binding proteins by the newly discovered i-trfs are also among the trfs emerging roles. recently, our group also showed that the structural type of trna-half can adopt multiple active instances that are distinguished by differences in their 3 0-terminus modifications (e.g. a cyclic phosphate group instead of the typical hydroxyl), that the expression of these modified trna halves (shot-rnas) can depend on sex hormones, and that their silencing impedes cell proliferation . working with transcriptomes from human tissues, instead of cell lines, we were able to generate evidence of intriguing associations involving trna fragments. in particular, we showed that the expression profiles of 5 0-halves, 3 0-halves, 5 0-trfs, 3 0-trfs and i-trfs from mitochondrially and nuclearly encoded trnas depend on tissue, tissue state, disease subtype and on an individuals sex, population origin and race . moreover, we showed that these molecules are produced constitutively . our discoveries of the existence of richer categories of 5 0-/3 0trfs and of the previously unrecognized i-trfs, our finding that mitochondrially encoded trnas are also sources of trna fragments with profiles that differ distinctly from those of their nuclearly encoded counterparts as well as the numerous dependencies on tissue, disease and an individuals attributes, which we uncovered, generate an acute need for an integrated and multi-faceted access to this knowledge. the current solutions, e.g. , only partially meet this need while also offering limited search and userinteraction capabilities. moreover, by considering short sequences (e.g. 14-nt, 15-nt, 16-nt, etc.) in a probabilistic search scheme whose performance is known to be influenced by the length of the query , instead of employing a deterministic and exhaustive approach such as the one we described in , the current schemes increase the likelihood that aberrant transcripts will be misreported as trfs . compounding these limitations are several facts that pertain to the idiosyncrasies of trna sequences and impose very concrete limitations on how one must go about identifying trna fragments among the reads of next generation sequencing datasets. as we detailed at length in , and more recently in , the. this is a pictorial summary of the five structural categories of trna fragments that are now known to arise from mature trnas, both mitochondrially and nuclearly encoded ones mapping of such reads must be deterministic and exhaustive, should not permit replacements or insertions/deletions, and, most importantly, take into account the fact that the human genome is riddled with partial trna sequences and with trna-lookalikes . here, we present a knowledge repository and interactive framework for the exploration of mi-tochondrial and n-uclear t-rfs (mintbase). mintbase recognizes that distinct isodecoders of the same anticodon comprise sequence segments that can differ ever so slightly from one another. consequently, mintbase does not group together instances of a structural type across isodecoders of the same anticodon (e.g. the 5 0-halves from all aspgtc isodecoders): if we were to allow such a grouping, we would hinder the users ability to elucidate the differences of these distinct instances in terms of transcription and of genomic distribution. instead, mintbase treats each such trf as a molecule that can be studied independently in its own right. mintbase also introduces and adopts a second labeling scheme, one that associates each trf with a unique label (trf-license plate) that is derived from the trfs nucleotide sequence. the uniqueness of the label ensures that a trf-license plate corresponds to a unique nucleotide sequence. this new labeling approach complements the genome-centric labeling scheme that we introduced in , and which is also used by mintbase. mintbase comprehensively embraces this newly discovered complexity of the trf biology, incorporates the latest discoveries in this field, brings about the various interconnections among trfs and provides access to what is already known via goal-oriented displays while also remaining flexible enough to easily accommodate future discoveries. mintbase is freely accessible at http://cm.jefferson.edu/ mintbase/. codes for generating trf-license plates and for converting them back to nucleotide sequences are available at https:// cm.jefferson.edu/mintcodes/.we presented mintbase, a novel framework for studying fragments that arise from mitochondrial and nuclear mature trnas. mintbase is an easy-to-use resource for accessing information on trfs and interactively studying them from diverse vantage points using one or more of the five available vistas. each vista provides distinct functionalities and its output is interconnected to some of the other four vistas, which in turn enables exploration of the active results from multiple angles at any time. the output pages provide filtering and sorting capabilities thereby permitting an interactive study and further filtering of the active results by the user. for example, the user can easily group the results to investigate possible connections to a type of trf, a specific source trna, number of instances in trna space, etc. additionally, several output pages also include links to external databases (e.g. the ucsc genome browser, pubmed, etc.) aimed at providing the user with other easily accessible information. mintbase offers several advantages. first, it addresses the need for a database that includes the most recent discoveries in the field of trfs and trna biology. the discoveries of the new structural type of i-trfs, of trfs produced from mitochondrial trnas and of shot-rnas, represent recent advances that are already part of mintbases knowledge repository. second, three of the five vistas that mintbase makes available are meant to capture and highlight the inherent complexity of the space of mature trnas while illustrating at the same time the ambiguity among parental trna genes: the genomic loci vista provides a detailed perspective on the possible genomic origins of a trf whereas the rna molecule and trf summary vistas summarize the distribution of each trf molecule across the various anticodons/isodecoders from which it could arise. thereby, mintbase allows the user to retrieve information in multiple ways while also keeping at the forefront the complexity of the trna space throughout the users interactive session. third, mintbase has been built to incorporate the spectrum of all possible trfs (currently up to 50 nt in lengthlonger trfs can be accommodated trivially) that can ever arise from a mature trna, whether it is mitochondrially or nuclearly encoded. our intent was to design a tool that can further promote research activities in the field of trfs. thus, in addition to listing molecules with known expression, mintbase can optionally provide detailed information on fragments that could potentially derive from mature trnas and for which no information exists yet in the public domain. such candidate trfs can serve as the subject of focused experimental studies by mintbases users. lastly, mintbase permits users to add their own datasets to the repository. this is done easily through the use of a submission conduit that we also provide. save a mandatory manual verification of the provided information the process is entirely automated. in summary, we hope mintbase will prove a useful framework for researchers who study trnas and trfs by providing quick access to the available knowledge, by juxtaposing relevant information in order to enable comparative analyses, by adopting and using both genome-centric and sequence-centric labeling schemes and by enabling web-based exploratory studies through its user-friendly, trna-centric interface.  
