data and text mining @minter: automated text-mining of microbial interactions motivation: microbial consortia are frequently defined by numerous interactions within the community that are key to understanding their function. while microbial interactions have been extensively studied experimentally, information regarding them is dispersed in the scientific literature. as manual collation is an infeasible option, automated data processing tools are needed to make this information easily accessible. results: we present @minter, an automated information extraction system based on support vector machines to analyze paper abstracts and infer microbial interactions. @minter was trained and tested on a manually curated gold standard dataset of 735 species interactions and 3917 annotated abstracts, constructed as part of this study. cross-validation analysis showed that @minter was able to detect abstracts pertaining to one or more microbial interactions with high specificity (specificity 95, auc 0.97). despite challenges in identifying specific microbial interactions in an abstract (interaction level recall 95, precision 25), @minter was shown to reduce annota-tor workload 13-fold compared to alternate approaches. applying @minter to 175 bacterial species abundant on human skin, we identified a network of 357 literature-reported microbial interactions, demonstrating its utility for the study of microbial communities. availability and implementation: @minter is freely available at https://github.com/csb5/atminter.in its natural state, microbial life often does not form a homogenous population, but is instead present as heterogeneous communities composed of distinct species i.e. a microbiome. microbiomes are virtually ubiquitous amongst telluric environments; soil, banknotes and even macroscopic organisms are all environmental niches that play host to one or more microbial communities . in recent years, microbial consortia resident in the human body have become a topic of particular interest. the human microbiome is now known to be intricately linked to overall human health . microbiome dysfunction has been implicated in a number of disease conditions , while bacteria in a healthy microbiome are known to act in a mutualistic fashion towards their host . despite this, the ecological structure and functional interconnections of the human microbiome are still not well understood . these gaps in our knowledge can be attributed in part to the fundamental complexity of microbial communities. microbiota functions as a system of multiple interdependent actors . the stability and dynamics of this system are thus not the direct result of any one organism but instead emerge from the sum total of the interactions contained within . understanding the functional behavior of a microbiome thus requires information on not only the composition of the microbiome, but also how its individual components interact . data from large-scale studies of the human microbiome provide an avenue for a data-driven understanding of interactions within a community. these studies typically use high-throughput sequencing to quantify individual abundances within a microbial community. these abundances can then be used by a number of statistical techniques to predict microbial interactions . however, the general performance of such methods can be difficult to assess in the absence of a gold standard database of experimentally validated interactions. microbial interactions have long been experimentally investigated. coculture experiments and growth assays allow for identification of both direction and strength of bacterial interactions . however, current information describing microbial interactions is spread across a large, constantly increasing set of papers; pubmed alone references upwards of 24 million articles at the time of writing, of which almost two million refer to bacteria. consolidation of literature curated data into a single gold-standard database would be a valuable resource for refining microbial interaction models. however, the sheer quantity of information makes this an imposing proposition with brute-force manual collation being infeasible. microbial interactions are not the first field to experience this challenge. the implementation of automated systems for information extraction has been frequently used to mine large datasets such as the unstructured text compendiums of scientific literature. textmining techniques have shown promising results in biomedical information extraction tasks involving proteinprotein interactions (ppis) , diseasedrug/drugdrug interactions and literature annotation among others. for example, the database prebind augmented traditional curation methods with a ppi identification system. by pre-filtering of the literature to remove irrelevant data, they achieved an estimated 60 reduction in annotation time . for microbial interactions,performed the pioneering, and at the time of writing, only automated analysis of the literature surrounding microbial interactions. they analyzed the co-occurrence of bacterial species in the literature through a statistical testing approach, organizing hits into a co-occurrence network. however, other than this study, text-mining has not been applied for the identification of microbial interactions. in particular, the application of machine learning approaches has not been explored and is also not straightforward, as evidence for a microbial interaction can be embedded in a hard to parse fashion in paper abstracts. for example, a paper abstract could describe the production of a specific molecule m by species a in the first part of the abstract, while the second part highlights the reduction in growth of species b in the presence of m, without explicitly stating that a can inhibit the growth of b. while this is a simplified example, in practice, even more complex textual and logical analysis may be needed to mine this information. a more tractable approach may be to use combinations of keywords to first identify abstracts reporting microbial interactions as proposed here. an additional challenge for machine learning approaches is the absence of sufficiently large datasets for model training. here, we describe @minter (acronym for automated text-mining of microbial interactions), a machine-learning-based text-mining system for automated identification and extraction of microbial interaction data. @minter complements manual annotation and curation through the identification of potentially informative texts, to accelerate the pace of data curation. the @minter system comprises two core components, a bioconductor-based crawler for the acquisition of article data and a support-vector machine (svm)-based classifier for the identification of abstracts containing interaction information. for comparison, we also evaluated the performance of the co-occurrence method devised by freilich et al., as well as a rudimentary pattern-based classifier available as part of @minter. @minters svm-based approach was found to classify abstracts containing one or more microbial interactions with a specificity of 95 and notably reduce annotator workload for identifying specific microbial interactions (13-fold compared to competing approaches). in addition, we present a large annotated dataset for microbial interactions consisting of 3917 abstracts (annotated to describe the presence and type of the interaction), as well as a collated set of 735 known species interactions, that can serve as a resource for the development of new interaction mining algorithms. in addition, as a proof-of-concept, @minter was employed to systematically construct a curated database of interactions between 175 bacterial species commonly found on human skin, highlighting the feasibility of large-scale use and providing a resource for ongoing studies of the human microbiome.  
