mir2go: comparative functional analysis for micrornas mir2go is a web-based platform for comparative analyses of human mirna functions. it includes two programs: mirmut2go and mirpair2go. mirmut2go implements a knowledge-based method to assess the functional effects of genetic and somatic mutations in microrna seed regions. the functional effects of a mutation are analysed by semantic comparison of enriched gene ontology (go) annotations of the target gene sets for the wild-type and mutated alleles. mirpair2go compares the functions of two different mirnas based on the enriched functional annotations of their target gene sets. availability and implementation: the mir2go web server is available at http://compbio.uthsc.edu/ mir2go.micrornas (mirna) are important post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression. it has been estimated that 60 of protein coding genes are potential targets of mirna regulation . the most important regulatory signal of a mirna, the information guiding its target recognition, is primarily encoded in the seed region (nucleotides 27 in mature mirna sequences). because a mirna often have a large number of target genes, a mirna seed mutation, may affect the regulation of many genes simultaneously. thus, genetic and somatic mutations in mirna seeds may have broad impacts on target gene expression and have been linked to various diseases . microrna functions can be predicted and annotated by linking the target genes to diseases and gene ontology (go) terms . however, such analyses are based only on wild-type mirnas and do not study the effects of mirna mutations. the functional effects of a mirna seed mutation can be assessed by comparative analysis of predicted target genes for the wild-type and mutated alleles of the mirna. differences and similarities in the enriched functional annotations of the reference (in this paper, the set of target genes for the wild-type mirna are called reference targets, the set of target genes for the mutated mirna are called derived targets, the genes in both sets are called common targets.) and derived target genes reflect the overall functional impacts of the mutation. here, we developed the mir2go web server to provide a computational tool for the assessment of functional impacts of genetic and somatic mutations in mirna seed regions. the first program of this web server, mirmut2go, allows users to analyse the changes of target genes caused by mirna seed mutations and view the functional impacts of these changes in go graphs. the second function of the web server, mirpair2go, allows users to perform comparative functional analysis of different mirnas.with the advance in genomic technologies, the number of newly identified genetic and somatic mutations in mirna seeds has been increasing very rapidly in recent years. there was virtually no known mirna seed snps when we created the polymirts database and only 20 snps were mapped to the human mirna seed regions when we developed polymirts 2.0 . the number of human mirna seed snps increased to 271 in polymirts 3.0 . currently, 517 snps can be mapped to the seed regions of 414 human mirnas using the genomic coordinates of snps in dbsnp and the mirna data in mirbase . somatic mutations have also been found in mirna seed regions . there is a great need to analyse the functional impacts of the mirna seed mutations. mir2go provides a web-based tool to address this challenge. it integrates mirna target prediction, go enrichment analysis and semantic comparison of functional annotations to analyse the functional impacts of mutations in mirna seed regions. it also uses the same workflow to compare the functions of different mirnas. it is noteworthy that mir2go can also be used to predict the functional impacts of any hypothetical seed mutations or compare the functions of designed mirna sequence with existing mirnas, which might be useful in artificial mirna design . mir2go relies on mirna target prediction tools to generate target gene sets. the default mirna target prediction tool of mir2go is targetscan. in a recent comprehensive assessments of mirna target prediction methods , targetscan was one of the best predictors with an auc (area under the roc curve) of 0.748 at the gene level. although this is a reasonably good predictive performance, obviously mir2go can benefit from more accurate mirna target prediction. because mir2go uses a modular framework, better target prediction tools can be easily incorporated when they become available.  
