data and text mining mircancer: a microrna–cancer association database constructed by text mining on literature motivation: research interests in micrornas have increased rapidly in the past decade. many studies have showed that micrornas have close relationships with various human cancers, and they potentially could be used as cancer indicators in diagnosis or as a suppressor for treatment purposes. there are several databases that contain micrornacancer associations predicted by computational methods but few from empirical results. despite the fact that abundant experiments investigating microrna expressions in cancer cells have been carried out, the results have remain scattered in the literature. we propose to extract micrornacancer associations by text mining and store them in a database called mircancer. results: the text mining is based on 75 rules we have constructed, which represent the common sentence structures typically used to state microrna expressions in cancers. the micrornacancer association database, mircancer, is updated regularly by running the text mining algorithm against pubmed. all mirnacancer associations are confirmed manually after automatic extraction. mircancer currently documents 878 relationships between 236 micrornas and 79 human cancers through the processing of 426 000 published articles. availability: mircancer is freely available on the web atmicrornas (mirnas) are small non-coding rnas that regulate gene expressions by base pairing to messenger rnas. although the first mirna, lin-4, was introduced in 1993 , it did not draw much attention until 2000, when the second mirna, let-7, was characterized. studies found that let-7 regulates a couple of gene expressions in caenorhabditis elegans development, and is conserved in many species . since then, many techniques have been developed to identify mirnas. as of november 2012, 430 000 mature mirna sequences have been identified with a growth of 410 000 in the past year. current findings suggest that mirnas play an important role in crucial biological processes, such as cell proliferation , apoptosis , development , differentiation and metabolism . among these, mirna association with disease, especially the association between mirna and human cancers, has attracted a great deal of interest in both scientific and business fields. cancer is a leading cause of death worldwide. it is estimated that cancer caused 7.6 million deaths in 2008, about 13 of all deaths globally (http://turl.ca/xndn). by 2010, cancer surpassed heart disease as the top killer in usa for the first time. there are many possible carcinogens including tobacco, radiation, chemicals, environmental toxins, viruses and genetic problems. however, the causes of many cancers remain unknown. cancer involves unregulated cell growth, thereby invading nearby parts of body during development. early diagnosis before proliferation usually makes a difference in treatment and survival rate. the fact that mirna expression levels vary significantly between normal cells and cancer cells suggests that mirna might be associated with cancer development and potentially could be used for cancer diagnosis or even treatment. even though it is uncertain whether cancer is a cause or consequence of deviant mirna expression, mirna fingerprints are found in all types of analysed cancers, such as lung cancer, breast cancer, cervical cancer and lymphoblastic leukemia . numerous databases have been created to document mirna functionalities either from computational predictions or from experimental results. although computational target prediction methods are fast, experimental validation of mirna functionalities is also needed. the significant increase in validation experiments raises the need for having a database to store these results in some uniform way. however, compared with databases providing computationally predicted mirna functions, databases storing experimental mirna targets are rare. most of these experimentally verified mirna target databases are manually collected, such as mir2disease , mirecords , mirtarbase and tarbase version 1 to 5. rapid increase in the number of mirna-related publications makes the manual collection more and more difficult. three databases using textmining strategies have been introduced in the past 2 years. mirsel and mirwalk contain mirna interaction data, and mirna targets were derived solely from text mining of medline abstracts. tarbase 6.0 adds text mining to preprocess abstracts before human curation. the text mining to whom correspondence should be addressed. preprocessing increased entries about 50-fold as compared with its previous version without text mining. text mining is the process in which useful information is extracted from text using computational approaches or tools. unlike its application in other fields, accurate biomedical text mining remains an open problem as a result of specialized and complex vocabularies. there are three commonly used text-mining approaches in biomedical realm: (i) co-occurrence-based approach, which was adopted by mirsel and tarbase 6.0; (ii) rule-based approach, which keeps a set of rules that usually take significant amount of time to develop; and (iii) machine learning, where the required training data are usually expensive or even impossible to generate . co-occurrence-based systems are normally easier to build while the other two provide better accuracy. in this article, we proposed and developed rule-based textmining approaches to extract mirna and cancer association and store them in a database called mircancer. all the discovered associations have been manually confirmed after automatic extraction. mircancer currently documents 878 relationships between 236 micrornas and 79 human cancers through the processing of 426 000 published articles from pubmed.  
