sequence analysis mircode: a map of putative microrna target sites in the long non-coding transcriptome although small non-coding rnas, such as micrornas, have well-established functions in the cell, long non-coding rnas (lncrnas) have only recently started to emerge as abundant regulators of cell physiology, and their functions may be diverse. a small number of studies describe interactions between small and lncrnas, with lncrnas acting either as inhibitory decoys or as regulatory targets of micrornas, but such interactions are still poorly explored. to facilitate the study of micrornalncrna interactions, we implemented mircode: a comprehensive searchable map of putative microrna target sites across the complete gencode annotated transcriptome, including 10 419 lncrna genes in the current version.large-scale studies in recent years have revealed that mammalian genomes encode thousands of long (200 nt) transcripts that lack coding capacity, but are otherwise messenger rna-like. these are collectively referred to as long non-coding rnas (lncrnas) . although their overall biological importance has been debated, early functional examples were discovered more than 20 years ago, notably h 19 and xist . novel lncrnas are now being uncovered at an increasing rate, with molecular functions that include recruitment of histone-modifying complexes to chromatin [e.g. hotair and hottip (] and modulation of transcription and splicing by molecular interaction with relevant factors [e.g. gas5 and malat1 (. a small number of studies describe interactions between small and lncrnas, with lncrnas acting either as inhibitory decoys of micrornas or as regulatory targets. in humans, mir-671 targets an antisense transcript of the human cdr1 gene , and mir-29 can regulate the lncrna meg3 in hepatocellular cancer, although only indirectly . long non-coding transcripts that derive to whom correspondence should be addressed. from ultra-conserved regions (t-ucrs) have also been suggested to be microrna targets . in plants, the ips1 lncrna inhibits mir-399 through a sponge/decoy effect . herpesvirus-encoded rnas can bind and inhibit human host mir-27 , and the hulc lncrna can bind and sequester mir-372 in liver cancer . a pseudogene of the pten tumor suppressor can compete for microrna binding with its coding counterpart , and microrna inhibition by lncrnas is important during muscle differentiation . the decoy hypothesis is further supported by the observation that micrornas with many targets in the cell tend to have a diluted effect on each individual target . a recent study used lentiviral small hairpin rnas to silence 147 lncrnas at an average efficacy of 75 , demonstrating that lncrnas in general are susceptible to regulation by argonautesmall rna complexes despite frequent nuclear localization. however, existing web-accessible microrna target prediction databases, such as pictar , miranda or targetscan , are focused on 3-untranslated region (utr) of coding genes and fail to provide predictions for the long non-coding transcriptome. to simplify the study of micrornalncrna interactions, we here describe mircode: a comprehensive map of putative microrna target sites across the gencode long non-coding transcriptome (10 419/15 977 lncrnas genes/transcripts in the current version based on gencode v11). mircode is designed to be an easy to use, web-based tool, with search functionalities to aid hypothesis generation starting from a lncrna or microrna of interest. custom genome browser views and downloadable tab-delimited files are also accessible through the mircode web interface. mircode additionally covers other gencode gene classes, including 12 549 pseudogenes and 19 999 coding genes both in typical (3-utr) and atypical (5-utr and cds) positions.  
