data and text mining anatomical entity mention recognition at literature scale motivation: anatomical entities ranging from subcellular structures to organ systems are central to biomedical science, and mentions of these entities are essential to understanding the scientific literature. despite extensive efforts to automatically analyze various aspects of biomedical text, there have been only few studies focusing on anatomical entities, and no dedicated methods for learning to automatically recognize anatomical entity mentions in free-form text have been introduced. results: we present anatomytagger, a machine learning-based system for anatomical entity mention recognition. the system incorporates a broad array of approaches proposed to benefit tagging, including the use of unified medical language system (umls)-and open biomedical ontologies (obo)-based lexical resources, word representations induced from unlabeled text, statistical truecasing and non-local features. we train and evaluate the system on a newly introduced corpus that substantially extends on previously available resources, and apply the resulting tagger to automatically annotate the entire open access scientific domain literature. the resulting analyses have been applied to extend services provided by the europe pubmed central literature database. availability and implementation: all tools and resources introduced in this work are available from http://nactem.ac.uk/anatomytagger.during the past two decades, there has been increasing research interest in the development of resources and methods for automatically processing the biological and medical scientific literature to address the multiple challenges created by its size and increasingly rapid growth. annotated resources and tools targeting various aspects of scientific texts have been introduced, including, for example, mentions of gene names , chemicals and organisms , relations such as proteinprotein interactions , drugdrug interactions and molecular events and biological processes such as gene expression, protein phosphorylation, viral infection and angiogenesis . much of recent work in biomedical natural language processing and text mining has focused on molecular level entities and processes, addressing e.g. the detection of gene name mentions and proteinprotein interaction statements. however, a comprehensive analysis of biomedical text requires automatic systems to address entities also at other levels of biological organization. in this study, we focus on the development and large-scale application of a machine learning-based system on for the recognition of mentions of anatomical entities, organism parts at levels of organization between the molecular and the whole organism . building on a state-of-the-art entity mention tagger based on conditional random fields, we implement and evaluate a variety of approaches for improving mention recognition performance. for training and evaluation, we extend existing corpora through manual annotation to create a large, open-domain, cross-species resource covering both publication abstracts and full-text documents. the developed integrated system, anatomytagger, can be applied either as a standalone tagger, a component in pipelines based on the unstructured information management architecture (uima) or as a web service, and complements existing tools for the recognition of molecular entities and whole organism mentions to facilitate comprehensive analysis of entity references in biological and medical text. to further advance such analysis and to demonstrate the feasibility of large-scale tagging, we apply the system to all available open access domain publications, recognizing 48 million anatomical entity mentions. the contribution of this study is thus 4-fold: the introduction of a new integrated corpus, the detailed evaluation of multiple methods and resources for anatomical entity tagging, the implementation of a new system incorporating the best-performing approach to tagging and the application of this tagger to the entire openaccess literature. all contributed tools and resources are made available under open licenses.we have presented anatomytagger, a system for the recognition of anatomical entity mentions in free text. the machine learningbased tagger integrates a variety of techniques shown to benefit tagging performance, including manually curated lexical resources, word representations induced from unannotated text, statistical truecasing and non-local features. evaluation demonstrated that all techniques incorporated into anatomytagger were beneficial compared with a strong baseline tagger and that the final integrated system outperforms previously introduced methods for comparable tasks. we then applied a uima implementation of the tagging pipeline to the entire open access biomedical literatureover 600 000 full-text documentsto create an automatically tagged resource of 448 million entity mentions. we are currently applying the method to the entire europe pubmed central literature and integrating the results into the europe pubmed central search and analytics services. all tools and resources introduced in this work are available under open licenses from http://nactem.ac.uk/anatomytagger.  
