databases and ontologies mir-editar: a database of predicted a-to-i edited mirna target sites motivation: a-to-i rna editing is an important mechanism that consists of the conversion of specific adenosines into inosines in rna molecules. its dysregulation has been associated to several human diseases including cancer. recent work has demonstrated a role for a-to-i editing in microrna (mirna)-mediated gene expression regulation. in fact, edited forms of mature mirnas can target sets of genes that differ from the targets of their unedited forms. the specific de-amination of mrnas can generate novel binding sites in addition to potentially altering existing ones. results: this work presents mir-editar, a database of predicted a-to-i edited mirna binding sites. the database contains predicted mirna binding sites that could be affected by a-to-i editing and sites that could become mirna binding sites as a result of a-to-i editing. availability: mir-editar is freely available online at http://microrna.a-to-i editing is an essential post-transcriptional mechanism common to all eukaryotes. this form of editing is catalyzed by enzymes of the adenosine deaminase acting on rna family and results in the conversion of single adenosines into inosines, which are recognized as guanosines by various cellular machineries . this can affect splicing and alter coding and non-coding sequences in rna molecules, thus contributing to the diversity of the transcriptome . alterations of a-to-i editing have been associated to several human diseases, such as infections, neurological diseases and cancer . a-to-i editing can also influence micro rna (mirna)mediated gene regulation . several cases of a-to-i editing of mirna precursors have been reported . this phenomenon can suppress processing by drosha and dicer, and the presence of inosines in the mature sequences can alter the recognition of their target sites . a-to-i editing is most abundant in the 3 0 untranslated region (utr) regions of the human transcriptome . this could affect the existing mirna binding sites as well as generate novel binding sites . the importance of rna editing in mirna activity suggests the need for computational tools to predict and analyze the effects of rna editing on mirna-mediated regulation. this work presents mir-editar, a database of predicted a-to-i edited mirna binding sites. in this article, we describe the database and suggest some plausible scenarios of the involvement of editing in mirna activity.  
