sequence analysis mireval 2.0: a web tool for simple microrna prediction in genome sequences result: we have developed mireval 2.0, an online tool that can simultaneously search up to 100 sequences for novel micrornas (mirnas) in multiple organisms. mireval 2.0 uses multiple published in silico approaches to detect mirnas in sequences of interest. this tool can be used to discover mirnas from dna sequences or to validate candidates from sequencing data.micrornas (mirnas) are 22-nt non-coding rnas (ncrnas) that post-transcriptionally regulate the expression of target mrnas. although recent advances in sequencing technology allow a comprehensive analysis of expressed small rnas, including mirnas, distinguishing mirnas from other rna molecules within sequencing data remains difficult . moreover, sequencing data will not detect mirnas specific to other tissue types and may not be available for partially sequenced genomes. mireval 2.0 detects novel mirnas from input dna or rna sequences using multiple bioinformatics approaches such as predicted secondary structure, phylogenetic conservation and shadowing and positional clustering. it also allows users to visualize rna molecules in the sequence of interest that may be mistaken for mirnas. mireval 2.0 also displays transcription factor (tf) binding sites that may regulate mirnas in the input sequence and overlapping mrna transcripts. improvements over our previous version of mireval include a bigger genome database (31 species instead of 10), multiple input sequences per enquiry, improved performance of the secondary structure prediction and parallelization to increase the speed of each analysis by over 10-fold. results are now displayed in a circle graph to allow for a more compact visualization of long input sequences. new features include phylogenetic footprinting to discover mirnas that are specific to a given clade, the display of rna molecules from rfam that may be mistaken for mirnas and of tf binding sites that may regulate mirnas in the input sequence. mireval 2.0 offers more features than most current prediction tools and displays high performance scores (supplementary). prediction. mireval searches 1000 bp around the enquiry sequence for mirnas (mirbase v20) that cluster with the enquiry sequence.  
