sequence analysis mirpipe: quantification of micrornas in niche model organisms micrornas (mirnas) represent an important class of small non-coding rnas regulating gene expression in eukaryotes. present algorithms typically rely on genomic data to identify mirnas and require extensive installation procedures. niche model organisms lacking genomic sequences cannot be analyzed by such tools. here we introduce the mirpipe application enabling rapid and simple browser-based mirna homology detection and quantification. mirpipe features automatic trimming of raw rna-seq reads originating from various sequencing instruments, processing of isomirs and quantification of detected mirnas versus public-or user-uploaded reference databases. availability and implementation: the web service is freely available atmicrornas (mirnas) are 22 nucleotides long and belong to the class of snrnas. mirnas serve numerous roles in downregulation (transcript degradation and sequestering, translational suppression) of gene expression. in general, mirnas are assumed to regulate multiple targets although effects on most targets are relatively mild . isoforms of mirnas resulting from imperfect digestion by drosha and dicer or rna editing by specialized enzymes represent a challenge during the determination of correct read counts following rnaseq. mirna variants might be silent (3 0 modification = isomir) or target different mrnas when changes occur in the 5 0 regions responsible for complementary binding. sequence differences between taxa hamper quantification, especially if no genomic or mirna data for the studied organism are available as in the case of niche model organisms. sequencing errors can further complicate the identification of mirnas. these effects should ideally be addressed on multiple levels, including (i) isomir handling, (ii) enforcement of a minimum read copy number, (iii) clustering of similar mirnas, (iv) removal of relatively low abundance reads and (v) optional fallback to the mirna family level. a set of applications in the field attempts to cover these features, but a web-based tool able to unify all functionalities that can be applied to any organism is critically missing . introduced by organism prefixes and precursor suffixes (e.g. btamir-200a, oan-mir-200a-3p4mir-200a). for each read, the detected reference mirna families are scored based on the minimum number of mismatches. if a read matched equally well versus multiple mirna families, the respective families are joined by single linkage clustering. this permits the inclusion of reads that cannot be matched uniquely, as well as the exact measurement of the fraction of ambiguously matching reads and thereby the reliability of the match. by default, only those read sequences that are at least 5 as abundant as the most abundant sequence per mirna family cluster are denoted to reduce the impact of sequencing errors and increase robustness. counts per mirna family and cluster are presented for download. currently, mirpipe can complete a job within 0.52 h, depending on the file size and the selected reference database. mirpipe quantification results can be directly used for differential expression analysis using other tools on our web site (supplementary file s1).  
