data and text mining mir-prefer: an accurate, fast and easy-to-use plant mirna prediction tool using small rna-seq data plant microrna prediction tools that use small rna-sequencing data are emerging quickly. these existing tools have at least one of the following problems: (i) high false-positive rate; (ii) long running time; (iii) work only for genomes in their databases; (iv) hard to install or use. we developed mir-prefer (mirna prediction from small rna-seq data), which uses expression patterns of mirna and follows the criteria for plant microrna annotation to accurately predict plant mirnas from one or more small rna-seq data samples of the same species. we tested mir-prefer on several plant species. the results show that mir-prefer is sensitive, accurate, fast and has low-memory footprint. availability and implementation: https://github.complant micrornas (mirnas) are $21-nt-long non-coding rnas that play important roles in transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression . recently developed genome-wide mirna annotation tools all use small rna-seq data to quantify the expression of annotated mirnas and to predict novel ones . these tools suffer from several of the following problems. first, these tools usually have variable sensitivity and high false-positive (fp) rate when applied to different species. second, most of existing ngsbased tools are slow. third, most existing command-line-based tools are not user friendly. web-server tools, such as miranalyzer , are easy to use. but they usually only work for genomes in their databases, which inhibit users to analyze new genomes. in addition, most of web-server tools also have other problems listed here. thus, there is a need for a plant mirna prediction tool that has good performance (high sensitivity, low fp rate and accurate), works for all plant genomes, runs fast, has a small memory footprint and is easy to use. mir-pfefer uses expression patterns of mirnas and follows the criteria for plant microrna annotation to accurately predict plant mirnas from one or more small rna-seq data samples. it has high sensitivity and low fp rate. mir-prefer is much faster and uses less memory than existing tools. using mir-prefer requires minimum informatics expertize: it has low dependency on other programs; there is no need to compile or install the pipeline; it provides a checkpoint feature, which makes it easy to continue an unfinished job from where it was stopped; and the documentation is publicly available. the mir-prefer pipeline is in the process of being incorporated into the maker-p genome annotation engine . job running on a high-performance computing system is killed because of resource limits, or the laptop that the user works on runs out of battery. by restarting a job from the latest checkpoint other than starting it from the beginning, a lot of time/resources can be saved for long-running jobs on large plant genomes. as far as we know, mir-prefer is the first microrna prediction tool that provides such a useful feature.  
