systems biology mirror: a combinatorial analysis web tool for ensembles of micrornas and their targets the mirror application provides insights on microrna (mirna) regulation. it is based on the notion of a combinatorial regulation by an ensemble of mirnas or genes. mirror integrates predictions from a dozen of mirna resources that are based on complementary algorithms into a unified statistical framework. for mirnas set as input, the online tool provides a ranked list of targets, based on set of resources selected by the user, according to their significance of being coordinately regulated. symmetrically, a set of genes can be used as input to suggest a set of mirnas. the user can restrict the analysis for the preferred tissue or cell line. mirror is suitable for analyzing results from mirnas profiling, proteomics and gene expression arrays.recent mirna discovery techniques confirmed the presence of hundreds of mirnas in healthy and diseased tissues. currently, approximately 900 mirnas are reported in human and approximately 600 in mouse. it was shown that mirna binding sites are not confined solely to 3-untranslated regions (utrs), but also are found in coding regions and introns . furthermore, multiple features were shown to be imperative in regulation by mirnas . this led to a growing number of resources and algorithms that predict the pairing of mirnas and their targets . currently, mirbase is the most exhaustive collection of mirnas with over approximately 15 000 mature mirna sequences. mirbase collection is based on microcosm algorithm. additional exhaustive mirna targets predictors include targetscan and pictar . other large-scale resources for micrornatarget pairing includes pita , microrna.org that is based on miranda algorithm , diana-microt 3.0 , mirdb and elmmo-mirz . for to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. a subset of mirnastarget pairs, in vivo experimental validation is available in tarbase database . we have developed mirror, an interactive tool for analyzing experimental results under the notion of coordination in mirnas regulation. a coordinated regulation by several mirnas was proposed [see discussion (. for a set of mirnas, mirror outputs a ranked list of gene targets according to their likelihood to be targeted by the mirna ensemble and vice versa for a set of regulated genes. mirror converts all predictor resources results into a unified platform by incorporating a statistical measure according to the hypergeometrical distribution. for example, in mirnas overexpressing experiments in human cells , 174 genes (mir-124) and 65 genes (mir-1) were downregulated and were used as input for mirror. the original mirnas were identified as the top candidates with a p-value 3e-11 and with 9193 of the genes marked as targets for the relevant mirna. similar results were obtained by using only 50 of the gene lists, supporting the robustness of the mirror platform.  
