genome analysis miss: a non-linear methodology based on mutual information for genetic association studies in both population and sib-pairs analysis motivation: finding association between genetic variants and phenotypes related to disease has become an important vehicle for the study of complex disorders. in this context, multi-loci genetic association might unravel additional information when compared with single loci search. the main goal of this work is to propose a non-linear methodology based on information theory for finding combinatorial association between multi-snps and a given phenotype. results: the proposed methodology, called miss (mutual information statistical significance), has been integrated jointly with a feature selection algorithm and has been tested on a synthetic dataset with a controlled phenotype and in the particular case of the f7 gene. the miss methodology has been contrasted with a multiple linear regression (mlr) method used for genetic association in both, a population-based study and a sib-pairs analysis and with the maximum entropy conditional probability modelling (mecpm) method, which searches for predictive multi-locus interactions. several sets of snps within the f7 gene region have been found to show a significant correlation with the fvii levels in blood. the proposed multi-site approach unveils combinations of snps that explain more significant information of the phenotype than their individual polymorphisms. miss is able to find more correlations between snps and the phenotype than mlr and mecpm. most of the marked snps appear in the literature as functional variants with real effect on the protein fvii levels in blood. availability: the code is available atone of the main challenges of current genetic research is to study the association between genotypes and phenotypes and, in to whom correspondence should be addressed.particular, to identify genetic factors responsible for the heritability of complex traits. the two principal strategies for finding genetic variants related to diseases are linkage analysis and association studies . linkage occurs when multiple loci are physically related and are inherited together jointly with the disease. linkage analyses take profit of this effect through measuring the cosegregation of the polymorphisms and a phenotype through a family or set of families. genetic association looks for correlations between two investigated factors, typically a dna sequence variability (a genotype) and a trait (a phenotype). in the last decades, technological advances in human genetics have allowed association studies to work with large numbers of genetic markers. association studies may be affected by the structure or homogeneity of the population under study. in particular, common genetic information between relatives may introduce a bias in the data. the main goal of family studies is to explore this dependence in order to extract additional information. one of the first approaches for family association studies was the analysis of sib-pairs that present more homogeneity of age and environment than other pairs of relatives and are relatively easy to ascertain . however, these methods have been extended to small pedigree (nuclear families) analysis and later on to extended families . the genetic variability represents around 1 of the dna sequence . the genetic variants are responsible for differences between individuals such as physical appearance, susceptibility to disease or response to medical treatments. among the different types of genetic variants, single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) are the most common type of genetic variation used for the study of genetic diseases . snps are defined as single nucleotide positions in the genome where there is a mutation (i.e. the substitution of one base by another), which is observed in 1 of the population . it is assumed that at most one mutation could have occurred at a given locus in the short human evolution . consequently, only two of the four common nucleotides may be found in a given snp position, the ancestral one (a 1 ) and the mutated one (a 2 ). some variations in the dna may be responsible for the development of diseases. traditional genetic techniques have  
