data and text mining missforest—non-parametric missing value imputation for mixed-type data motivation: modern data acquisition based on high-throughput technology is often facing the problem of missing data. algorithms commonly used in the analysis of such large-scale data often depend on a complete set. missing value imputation offers a solution to this problem. however, the majority of available imputation methods are restricted to one type of variable only: continuous or categorical. for mixed-type data, the different types are usually handled separately. therefore, these methods ignore possible relations between variable types. we propose a non-parametric method which can cope with different types of variables simultaneously. results: we compare several state of the art methods for the imputation of missing values. we propose and evaluate an iterative imputation method (missforest) based on a random forest. by averaging over many unpruned classification or regression trees, random forest intrinsically constitutes a multiple imputation scheme. using the built-in out-of-bag error estimates of random forest, we are able to estimate the imputation error without the need of a test set. evaluation is performed on multiple datasets coming from a diverse selection of biological fields with artificially introduced missing values ranging from 10 to 30. we show that missforest can successfully handle missing values, particularly in datasets including different types of variables. in our comparative study, missforest outperforms other methods of imputation especially in data settings where complex interactions and non-linear relations are suspected. the out-of-bag imputation error estimates of missforest prove to be adequate in all settings. additionally, missforest exhibits attractive computational efficiency and can cope with high-dimensional data. availability: the r package missforest is freely available fromimputation of missing values is often a crucial step in data analysis. many established methods of analysis require fully observed datasets without any missing values. however, this is seldom the case in medical and biological research today. the ongoing to whom correspondence should be addressed. development of new and enhanced measurement techniques in these fields provides data analysts with challenges prompted not only by high-dimensional multivariate data where the number of variables may greatly exceed the number of observations, but also by mixed data types where continuous and categorical variables are present. in our context, categorical variables can arise as any kind ranging from technical settings in a mass spectrometer to a diagnostic expert opinion on a disease state. additionally, such datasets often contain complex interactions and non-linear relation structures which are notoriously hard to capture with parametric procedures. most prevalent imputation methods, like k nearest neighbours] for continuous data, saturated multinomial model for categorical data and multivariate imputation by chained equations [mice, van buuren and] for mixed data types depend on tuning parameters or specification of a parametric model. the choice of such tuning parameters or models without prior knowledge is difficult and might have a dramatic effect on a methods performance. excluding mice, the above methods and the majority of other imputation methods are restricted to one type of variable. furthermore, all these methods make assumptions about the distribution of the data or subsets of the variables, leading to questionable situations, e.g. assuming normal distributions. the literature on mixed-type data imputation is rather scarce. its first appearance was in the developing field of multiple imputation brought up by. little andpresented an approach based on maximum likelihood estimation combining the multivariate normal model for continuous and the poisson/multinomial model for categorical data. this idea was later on extended in the book of little and rubin (1987). see also, rubin and schafer (1990) and schafer (1997). a more refined method to combine different regression models for mixed-type data was proposed by van buuren and oudshoorn (1999) using chained equations. the conditional model in mice can be specified for the missing data in each incomplete variable. therefore, no multivariate model covering the entire dataset has to be specified. however, it is assumed that such a full multivariate distribution exists and missing values are sampled from conditional distributions based on this full distribution (for more details see section 3). another similar method using variable-wise conditional distributions was proposed bycalled sequential regression multivariate imputation. unlike in mice, the predictors must not be incomplete. the method is focussed on survey data and therefore includes strategies to incorporate restrictions onour new algorithm, missforest, allows for missing value imputation on basically any kind of data. in particular, it can handle multivariate data consisting of continuous and categorical variables simultaneously. missforest has no need for tuning parameters nor does it require assumptions about distributional aspects of the data. we show on several real datasets coming from different biological and medical fields that missforest outperforms established imputation methods like k-nearest neighbours imputation or multivariate imputation using chained equations. using our oob imputation error estimates, missforest offers a way to assess the quality of an imputation without the need of setting aside test data nor performing laborious cross-validations. for subsequent analysis, these error estimates represent a mean of informal reliability check for each variable. the full potential of missforest is deployed when the data include complex interactions or non-linear relations between variables of unequal scales and different type. furthermore, missforest can be applied to high-dimensional datasets where the number of variables may greatly exceed the number of observations to a large extent and still provides excellent imputation results.  
