missmethyl: an r package for analyzing data from illumina's humanmethylation450 platform dna methylation is one of the most commonly studied epigenetic modifications due to its role in both disease and development. the illumina humanmethylation450 beadchip is a cost-effective way to profile 450 000 cpgs across the human genome, making it a popular platform for profiling dna methylation. here we introduce missmethyl, an r package with a suite of tools for performing normalization, removal of unwanted variation in differential methylation analysis, differential variability testing and gene set analysis for the 450k array. availability and implementation: missmethyl is an r package available from the bioconductor project at www.bioconductor.org.dna methylation, one of the most widely studied epigenetic modifications, is crucial for normal embryonic development and is often disrupted in disease. epigenetic marks can be modified by environmental exposures and are dramatically altered in cancer. since epigenetic changes are potentially reversible, dna methylation is an attractive therapeutic target and remains an important area of research. there are several array and sequencing-based technologies available for profiling dna methylation. while sequencing costs have declined, it remains expensive for large dna methylation studies, making arrays a cost-effective alternative. illuminas humanmethylation450 (450k) beadchip is currently the most popular platform, having been used in many large studies such as the cancer genome atlas, as well as in many epigenome-wide association studies. here, we present the missmethyl r package, which contains dedicated tools for performing a range of analyses primarily targeted at 450k arrays. these methods include normalization, removal of unwanted variation (ruv) such as batch effects in a differential methylation analysis, differential variability testing and gene set analysis. software packages for reading in raw data, pre-processing and differential methylation analysis include minfi , methylkit and methylumi. however, missmethyl provides more specialized analysis methods not available elsewhere.the missmethyl r package contains a suite of functions to perform novel analyses for 450k array data, with new functions likely to be added as they are developed. the functions have been written to complement the limma package and are compatible with data objects from minfi, methylumi and edger. in addition, missmethyl is well documented and freely available from bioconductor.  
