mixed-model coexpression: calculating gene coexpression while accounting for expression heterogeneity motivation: the analysis of gene coexpression is at the core of many types of genetic analysis. the coexpression between two genes can be calculated by using a traditional pearsons correlation coefficient. however, unobserved confounding effects may cause inflation of the pearsons correlation so that uncorrelated genes appear correlated. many general methods have been suggested, which aim to remove the effects of confounding from gene expression data. however, the residual confounding which is not accounted for by these generic correction procedures has the potential to induce correlation between genes. therefore, a method that specifically aims to calculate gene coexpression between gene expression arrays, while accounting for confounding effects, is desirable. results: in this article, we present a statistical model for calculating gene coexpression called mixed model coexpression (mmc), which models coexpression within a mixed model framework. confounding effects are expected to be encoded in the matrix representing the correlation between arrays, the inter-sample correlation matrix. by conditioning on the information in the inter-sample correlation matrix, mmc is able to produce gene coexpressions that are not influenced by global confounding effects and thus significantly reduce the number of spurious coexpressions observed. we applied mmc to both human and yeast datasets and show it is better able to effectively prioritize strong coexpressions when compared to a traditional pearsons correlation and a pearsons correlation applied to data corrected with surrogate variable analysis (sva). availability: the method is implemented in the r programming language and may be found atthe analysis of gene coexpression patterns has been of great interest in recent years due to the widespread availability of microarray datasets measuring thousands of genes. gene coexpressions, evaluated by comparing the expression patterns of pairs of genes, have been utilized in order to identify loci responsible for regulating genes , to evaluate the significance of known pathways and to identify functionally related genes whose relationships have been conserved through evolution . unfortunately, gene expression data can be largely affected by technical bias such as a batch effects or plate effects . such nonbiological effects have been shown to induce correlations between to whom correspondence should be addressed. genes. for example,showed that spacial placement of microarray probes affected the correlation between gene expression patterns, causing genes to be more or less correlated depending on the proximity of their respective probes on the array. more generally, unobserved factors affecting gene expression have the potential to cause correlation between genes. when these factors are shared between gene expressions, they cause genes to have similar patterns of overall variation. since these effects are not directly observed they are not incorporated into statistical models. the shared variation between genes is attributed to biological causes. this issue is referred to as expression heterogeneity and has been acknowledged as a general problem when analyzing expression datasets . the detrimental effects of technical confounding on the results obtained from microarray analysis are well known., while examining the effects of stochastic dependence between arrays on the correlation of test statistics used in determining differential expression, noted that the correlation structure of arrays induced through non-biological effects can lead to spurious correlation between genes. they note that microarray normalization procedures mitigate such phenomenon, but are unable to completely negate them. in fact, the presence of spurious correlations is a general problem that arises when analyzing many types of noisy high dimensional biological datasets, and has been examined in many different contexts . in the context of gene coexpression, the cause of spurious correlations can be conceptualized by viewing a set of n microarrays measuring m genes as a mn matrix. in this matrix, we expect that the microarrays represented by the columns are independent and that some of the rows, representing the genes will be correlated, indicating biological relationships. in the presence of technical confounding effects, such as batch effects, the columns will share characteristics that will cause the overall patterns of expression to be similar and thus the arrays will be statistically correlated. this increased correlation between columns induces correlation between rows, as it becomes more likely that two randomly selected rows will be correlated, given that the overall patterns of expression for each array are similar. in this way, the correlation between arrays, or inter-sample correlation, has the potential to induce correlations between genes. many methods have been developed that aim to remove confounding effects from gene expression data. for example, in the case of known batch effects, a method such as combat may be employed. combat uses an empirical bayes approach to estimate parameters associated with batch and produces corrected gene expression data. this corrected expression data can then be used in subsequent analysis.in this article, we present a statistical model for the calculation of gene coexpression called mmc. our method calculates gene coexpressions that are robust to confounding effects. we calculate the coexpression between two genes by utilizing a mixed-model framework. unknown confounding effects are represented as a random variable in a mixed-model formulation of coexpression. we use the inter-sample correlation to estimate the variance of the random variable representing unknown confounding and incorporate this variance into the model of coexpression. we compare the coexpressions obtained with our method with those obtained using the traditional pearson correlation and those obtained using sva corrected expression data. although, rank based correlation methods, such as the spearman correlation, have been used to reduce the prevalence of spurious correlations due to deviations from assumptions of normality in expression data, we have observed in practice that the spearman correlation coefficient performs similarly to the pearson when comparing with mmc (data not shown). when probe pairs target the same gene, we expect that their coexpressions will be highly ranked when compared with all other pairwise coexpressions. for probe pairs of this type, mmc is shown to produce coexpressions that are more highly ranked when compared with the other two methods. we also show that mmc produces coexpressions that are more concordant across replicate datasets generated by the same lab using the same strains but generated at different times. operating under the assumption that biologically and functionally meaningful groups of genes will be highly coexpressed, we create a simple statistic which is used to assess the functional significance of groups of genes. our method shows increased power to discover sets of genes which are known to be biologically significant. although our method is able to calculate coexpression while removing the effects of confounding, it might also remove effects which are biologically meaningful. technical confounding effects, such as a batch effect, typically have a global effect on the data. that is, these effects will increase the expression variation in a large number of genes. this shared variation within genes causes them to appear to be significantly coexpressed. our method estimates global patterns of shared variation through the inter-sample correlation and effectively removes the effects causing the variation from the calculation of coexpression. a problem arises when we consider the case in which one gene has a large biological effect on hundreds of other genes. the effect that master regulators have on expression data as a whole is indistinguishable from the unwanted global confounding effects. that is, the variation in gene expression caused by master regulators quite closely resembles patterns of variation caused by confounding effects and will therefore be removed by our method. in this case, mmc may over-correct true biological signal and cause true coexpressions to be lost. the drawback to our method may also be seen as a beneficial side effect. when master regulators target many genes, traditional coexpression analyses employing clustering will yield many large sized gene modules. by removing the effects of master regulators, mmc essentially enables coexpression clustering analysis to produce smaller gene modules conditional on the large modules. large gene modules discovered through the use of standard coexpression analysis may be seen as representative of large-scale cellular functionality. small modules discovered through clustering with mmc will be subsets of these large modules. by intersecting results, it may be possible to more fully understand the detailed circuitry of the cell.  
