mixupmapper: correcting sample mix-ups in genome-wide datasets increases power to detect small genetic effects motivation: sample mix-ups can arise during sample collection, handling, genotyping or data management. it is unclear how often sample mix-ups occur in genome-wide studies, as there currently are no post hoc methods that can identify these mix-ups in unrelated samples. we have therefore developed an algorithm (mixupmapper) that can both detect and correct sample mix-ups in genome-wide studies that study gene expression levels. results: we applied mixupmapper to five publicly available human genetical genomics datasets. on average, 3 of all analyzed samples had been assigned incorrect expression phenotypes: in one of the datasets 23 of the samples had incorrect expression phenotypes. the consequences of sample mix-ups are substantial: when we corrected these sample mix-ups, we identified on average 15 more significant cis-expression quantitative trait loci (cis-eqtls). in one dataset, we identified three times as many significant cis-eqtls after correction. furthermore, we show through simulations that sample mix-ups can lead to an underestimation of the explained heritability of complex traits in genome-wide association datasets.genome-wide studies have identified many disease-associated variants for a wide plethora of complex human diseases [such as celiac disease , type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes , crohns disease (, and complex continuous phenotypes [such as lipid levels , body mass index (bmi) and height (. many of these studies also assess the effect of the identified genetic variants on gene expression variation [i.e. genetical genomics (, by mapping expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl). as such, these studies involve many steps before actual analysis of the data, during each of which samples could be accidentally swapped. since these studies are pushing toward larger sample-sizes in order to be able to identify ever smaller effects, the presence of sample mix-ups becomes almost unavoidable. it is known from simulations that sample mix-ups can have an effect on the power to detect genetic associations in genome-wide studies , which may present a problem to detect variants with small effects. however, it is unclear how often such sample mix-ups actually occur in studies investigating gene expression. the common method to detect sample mix-ups in genome-wide association studies (gwas) is to check for heterozygous genotypes for x-chromosomal markers in males. however, this procedure will not identify sample mix-ups between samples of identical gender. while it is also possible to use multiple phenotypes that can be well predicted based on genetic markers [such as eye color and hair color and abo blood group (, we are not aware of any study where this has been applied to identify sample mix-ups in gwas. it is obvious that if there would be a considerable number of such phenotypes available, identification of nearly all sample mix-ups should become feasible. another method to prevent sample mixups that is commonly used in gwa studies involves the genotyping of a small number of variants prior to hybridization to the chip. post hoc concordance analysis then allows to resolve mixed-up samples, although this method does not resolve mix-ups that might have been introduced during phenotyping. although these methods are tailored for gwas, they are also applicable to genetical genomics datasets. this however does not apply to gene expression data, for which to our knowledge no methods to detect sample mix-ups currently exist. our method (mixupmapper) uses gene expression levels for genes, which are influenced by genetic variation located near these genes (cis-eqtls). on the basis of such cis-eqtl effects, ourwe have identified sample mix-ups in four out of five genetical genomics studies by applying a novel method (mixupmapper). on average, 3 of all samples were mixed-up. after correction for these sample mix-ups by our method, we detected on average 15 more cis-eqtls. correcting mix-ups in one dataset in which 23 of the samples were incorrect led to three times as many significant cis-eqtls being detected. the consequences of only page: 2110 210421113 sample mix-ups on the heritable fraction that can be explained by significantly associated variants can also be substantial. for some simulated complex traits with a moderate to high heritability, the explained heritability of the genome-wide significant variants increased 1.24-fold, when these sample mix-ups could be detected and corrected. a considerable proportion of the heritability of complex diseases and traits is currently missing. there is debate on whether the missing heritability problem is caused by rare variants with a large effect, by many more common variants, each with a very small effect size, by overestimation of the heritability estimates or through other means . as current genome-wide studies are pushing toward associating ever smaller effect sizes, sample sizes have to increase substantially to discover loci with smaller effect sizes . our results indicate that especially for these small-effect size loci, sample mix-ups could have consequences on the power to detect such loci for both genetical genomics studies as well as gwas. as such, a proportion of the missing heritability could possibly be explained by the presence of sample mix-ups in genome-wide datasets. however, it remains a question whether the frequency of sample mix-ups we observed in genetical genomics samples is a realistic estimate for other types of genome-wide datasets. different types of genome-wide datasets require many different handling steps, and therefore their frequencies for the presence of sample mixups may differ. for example for casecontrol gwas the cases and controls are often collected and processed separately from each other. therefore, the frequency and hence the consequence of sample mix-ups in such casecontrol studies might be lower compared to the studies presented here. as such, gwas in general might contain fewer sample mix-ups. in the case of genetical genomics datasets, more cis-eqtls could be detected in each of the datasets after correction, although the number of included samples had actually decreased for three of these datasets. this effectively demonstrates that increasing the sample size is not the only way of increasing statistical power for determining complex traits; increasing the phenotypic accuracy can be equally helpful. in addition to the method described here, phenotypic accuracy may be increased by, for example, including relevant co-variates in gwas, or by using principal components). although these methods are helpful in increasing the phenotypic accuracy, they do not help to identify or overcome sample mix-ups. one possible problem with mixupmapper is that it depends on an initial set of cis-eqtls that can be detected in the data. although our method generally shows high sensitivity and specificity when large proportions of samples are mixed-up, in an extreme scenario, where all genotyped samples are randomly assigned to the gene expression samples, the mix-ups cannot be resolved since no ciseqtls will be initially detectable. however, if a set of cis-eqtls has been independently identified in another set of samples for the particular expression platform used, it is also be possible to resolve these problems (data not shown). we feel it is important to emphasize that the sample mix-ups that we detected in the five public datasets do not in any way discredit these studies. to our knowledge, we are the first to describe a method to identify mix-ups for these kinds of datasets. if the authors had been aware of the existence of these mix-ups, they would have certainly corrected them, as their goal was to find as many eqtls as possible. since we observed a substantial overlap of detected cis-eqtls in the three hapmap populations before correction of sample mix-ups, we assume the detected cis-eqtls in these datasets are still valid. we are convinced that the results and conclusions drawn from these datasets remain appropriate. although our method is intended for genetical genomics datasets, it can also be applied to other types of genome-wide datasets, as long as there are sufficient numbers of different phenotypes available per individual that are each (strongly) determined by genetic variants or combinations of variants. this requirement will likely be met with the growing interest in population-based cohort studies in which hundreds of phenotypes are collected from the participants. as a consequence, identifying sample mix-ups will then become possible for these datasets as well. our results clearly indicate that sample mix-ups occur in many laboratories (including ours). although a great deal of quality control is conducted in gwas, it is very difficult to prevent the accidental mislabeling of some samples. this is particularly problematic in studies of unrelated individuals where inheritance patterns cannot be investigated. nevertheless, these accidental human mistakes or experimental problems can sometimes have farreaching consequences. we therefore recommend rigorous quality control of the laboratory and administrative processes in order to prevent sample mix-ups from happening. we conclude that fewer sample mix-ups will increase the power to detect significant genetic associations substantially and might resolve a part of the missing heritability.  
