gene expression mmad: microarray microdissection with analysis of differences is a computational tool for deconvoluting cell type-specific contributions from tissue samples background: one of the significant obstacles in the development of clinically relevant microarray-derived biomarkers and classifiers is tissue heterogeneity. physical cell separation techniques, such as cell sorting and laser-capture microdissection, can enrich samples for cell types of interest, but are costly, labor intensive and can limit investigation of important interactions between different cell types. results: we developed a new computational approach, called micro-array microdissection with analysis of differences (mmad), which performs microdissection in silico. notably, mmad (i) allows for simultaneous estimation of cell fractions and gene expression profiles of contributing cell types, (ii) adjusts for microarray normalization bias, (iii) uses the corrected akaike information criterion during model optimization to minimize overfitting and (iv) provides mechanisms for comparing gene expression and cell fractions between samples in different classes. computational microdissection of simulated and experimental tissue mixture datasets showed tight correlations between predicted and measured gene expression of pure tissues as well as tight correlations between reported and estimated cell fraction for each of the individual cell types. in simulation studies, mmad showed superior ability to detect differentially expressed genes in mixed tissue samples when compared with standard metrics, including both significance analysis of microarrays and cell type-specific significance analysis of microarrays. conclusions: we have developed a new computational tool called mmad, which is capable of performing robust tissue microdissection in silico, and which can improve the detection of differentially expressed genes. mmad software as implemented in matlab is publically available for download at http://sourceforge.net/projects/ mmad/.gene expression microarrays have yielded valuable biological and medical insight into many disease processes and have been heavily researched, especially in the investigation of cancer biology . however, standard approaches to microarray analysis can be easily confounded by cellular heterogeneity in tissue samples and by variability in cell type composition. this may introduce false-positive correlations, but more importantly may also mask changes in gene expression within a given cell type of interest. of particular concern is impact of sample heterogeneity on developing and validating microarray-based predictive and prognostic models for human diseases . physical cell separation methods such as cell sorting and/or laser-capture microdissection can enrich samples for the cell type of interest, but such methods are time and resource intensive and can affect the quantity and quality of rna available for subsequent analysis . computational microdissection using various statistical approaches has consequently been a subject of interest for several groups. most techniques extend on the linear model of, which estimates the final measured gene expression as the sum of gene expression of the contributing cell types. several approaches estimate relative fractions of individual cell types within a sample using gene expression profiles that are characteristic for each cell type , whereas other models estimate the characteristic gene expression profiles of each cell type using measured cell type fractions . simultaneous estimates of cell type expression profiles and cell type fraction, analogous to principal-components analysis have also been proposed . a software package that incorporates several of these methodologies in a unified interface has recently been made available . we developed a flexible new model, microarray microdissection with analysis of differences (mmad), which incorporates several features of the previously described approaches in addition to several novel features, designed to improve performance and utility. these include adjustments for reporting bias and to whom correspondence should be addressed. normalization bias, incorporation of information theory criteria to minimize overfitting and methods for comparing gene expression between classes, either globally or on a cell-specific basis. an overview of mmad is provided in supplementary.we present a method for the in silico microdissection of tissue samples into component cell types that is both flexible and robust.  
