structural bioinformatics mobi: a web server to define and visualize structural mobility in nmr protein ensembles motivation: mobi is a web server for the identification of structurally mobile regions in nmr protein ensembles. it provides a binary mobility definition that is analogous to the commonly used definition of intrinsic disorder in x-ray crystallographic structures. at least three different use cases can be envisaged: (i) visualization of nmr mobility for structural analysis; (ii) definition of regions for reliable comparative modelling in protein structure prediction and (iii) definition of mobility in analogy to intrinsic disorder. mobi uses structural superposition and local conformational differences to derive a robust binary mobility definition that is in excellent agreement with the manually curated definition used in the casp8 experiment for intrinsic disorder in nmr structure. the output includes mobility-coloured pdb files, mobility plots and a fasta formatted sequence file summarizing the mobility results. availability: the mobi server and supplementary methods are available for non-commercial use atnmr solved structures deposited in the protein data bank (pdb;) often contain an ensemble of structurally different conformers, where each model equally satisfies the experimentally obtained restrains. among other reasons, differences between models are due to incompleteness or noise in the experimental data, as well as reflecting the dynamic behaviour of proteins in solution . to gain insight into protein dynamics, the structural ensemble can be further enriched or used to deduce quasi-rigid dynamical-domains . in order to make sense of this structural variability, e.g. to identify reliable regions for protein structure prediction, it is commonly sieved for conserved regions or to select the best representative . an intuitive representation of nmr variability through colouring of the structure by rmsd values has been recently proposed in caron . extreme structural variability in proteins is called intrinsic disorder and commonly has functional implications (dyson and  
