structural bioinformatics mobidb: a comprehensive database of intrinsic protein disorder annotations motivation: disordered protein regions are key to the function of numerous processes within an organism and to the determination of a proteins biological role. the most common source for protein disorder annotations, disprot, covers only a fraction of the available sequences. alternatively, the protein data bank (pdb) has been mined for missing residues in x-ray crystallographic structures. herein, we provide a centralized source for data on different flavours of disorder in protein structures, mobidb, building on and expanding the content provided by already existing sources. in addition to the disprot and pdb x-ray structures, we have added experimental information from nmr structures and five different flavours of two disorder predictors (espritz and iupred). these are combined into a weighted consensus disorder used to classify disordered regions into flexible and constrained disorder. users are encouraged to submit manual annotations through a submission form. mobidb features experimental annotations for 17 285 proteins, covering the entire pdb and predictions for the swissprot database, with 565 200 annotated sequences. depending on the disorder flavour, 620 of the residues are predicted as disordered. availability: the database is freely available at http://mobidb.bio.during the last decade, strong evidence has surfaced indicating that many proteins function in a natively unfolded or intrinsically disordered state . these regions have been shown to play important roles in various biological processes . the amount of disorder within a proteome seems to correlate with the complexity of the organism, especially in eukaryotes . the existence of different flavours of disorder has been proposed , and disordered regions have been categorized according to their function with a suggested coupling between disorder conservation and protein function . the main repository for experimentally determined disorder is the disprot database , containing manually curated information on currently ca. 650 proteins from the literature. although invaluable as a gold standard, disprot represents only a to whom correspondence should be addressed. fraction of the known protein sequences posing a bottleneck for large-scale analysis of intrinsic protein disorder. many prediction methods have long resorted to considering the lack of coordinates in x-ray protein structures as a proxy for intrinsic disorder . this increases the number of available sequences by an order of magnitude for mostly short disordered segments. recently, our group has also developed a method to define intrinsic disorder by looking at mobile regions in nmr structures . herein we describe mobidb, a centralized resource for disorder annotation in protein sequences.  
