mobyle snap workbench: a web-based analysis portal for population genetics and evolutionary genomics previously we developed the stand-alone snap workbench toolkit that integrated a wide array of bioinformatics tools for phylogenetic and population genetic analyses. we have now developed a web-based portal front-end, using the mobyle portal framework, which executes all of the programs available in the stand-alone snap workbench toolkit on a high-performance linux cluster. additionally, we have expanded the selection of programs to over 189 tools, including population genetic, genome assembly and analysis tools, as well as metagenomic and large-scale phylogenetic analyses. the mobyle snap workbench web portal allows end users to (i) execute and manage otherwise complex command-line programs, (ii) launch multiple exploratory analyses of parameter-rich and computationally intensive methods and (iii) track the sequence of steps and parameters that were used to perform a specific analysis. analysis pipelines or workflows for population genetic, metagenomic and genome assembly provide automation of data conversion, analysis and graphical visualization for biological inference. availability: the mobyle snap workbench portal is freely available online at http://snap.hpc.ncsu.edu/. the xmls can be downloaded at http://carbonelab.org/system/files/snap_xmls.tgz. each xml provides links to help files, online documentation and sample data.previously we developed the snap workbench toolkit that integrated phylogenetic and population genetic analyses and made complicated sets of program functions, settings and parameters accessible and transparent to the user . the snap workbench provided a graphical user interface for command-line programs and a workflow to guide the user on the assumptions and limitations of the methods that test for population differentiation. although useful for methods based on summary statistics and simple evolutionary models further insights into the magnitude and direction of evolutionary forces required the use of coalescent andbayesian methods that are parameter-rich and frequently computationally intensive . this translated into long computational times, often requiring several days or weeks, particularly for larger datasets and complex models that included migration and recombination. also restrictive was the large parameter space that must be examined for complex phylogeographic models to ensure reliable and accurate parameter estimation. in practice, this requires performing multiple separate independent simulations, which is prohibitive on a single standalone machine. to overcome these limitations, we have migrated our stand-alone snap workbench to a web-based platform that allows for execution on a high-performance linux cluster. this eliminates the need to provide multi platform installations of the workbench and has allowed us to expand our repertoire of tools to include large-scale phylogenetic analyses, metagenomics, genome assembly and comparative analyses and an enriched population genetic toolkit (see supplementary). next generation sequencing (ngs) reads or metagenomic data because these files are typically multiple gigabytes in size and require several consecutive pre-processing steps. in this case, each workflow can be scripted into a single xml, eliminating the transfer of intermediate metadata over the network. a formal description of the xml grammar (https://projets. pasteur.fr/projects/mobyle/wiki) is available on the mobyle project website. although there is currently no mechanism in mobyle for browsing files on the server, the path to files can be specified in the xml. we provide a tool for uploading large data files using the velocity service (https://velocity.ncsu.edu/) hosted at nc state university. users that set up a local instance of the portal can also upload ngs data files via sftp using clients such as cyberduck for mac (http://cyberduck.ch/) and winscp for windows (http://winscp.net/eng/index.php). the workflows track all metadata from original source data to final results, thereby ensuring that data recording and analysis are explicitly traceable.  
