gene expression model-based clustering of microarray expression data via latent gaussian mixture models motivation: in recent years, work has been carried out on clustering gene expression microarray data. some approaches are developed from an algorithmic viewpoint whereas others are developed via the application of mixture models. in this article, a family of eight mixture models which utilizes the factor analysis covariance structure is extended to 12 models and applied to gene expression microarray data. this modelling approach builds on previous work by introducing a modified factor analysis covariance structure, leading to a family of 12 mixture models, including parsimonious models. this family of models allows for the modelling of the correlation between gene expression levels even when the number of samples is small. parameter estimation is carried out using a variant of the expectationmaximization algorithm and model selection is achieved using the bayesian information criterion. this expanded family of gaussian mixture models, known as the expanded parsimonious gaussian mixture model (epgmm) family, is then applied to two well-known gene expression data sets. results: the performance of the epgmm family of models is quantified using the adjusted rand index. this family of models gives very good performance, relative to existing popular clustering techniques, when applied to real gene expression microarray data.the epgmm family of models has been shown to give good clustering performance when applied to gene expression microarray data. these applications, concerning leukaemia and colon tissue data, respectively, were conducted as genuine clustering examples. that is, no information on the true tissue classification was used for parameter estimation or model selection. in fact, this information was only used to assess the performance of the selected model. in this context, the clustering performance of the epgmm family can be looked upon favourably. moreover, the performance of thethe epgmm family of mixture models has been introduced and used for the model-based clustering of gene expression microarray data. this family of models is an extension of the pgmm family of models which, in turn, is an extension of the mixtures of factor analysers model. the epgmm family of models are very well suited to the analysis of high-dimensional data. the reason for this suitability is 3-fold. first, each member of the epgmm family has a number of covariance parameters that is linear in the data dimensionality. second, as shown herein, the woodbury identity can be used to avoid the inversion of any non-diagonal pp matrices, leading to efficient computation. thirdly, as shown byin the context of the pgmm family, these models are trivially parallelizable, opening up the possibility of even more efficient parameter estimation using parallel computing. the epgmm family was applied to two well-known gene expression microarray data sets. in both cases, the epgmm family performed well and gave much better clusterings than several popular clustering techniques. herein, we took g = 2 for all of the analysis but future work will focus on the selection of g.  
