databases and ontologies model-based gene set analysis for bioconductor gene ontology and other forms of gene-category analysis play a major role in the evaluation of high-throughput experiments in molecular biology. single-category enrichment analysis procedures such as fishers exact test tend to flag large numbers of redundant categories as significant, which can complicate interpretation. we have recently developed an approach called model-based gene set analysis (mgsa), that substantially reduces the number of redundant categories returned by the gene-category analysis. in this work, we present the bioconductor package mgsa, which makes the mgsa algorithm available to users of the r language. our package provides a simple and flexible application programming interface for applying the approach. availability: the mgsa package has been made available as part of bioconductor 2.8. it is released under the conditions of the artisticgene ontology (go) analysis and other forms of gene-set enrichment analysis have become a standard exploratory tool for understanding the results of large-scale genomics experiments and for generating new hypotheses . most early approaches investigated each go term one at a time, for example testing for significant enrichment of responder genes in each term using fishers exact test. in contrast, two recent methods, gengo and model-based gene set analysis (mgsa) have been developed as global approaches, in which one aims to find the best combination of go terms to explain the observed biological response . such global, or modelbased approaches avoid problems connected with the statistical dependencies inherent in large ontologies such as the go, in which gene annotations are propagated to ancestor terms, or in any collection of gene sets in which the categories share many annotated genes. mgsa analyzes all go categories at once by modeling gene response as a function of the combination of active go terms. it employs probabilistic inference via a metropolis-hasting algorithm to estimate the probability of categories to be active. the mgsa approach naturally takes category overlap into accountpage: 1883 18821883the mgsa package is not restricted to the go but allows analysis with arbitrary gene sets. this flexibility is illustrated on a dataset in which gene expression for two yeast strains that differ by a single allele (pho84;) is compared. we ask which transcription factor(s) could together best explain the set of 84 transcripts that show differential expression. we stored these as vector of gene identifiers, observations: ybr050c ybr054w ybr093c ...have compiled a regulatory network for yeast by integrating data of in vivo transcription factor binding from chip/chip together with transcription factor motif analysis and sequence conservation. we defined as gene sets the sets of targets of each transcription factor of the network with intermediate cutoffs for binding intensities and conservation . this network contains a total of 2514 targets across 116 transcription factors. we simply stored it as a named list of vectors of gene identifiers, sets: $abf1ypl242c ypl159c ypl012w ... $ace2yor140w yor138c ynl327w ... .the mgsa package gives users of bioconductor programmatic access to mgsa. thus, it can be incorporated into scripts and pipelines written in r and be combined with many other packages of the bioinformatics community. the package comes with a simple but flexible api, which allows researchers not only to use go asposterior (std error)categories whose posterior is above 0.5 are interpreted to be active according to the mgsa model . source of gene sets, but also other categorization schemes like the kegg pathways or the broad institute gene sets that are easily available through other bioconductor packages, for instance via gseabase .  
