model-based media selection to minimize the cost of metabolic cooperation in microbial ecosystems motivation: simple forms of mutualism between microorganisms are widespread in nature. nevertheless, the role played by the environmental nutrient composition in mediating cross-feeding in microbial ecosystems is still poorly understood. results: here, we use mixed-integer bilevel linear programming to investigate the cost of sharing metabolic resources in microbial communities. the algorithm infers an optimal combination of nutrients that can selectively sustain synergistic growth for a pair of species and guarantees minimum cost of cross-fed metabolites. to test model-based predictions, we selected a pair of escherichia coli single gene knockouts auxotrophic, respectively, for arginine and leucine: dargb and dleub and we experimentally verified that model-predicted medium composition significantly favors mutualism. moreover, mass spectrometry profiling of exchanged metabolites confirmed the predicted cross-fed metabolites, supporting our constraint based modeling approach as a promising tool for engineering microbial consortia.in nature, beneficial interactions between species dramatically contribute in shaping ecosystem dynamics and survival. microbes form stable relationships with a multitude of different organisms, and many of these relationships have a direct impact on human health . hence, in spite of an increased complexity, the attention has been shifted from studying individual microorganisms to investigating the capabilities of microbial consortia as such . in parallel, several microbial communities have been engineered for bioremediation , metabolic engineering and biomedical utilization . however, understanding the ecological principles that shape and drive dynamics and evolution of microbial ecosystems remains a challenging task.cooperative interactions between species can take place at different levels. one of the most common cooperative interaction is metabolic, although such type of interactions can have radically different nature. in some cases only one species benefits from the community without participating in sharing metabolic resources (i.e. altruism versus parasitism), while often bacteria can establish mutually beneficial inter-species interactions . in this bidirectional interaction a pair of organisms receives an advantage from each other, typically in terms of cross-fed metabolites. nevertheless, mapping these interactions within a microbial community is hampered by the complexity and dynamic nature of multispecies ecosystems. to reduce problem complexity, artificial microbial communities have been successfully used to shed some light on the complex relationships between genetic interactions and microbial communitys behavior . in parallel,). the development of large-scale stoichiometric models combined with linear programming approaches has facilitated the quantitative understanding of microbial metabolism . in this constraint-based framework, the detailed reconstructions of metabolic reactions are deprived of their kinetic and efficiency parameters and are investigated as chemical reaction matrices. control strategies that optimize microorganism growth are used to select biologically meaningful steady-state flux distributions among an ensemble of in silico cell phenotypes . the ability to simulate distributions of fluxes, in various microorganisms and under diverse perturbations , renders this simple method valuable for diverse applications (; tepper and shlomi, 2010; i.e. metabolic engineering, drug discovery, etc.). using stoichiometric models to capture complex cooperative behavior within microbial communities, however, is still an open challenge . recently, a set of 46 escherichia coli single gene knockouts, auxotrophic for different classes of amino acids and nucleotides, were used to test their ability to establish synergistic growth . each pair of mutants was co-cultivated in a glucose minimal medium and growth was monitored over a 4-days period. under this particular nutrient composition, none of the mutants was capable of surviving individually, but significant growth was detected for 17 of the co-cultivated pairs. because of their reduced complexity, these synthetic microbial communities enabled the use of quantitative predictive models (e.g. constraintbased models) to resolve the underlying molecular interactions. joint biochemical reaction networks and flux balance analysis were used to predict whether a pair of e.coli knockouts can grow by sharing essential metabolites . this constraint-based modeling approach has been shown to be too permissive, allowing synergistic growth for more than 90 of the 1035 mutant pairs. one of the limits of this approach is that the cost of sharing metabolic resources between microorganisms is typically not taken into account. within a community, altruism in bacteria should be promoted in order to sustain mutualistic type of interactions. this could be obtained by an appropriate environment, where sharing metabolic resources is crucial for survival of the different species and the cost of producing essential metabolites is minimized . to this end, we here propose an algorithm to predict an optimal nutrient composition that prevents growth of two species when grown in isolation, but promotes their synergistic growth by minimizing the cost of sharing essential metabolites . to experimentally test our in silico predictions we selected a pair of single e.coli gene knockouts: dargb and dleub, auxotrophic, respectively, for arginine and leucine. these two strains exhibited poor synergistic growth in a glucose minimal medium , and, more generally, cross-feeding of arginine and leucine was found to induce moderate and very low cooperativity, respectively . we applied our algorithm and simulated synergistic growth of dargb and dleub in a glucose minimal medium and in the model-based predicted medium, where the cost of the interaction was predicted to be significantly lower. we experimentally tested the ability to coculture these two e.coli knockout strains in a minimal m9 medium supplemented with nucleotides precursors, as suggested by the model, and showed significantly improved synergistic growth. by monitoring the supernatant composition using a sensitive mass spectrometry approach, we could also identify the most relevant exchanged metabolites between the two strains and support model predictions.  
