gene expression model-free unsupervised gene set screening based on information enrichment in expression profiles motivation: a number of unsupervised gene set screening methods have recently been developed for search of putative functional gene sets based on their expression profiles. most of the methods statistically evaluate whether the expression profiles of each gene set are fit to assumed models: e.g. co-expression across all samples or a subgroup of samples. however, it is possible that they fail to capture informative gene sets whose expression profiles are not fit to the assumed models. results: to overcome this limitation, we propose a model-free unsupervised gene set screening method, matrix information enrichment analysis (miea). without assuming any specific models, miea screens gene sets based on information richness of their expression profiles. we extensively compared the performance of miea to those of other unsupervised gene set screening methods, using various types of simulated and real data. the benchmark tests demonstrated that miea can detect singular expression profiles that the other methods fail to find, and performs broadly well for various types of input data. taken together, this study introduces miea as a broadly applicable gene set screening tool for mining regulatory programs from transcriptome data.recently, a number of gene set screening methods have been introduced successfully to analyze regulatory programs hidden in transcriptome data. while classical microarray analyses focus on individual genes, gene set screening methods search a prescribed gene set library for gene sets with informative expression profiles in given transcriptome data. by treating a gene set as a unit, these methods enhance statistical power as well as make results easier to biologically interpret. for example, gene set enrichment analysis (gsea), which finds gene sets showing differential expression between two sample groups , has become one of the pivotal tools for transcriptome analysis. a lot of other methods employing similar supervised approach are used to search to whom correspondence should be addressed. for gene sets associated with given sample labels . however, if we want to globally search for putatively functional gene sets, irrespectively of association with sample labels, we need another approach that does not rely on supervision of sample labels, i.e. the unsupervised approach. for this purpose,proposed a method to find a set of genes whose expressions are induced or repressed in any samples based on a hypergeometric test. although their pioneering method realizes an unsupervised approach, this method can also be regarded as a kind of supervised method in that it tests differential expression between a single sample and the others. we recently proposed an unsupervised method, extraction of expression module (eem) to search for gene sets that have significantly large subsets of genes coherently expressed in the input transcriptome data (also proposed a method termed gene set expression coherence analysis (gseca), which selects gene sets based on expression coherence. gseca is different from eem in that gseca measures expression coherence, taking into account all the members in the gene set rather than focusing on the coherent subset. since eem assumes that a significant gene set is co-expressed across all samples, it is possible that eem fails to capture gene sets that exhibit coherent expression patterns across only a subset of samples. to overcome this limitation, we also developed an extended version of eem termed biclustering-based eem (beem), which takes advantage of a biclustering algorithm to identify gene sets coherently expressed in a subgroup of samples . compared with the supervised approach, few gene set screening methods have so far employed the unsupervised approach, and also there remain some problems to be solved in the existing methods. for example, although eem and beem evaluate expression coherence of an input gene set based on specific models, i.e. co-expression across all samples or a subgroup of samples, it is possible that such a model-based method fails to capture informative expression profiles that do not fit to the assumed model. to address this problem, we developed a novel model-free method termed miea (matrix information enrichment analysis). without assuming any specific model, miea evaluates information in expression profiles; therefore, it could be used to search for gene sets associated with any types of informative expression profiles. in order to reveal the properties of miea and other unsupervised gene set screening methods, we extensively performed benchmark tests to compare their performances using both simulated andin this study, we introduced a new unsupervised model-free gene set screening method, miea, and extensively compared its performance with those of the four existing unsupervised gene set screening methods: ssa, eem, beem and gseca. ssa is a reformulated version of the classical gene set screening method proposed by. ssa shows by far the worst performance in all the benchmark tests. this result seems reasonable when considering that ssa tests over or underexpression of a gene set in each single sample individually, while the other methods take into account expression profiles of a gene set across multiple samples. on the other hand, eem, which tests expression coherence across all samples, performs broadly well for various types of input data. beem, which tests over or underexpression in a subgroup of samples, works well for the gnf expression dataset, confirming our previous report . however, in the other expression datasets, eem outperforms beem; biclustertype expression modules targeted by beem are less common than coherent expression modules targeted by eem in most real expression datasets. the feature of these methods is that they are based on the rigid model assumptions. there are pros and cons about this feature. a notable advantage of this feature is that it can be utilized for not only gene set screening, but also expression module discovery. if a gene set is taken as significant by eem and beem, a subset of genes should be co-expressed across all samples or in a subgroup of samples. eem and beem can extract the subset as an expression module. this expression module discovery approachbrings us much biological knowledge, especially when combined with additional analyses of the extracted module information . however, note that eem and beem potentially fail to capture expression profiles which do not fit to their expression module models. similarly to eem, gseca assumes expression coherence of input gene sets as an indication of its functionality. however, while eem tests existence of a coherent subset in the input gene set, gseca evaluates overall coherence by calculating the sum of correlations for all gene pairs in the gene set . in the real data test, this approach retrieves the largest number of gene sets as significant, possibly by capturing loosely coherent patterns that cannot be detected by eem. an example of such an expression profile is given in supplementary. however, note that gseca cannot capture a gene set containing subsets whose expressions are anti-correlated, because the coherence signals cancel each other out. supplementaryshows an example taken as significant by miea, eem and beem, but not gseca. this case was also shown in the simulated data test using the sine-wave model (supplementaryand g). the newly introduced method, miea, is designed to detect any informative expression profiles of the input gene sets without assuming any specific models. this notable feature endows the method with the broad applicability so that it can capture complex expression profiles that the other model-based methods fail to detect. supplementaryand d shows such complex expression profiles, which are hard to be captured by any simple models. however, note that this broad applicability comes at cost: in case where a model-based method would be appropriate, the model-free method has less power, demonstrated by the simulated data test using the coherent and bicluster model. . collectively, we conclude that miea is broadly applicable to various types of gene sets and expression datasets, while eem and gseca also have comparably broad applicability. since eem and gseca have biased preferences for their targets, they might perform better than miea when applied to their favorite target. although each method alone seems to have enough performance, combining these different methods would enable more comprehensive screenings for functional gene sets. this study not only introduced miea but also revealed unique characteristics of the novel and existing unsupervised gene set screening methods by performing extensive benchmark tests. taken together with our previous studies , this study provides a foundation for unsupervised gene set screening analysis, a novel paradigm in transcriptome data analysis.  
