modeling and analyzing complex biological networks incooperating experimental information on both network topology and stable states motivation: linking the topology of a complex network to its long-term behavior is a basic problem in network theory, which has been on the focus of many recent research publications. to obtain a suitable boolean model for a biological system, one must analyze the initial model and compare it with other experimental evidence, and if necessary, make adjustments by changing the topology of the wiring diagram. however, our knowledge on how to link the topology of a network to its long-term behavior is very limited due to the complexity of the problem. since the need to consider complex biological networks has become ever greater, develop both theoretical foundation and algorithms for model selection and analysis has been brought to the forefront of biological network study. results: this article proposes a novel method to study intrinsically the relationship between experimental data and the possible boolean networks, which can be used to model the underlying system. simple and easy to use criteria for a boolean network to have both a given network topology and a given set of stable states are derived. these criteria can be used to guide the selection of a boolean network model for the system, as well as to gain information on the intrinsic properties, such as the robustness and the evolvability, of the system. a boolean model for the fruit fly drosophila melanogaster is used to explain the method.boolean networks were introduced as random models of genetic regulatory networks to study biological systems by, and in recent years, we have seen a rapid increase of applications of boolean networks to modeling and analyzing biological systems, as well as a rapid increase of research activities aim at developing foundational theories and algorithms for boolean networks to address questions arise from biological applications. see for example,, davidson and levine (2008), karlebach and shamir (2008),, purnick and, tomlin and axelrod (2007) and the references therein. the construction of a boolean model for a biological system, such as a gene regulatory network, is based on the experimental evidence on the interactions among the genes (; to whom correspondence should be addressed.). the interactions among the genes are specified by the lines. arrows mean activations and blunts mean inhibitions. to distinguish the different actions of the genes among themselves and to make it clear from the diagram which of the logical operations , and should be used in formulating the updating functions, two copies of each of the genes wg 3 , wg 4 , ptc 1 and ptc 2 were drawn, with the assumption that the identical copies were to be combined by the logical operation . more details are provided in the supplementary material.). the data can be integrated into a diagram, which is similar to an electrical wiring diagram , and logical functions that define a boolean network for the biological system can then be formulated according to the topology (how it is wired) of the diagram . for a system that only partial information was obtained through experiments, the choice of a boolean network for the system is nonunique, assumptions must be made in order to construct a wiring diagram, and linking the topology of the wiring diagram to the stable states of the network constructed from it becomes crucial . if the system under consideration is small, then we can use the exhaustive method to study the system effectively. for systems occurring in biology, which are typically large, developing general theory to guide our study is important. however, for complex systems, only in some special cases, we have a clear picture of how to derive information on the long-term behavior of a network from the topology of the corresponding wiring diagram. here, we briefly review some recent publications that are relevant to this study.studied a family of boolean networks for which each updating function (see section 2 for definition) is given by a monomial. a method to derive the dynamical properties of such a boolean network from the structure of the monomials that define the network was derived there, and thus  
