systems biology modeling community-wide molecular networks of multicellular systems motivation: multicellular systems, such as tissues, are composed of different cell types that form a heterogeneous community. behavior of these systems is determined by complex regulatory networks within (intracellular networks) and between (intercellular networks) cells. increasingly more studies are applying genome-wide experimental approaches to delineate the contributions of individual cell types (e.g. stromal, epithelial, vascular cells) to collective behavior of heterogeneous cell communities (e.g. tumors). although many computational methods have been developed for analyses of intracellular networks based on genome-scale data, these efforts have not been extended toward analyzing genomic data from heterogeneous cell communities. results: here, we propose a network-based approach for analyses of genome-scale data from multiple cell types to extract community-wide molecular networks comprised of intra-and intercellular interactions. intercellular interactions in this model can be physical interactions between proteins or indirect interactions mediated by secreted metabolites of neighboring cells. applying this method on data from a recent study on xenograft mouse models of human lung adenocarcinoma, we uncover an extensive network of intra-and intercellular interactions involved in the acquired resistance to angiogenesis inhibitors.individual cells within a heterogeneous cell population interact with each other through secreted molecules and membrane proteins, sometimes referred to as cross-talk . at the molecular level, this population can be viewed as a communitywide network of molecular interactions comprising intracellular interactions within each cell as well as intercellular interactions of molecules of different cells. since population characteristics as a whole are highly dependent on the intra-as well as intercellular networks, the global architecture of the communitywide molecular network (cmn, made of intra-and intercellular to whom correspondence should be addressed.molecular interactions) can determine the collective behavior of heterogeneous cell communities. network-based analyses of genomic data have shed light on the global organization of intracellular networks contributing to normal and malignant behavior of cells . mounting evidence now suggests that interplays of cells within a microenvironment can give rise to complex population behavior . such complex interactions of cells within a population have been observed in developmental processes , in stem cell niches and in tumor microenvironments . however, most of the studies on deciphering the complex pattern of molecular network interactions in such multicellular systems and their role in population-wide collective behavior have been focused on a limited number of molecules. although some notable large-scale studies in some experimental systems have been undertaken , the computational methodology of analysis primarily involved candidate-based approaches, limiting the scope of analysis. more powerful computational methods for analyses of genomic data from heterogeneous cell populations would therefore greatly enhance our ability to gain insight into the organization of cmns and their role in the collective population behavior. here, in order to enable modeling of molecular networks of whole-cell populations, we developed a network model of community-wide molecular interactions by combining intracellular interactions from each cell type and their intercellular connections into a single global network (community molecular network) . we use this global network in conjunction with the genome-wide gene expression data from different cell types to extract networks of interest showing community-wide molecular interactions most highlighted by the data. we integrate genomic data with the global network using netwalk , a computational algorithm for seamless integration of genomic data with molecular networks. the advantage of netwalk compared to other network analysis tools is that netwalk takes into account the whole-data distribution without requiring statistical cutoffs or predetermined gene lists of interest. netwalk output is a distribution of edge flux (ef) values containing numeric score of relevance assigned to each interaction in the network. ef values, just like in gene expression data, can be used for further statistical analyses, allowing for direct network-based statistical analyses. using this platform, we present an analysis of recently published gene expression data from epithelial andare extracellular, protein 1 in one cell type can interact with protein 2 in the other, and vice versa. in addition, since the metabolite c is secreted into the extracellular space, the reaction performed by enzyme 3 in one cell can affect the reaction performed by enzyme 4 in the other. stromal cells of a mouse xenograft model of acquired resistance to bevacizumab (angiogenesis inhibitor) , and identify previously unrecognized cmns of stromal and epithelial cells involved in acquired resistance to this targeted therapy.as a proof of concept analysis using our cmn model, we chose to use the data from a recent study utilizing mouse xenograft models to study acquired resistance of human lung adenocarcinomas to angiogenesis inhibitors . the authors in the aforementioned study injected h1975 cells (human non-small cell lung cancer cell line that is sensitive to bevacizumab) into mice and after a while started treating them with a vehicle control or bevacizumab. despite initial response, majority of tumors developed resistance to the drug. gene expression microarray analyses were then performed on control and bevacizumab-resistant tumors (n = 3 for each) using illumina mouse-specific (wg-6 v2) and humanspecific (wg-6 v3) arrays. mouse-specific arrays were used to measure stromal gene expression and the human array was used to measure the tumor gene expression. in order to identify community-wide molecular networks involved in the acquired resistance to bevacizumab, we first performed t-tests on each gene in the stromal and tumor datasets to score the extent of their change in resistant versus control cases. the resultant t-values (the value of t-statistic from t-tests) for tumor and stromal gene expression data had different distributions; stromal cells had a wider t-value distribution (not shown), consistent with the original studys report that stromal gene expression changes were more pronounced than that in tumor data. therefore, we transformed the two t-value distributions using quantile normalization to obtain identical distributions for tumor and stromal t-values. these t-values (two sets, one for stromal and one for tumor cells) were used as node weights for our netwalk-based network analyses .in this study, we proposed a modeling approach of multicellular systems as community-wide molecular networks to increase ourunderstanding of the complex interplay between intracellular networks of different cell types within the community. using our previously developed data-biased random walk approach, netwalk, together with cmn, we were able to obtain a view of the complex interplay between intracellular networks of tumor and stromal cells in acquired drug resistance. in addition to identifying the previously reported findings from the original study of cascone et al., our approach uncovered several novel intercellular interactions involving physical as well as indirect metabolic cross-talk with potential roles in the drug resistance phenotype. although experimental validation of these findings is beyond the scope of the current study, which is to demonstrate the use of cmn in conjunction with netwalk, the analyses presented here show that the results faithfully reflect the data distribution that was used as input for netwalk (and supplementary). although the analyses demonstrated here used netwalk for network integration, other methods, such as those based on data cutoffs could be used. although insightful community networks can be constructed by using gene lists from such data cutoffs, most of the genes within these lists will not be used for network construction and therefore will not be accounted for during analyses (supplementary). however, the interactions with highest ef values generated by netwalk contain most of the genes with highest data values, and therefore information loss is minimized in netwalk-based network analyses (supplementaryand legend). the community network model that we present here takes into account both physical and indirect interactions mediated by secreted metabolites between different cells within the community. although physical interactions through ecm components have been well-characterized in several systems, intercellular interactions at the metabolite level have not been studied to a similar extent , leaving much room for exploration. our model enables analyses of large-scale functional genomics data from multicellular systems for the identification of complex scenarios involving functional interplay at the physical and metabolic levels between different cells of the multicellular system. overall, our community-wide molecular network model is an invaluable tool in genome-wide studies of multicellular systems.  
