gene expression modeling dynamic functional relationship networks and application to ex vivo human erythroid differentiation motivation: functional relationship networks, which summarize the probability of co-functionality between any two genes in the genome, could complement the reductionist focus of modern biology for understanding diverse biological processes in an organism. one major limitation of the current networks is that they are static, while one might expect functional relationships to consistently reprogram during the differentiation of a cell lineage. to address this potential limitation, we developed a novel algorithm that leverages both differentiation stage-specific expression data and large-scale heterogeneous functional genomic data to model such dynamic changes. we then applied this algorithm to the time-course rna-seq data we collected for ex vivo human erythroid cell differentiation. results: through computational cross-validation and literature validation, we show that the resulting networks correctly predict the (de)-activated functional connections between genes during erythro-poiesis. we identified known critical genes, such as hbd and gata1, and functional connections during erythropoiesis using these dynamic networks, while the traditional static network was not able to provide such information. furthermore, by comparing the static and the dynamic networks, we identified novel genes (such as osbp2 and pdzk1ip1) that are potential drivers of erythroid cell differentiation. this novel method of modeling dynamic networks is applicable to other differentiation processes where time-course genome-scale expression data are available, and should assist in generating greater understanding of the functional dynamics at play across the genome during development. availability and implementation: the network described in this article is available at http://guanlab.ccmb.functional relationship networks offer a potentially critical complement to the reductionist focus of modern biology and to our ability to understand and interpret diverse biological processes systematically in an organism. these networks are modeled through integrating heterogeneous large-scale genomic data and they represent the probability of co-functionality between any two genes in the genome. mining these networks can help us discover gene functions and identify disease/phenotype-associated genes. we have previously modeled the global functional relationship network for the mouse and developed the algorithm that can systematically model tissue-specific networks in mammalian systems . current network models, including the ones we previously established, have one major limitation: a single network is generated without considering the dynamic changes of functional connections, which might be expected to change during the differentiation of any given cell lineage. it should be anticipated that functional connections might consistently evolve, which would allow different cell fates to arise from the same genetic background. it has been widely accepted and modeled that at the co-expression, physical interaction and pathway levels, interactions between genes are constantly changing . motivated by our recently developed method to infer dynamic signaling network responses and to classify cell lineage-specific expression patterns , we extend our algorithm to integrate heterogeneous datasets for predicting the dynamic co-functionality relationships across a differentiation process. to capture such dynamics in functional connections, here, we introduce the concept of transitional functional relationship networks, which are intended to reveal the activated and deactivated functional relationships between any two stages distinguishable during cell lineage differentiation. the assumption behind this algorithm is that an existing connection in the stationary network is likely to be activated, if both members of a pair of genes become upregulated, and vice versa. however, unlike most of the existing methods that directly map upregulated/downregulated genes to the stationary network , we reweigh diverse genomic datasets for their relevance to the (de)-activated to whom correspondence should be addressed.) and weighted correlation network analysis (wgcna;), this algorithm has the following benefits:systematics in developmental biology is an exciting emerging field, which uses large-scale genomic data to understand the complexity of developmental processes. in this study, we developed a new algorithm that models the dynamic functional relationships during a differentiation process through large-scale data integration. such networks describe the dependency of functional relationships between two time points. this novel model for transitional networks, is an advance over our previous global , context-specific and tissue-specific networks , as well as other previously established functional networks , all of which are static in nature. these transitional networks reveal functional relationships and genes important to erythroid cell differentiation and function, which are not shown in the static networks. through the application of bayesian integration, the approach described here managed to combine diverse genomic datasets, while datasets related to the target stage were assigned stronger weights. the key element determining bayesian classifier, the gold standard pairs, is refined to a group of gene pairs that are either upregulated or downregulated together across the various developmental stages. hence, data from relevant contexts are highly weighted and trusted, while irrelevant or inaccurate data are weighted more slightly and less regarded. the results demonstrated that the dynamic stage-specific network algorithm could precisely reveal functional relationships that were masked in analysis of the static networks. the genes that changed most were also confirmed to be highly related to the differentiation process. we expect that this same generic algorithm can be readily applied to other developmental or differentiation processes, given appropriate time-course expression data. for example, when predicting regulatory networks, classical co-expressionbased analyses take a single time-course dataset as its only input. these approaches are likely to be sensitive to noise and require a considerable number of different time points in a single dataset. compared with classical approaches, these transitional networks make use of the highly specific time-course dataset together with thousands of public datasets. we expect that combining the transitional network together with classical co-expression networks should improve the performance of these networks in identifying regulatory elements. funding: this work is supported by nih 1r21ns082212-01, nih university of michigan obrien kidney translational core center, aha midwest postdoctoral fellowship n012616, nih grants r21 hl114368 and u01 hl117658.  
