modeling mechanistic biological networks: an advanced boolean approach motivation: the understanding of the molecular sources for diseases like cancer can be significantly improved by computational models. recently, boolean networks have become very popular for modeling signaling and regulatory networks. however, such models rely on a set of boolean functions that are in general not known. unfortunately, while detailed information on the molecular interactions becomes available in large scale through electronic databases, the information on the boolean functions does not become available simultaneously and has to be included manually into the models, if at all known. results: we propose a new boolean approach which can directly utilize the mechanistic network information available through modern databases. the boolean function is implicitly defined by the reaction mechanisms. special care has been taken for the treatment of kinetic features like inhibition. the method has been applied to a signaling model combining the wnt and mapk pathway. availability: a sample c++ implementation of the proposed method is available for linux and compatible systems throughan important focus in systems biology are emergent properties of biological systems, properties which arise from the system as a whole and which cannot be explained by looking at individual components alone. a common theme in this evolving field are biological networks, which describe complex relations between biological entities. modeling these networks uncovers the systems behavior as a whole based on the properties and interactions of the contained compounds. an important subset of such networks describes mechanistic processes among biochemical species. such processes play an important role in cellular metabolism, signal transductions and gene regulation. computational models of these networks have been investigated for a long time. a first category of models concentrate on single pathways, i.e. functionally related parts of the networks, with the use of differential equations (; schoeberl to whom correspondence should be addressed). such models usually yield high-quality predictions of the system dynamics with quantitative information on the molecule concentrations. those models, however, require accurate kinetic parameters. the emergence of large-scale electronic databases like kegg , reactome or the pathway interaction database (pid) opened new directions in modeling biological networks. for large models, it is often unfeasible to obtain all the necessary kinetic parameters. in such cases, so-called structural methods are applied. these include elementary flux modes , flux balance analysis and petri nets . a further structural method that became very popular in particular for signaling and gene regulatory networks are boolean networks . in a boolean network, each compound is represented by a network node and has an associated boolean value. this value either represents the existence of a compound, i.e. it is true if the compound is present in a significant concentration and false if not, or it represents the activity. in the network, nodes are connected by edges that represent biochemical interactions. the boolean value of a node is calculated in each step of the algorithm through a boolean function, which depends on the boolean values of all inbound nodes. usually, while the topology of the network is known (e.g. from interaction databases or qualitative interaction studies), the boolean function is unclear. one approach is to estimate this function by adapting the model to experimental data as shown in, we introduced a different boolean approach for metabolic networks, the concept of scopes, which circumvents this problem. here, a (metabolic) reaction is active if all of its substrates are present (i.e. true). subsequently, all compounds become true for which at least one producing reaction is active. hence, the boolean function is clearly defined by the topology and is represented by the conjunction (and) of all substrates of a reaction. in signaling and gene regulatory networks, the situation is more complex. in fact, there exist different views on these networks. a phenomenological view represents experimental findings, like a and c activate and b and d inactivate protein e. this view, which is similar to the sbgn 1 activity flow ,page: 558 557563  
