structural bioinformatics anchorms: a bioinformatics tool to derive structural information from the mass spectra of cross-linked protein complexes mass spectrometry is being increasingly used in the structural elucidation of mega-dalton protein complexes in an approach termed ms3d, referring to the application of ms to the study of macromolecular structures. this involves the identification of cross-linked residues in the constituent proteins of chemically cross-linked multi-subunit complexes. anchorms was developed to simplify ms3d studies by identifying cross-linked peptides in complex peptide mixtures , and to determine the specific residues involved in each cross-link. when identifying cross-linked peptide pairs (clpp), anchorms implements a mathematical model to exclude false positives by using a dynamic score threshold to estimate the number of false-positive peak matches expected in an ms/ms spectrum. this model was derived from clpps with randomly generated sequences. anchorms does not require specific sample labeling or pre-treatment, and anchorms is especially suited for discriminating between clpps that differ only in the cross-linked residue pairs.many essential protein complexes are composed of multiple subunits, where an understanding of the structural arrangement and interactions between the constituent subunit proteins is needed for a mechanistic insight into the function of the complex. however, large multi-subunit protein complexes are often not amenable to structural elucidation by traditional methods such as x-ray crystallography or nuclear magnetic resonance. mass spectrometry (ms) has been applied to enzymatic digests of chemically crosslinked protein complexes to identify cross-linked peptides. the identity of cross-linked peptides and the cross-linked residues indicates possible interaction surfaces. this allowed the determination of the orientation and contact points of subunits within large protein complexes, such as the 15-subunit 670-kda complex of pol ii with tfiif . this approach is termed ms3d and requires specialized software for the analysis of the ms and the ms/ms spectra . perhaps the most challenging aspect of this type of analysis is the correct identification of low-abundance cross-linked peptide pairs (clpps) in complex sample mixtures. a number of software tools have been released to address this difficulty, but many are orientated toward niche experimental designs and sample treatments . furthermore, some implement sophisticated scoring schemes and probability models to estimate the rate of false-positive identification. generally, these are either trained on specific empirical datasets , or mathematically derived from theoretical principles of gas-phase peptide chemistry . however, if the experimental training dataset is insufficiently diverse, bias may be introduced into the resulting scoring scheme or probability model. anchorms was developed as an alternative general tool for identifying clpps in ms and ms/ms spectra. matches and the clpp length, ion charge and tolerance. the difference in the number of false-positive matches observed between absolute and relative tolerance modes was particularly noticeable. the model is not dependent on residue composition, and considers the aggregate of the residue compositions that were sampled. anchorms implemented this calibrated mathematical model as a dynamic false-positive threshold, which is calculated for each putative clpp spectrum assignment. those that score below the threshold value are excluded by anchorms.  
