modified screening and ranking algorithm for copy number variation detection motivation: copy number variation (cnv) is a type of structural variation, usually defined as gen-omic segments that are 1 kb or larger, which present variable copy numbers when compared with a reference genome. the screening and ranking algorithm (sara) was recently proposed as an efficient approach for multiple change-points detection, which can be applied to cnv detection. however, some practical issues arise from application of sara to single nucleotide polymorphism data. results: in this study, we propose a modified sara on cnv detection to address these issues. first, we use the quantile normalization on the original intensities to guarantee that the normal mean model-based sara is a robust method. second, a novel normal mixture model coupled with a modified bayesian information criterion is proposed for candidate change-point selection and further clustering the potential cnv segments to copy number states. simulations revealed that the modified sara became a robust method for identifying change-points and achieved better performance than the circular binary segmentation (cbs) method. by applying the modified sara to real data from the hapmap project, we illustrated its performance on detecting cnv segments. in conclusion, our modified sara method improves sara theoretically and numerically, for identifying cnvs with high-throughput genotyping data. availability and implementation: the modsara package is implemented in r program and freely available atsingle nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), structural variations (such as deletion, duplication or insertion of a chromosome segment) and epigenetic reasons account for the tremendous variability of human genomics. copy number variation (cnv) is a type of structural variation, which is usually defined as genomic segments that are 1 kb or larger, presenting variable copy numbers when compared with a reference genome . duplication or deletion on any of the two copies of genomic segments results in variation of this region in human populations. cnvs are generated by recombination-based or replication-based mechanisms, which can be inherited; their formation also occurs when de novo locus-specific mutation happens . with the new technologies developed in recent years, smaller copy number variants that are even in snp level are detectable . increasing evidence suggests that cnvs commonly exist and have strong impact on disease risks. through cnv mapping of human genome from 270 individuals, researchers found that 12 of human genome is subject to cnvs . meanwhile, other research revealed that the average number of cnvs per individual in the 112 hapmap individuals was 27 . moreover, a large-scale cnv detection study in human genome demonstrated that a large amount of the identified cnvs overlapped with protein coding region (transcription levels higher or lower than those that can be achieved by control of transcripts of a single copy per haploid genome . given this information, cnvs in human genome may significantly affect risks of not only mendelian diseases but also many common diseases. great effort is being made to uncover a causal role of cnvs in pathogenesis of human common disorders, such as pancreatic adenocarcinoma, autism, growth retardation and hiv progression . precisely identifying cnvs and studying their genetic functions will greatly benefit the functional analysis of human genomics and complement current gwass, which measure genome-wide genotype variations . various techniques have been proposed for detecting dna cnvs in humans and mammalians. the advent of whole-genome snp genotyping array and the next generation sequencing which assays hundreds of thousands of points in parallel permits kilobaseresolution detection of cnvs. with the development of these highresolution techniques, many population-based statistical algorithms have been developed for cnv studies including quantisnp , cnvcall, cnvdetector , cghcall (van de), cnv-seq , cnvtools , birdsuite and cnvassoc . penncnv is probably the most popular software for cnv analysis, which implements hidden markov model incorporating the log r ratio (lrr) values, b allele frequency (baf) values and also the distances between neighbouring snps. meanwhile, many change-point-based approaches have also been developed and extensively applied to the detection of cnvs. existing change-point-based approaches use exhaustive searching, such as binary segmentation method , circular binary segmentation (cbs;) and penalized regression . these global searching approaches present high computational complexity, given that the data points are repeatedly used in the process of determining change-points along the same sequence. as a result, finding multiple change-points in massive snp genotyping array data accurately and efficiently is challenging. the screening and ranking algorithm (sara) was recently proposed as an alternative approach for multiple change-points detection . this algorithm hypothesizes that determining whether a position at the dna sequence is a changepoint or not does not depend on the information far away from this position. the sara algorithm searches along the sequence in a series of windows, and it finds the local maximizers for the scan statistic as the most probable change-points locally. these local maximizers are then ranked and chosen by a backward subset selection strategy based on bayesian information criterion (bic), which yields final change-points. as discussed by niu and zhang (2012), it takes only on operations to perform the screening and ranking steps. therefore, sara ensures low computational complexity down to on, which makes it more efficient than the existing iterative searching algorithms with complexity at least on 2 . this statistical property makes sara more suitable for high throughput datasets. however, some practical issues arise from the application of sara to snp data for identifying cnvs. first, the distribution of intensities in high-throughput affymetrix snp array, for example, always presents heavy tails when compared with normal distributions, which violates the assumption of sara. second, the changepoints identified by sara are not clustered to make final calling of copy number states. in this article, to address the above two issues, we propose several strategies to implement sara on cnv detection. first, we use the quantile normalization (qn) on the original intensities to alleviate the requirement of normality. second, we propose to use a novel normal mixture model and apply the bic criterion for candidate change-point selection and further cluster the potential cnv segments to copy number states. after our modification, the sara algorithm is robust to the violations of the normal assumption and yields high sensitivity and specificity for identifying change-points. through intensive simulation studies, we evaluated the validity of the modified sara on identifying change-points for cnvs. our simulation results demonstrated that the modified sara achieved higher power than cbs . by applying it to real data from the hapmap project, we illustrated the performance of the modified sara on detecting cnv segments.in this article, we proposed a modified sara method to improve the power of sara by qn when the intensity is not normally distributed, and to reduce the false-positive errors by a clustering strategy.to evaluate the performance of our proposed method versus existing ones, we developed a novel method to generate dna sequences that mimic real data for the purpose of evaluating cnv detection. our simulations with noises from t-distributions highlight the necessity of preprocessing by qn on sara which renders its robustness to the normal assumption . moreover, we propose to use multiple bandwidths in identifying change-point candidates to optimize the sensitivity, then a normal mixture model-based clustering strategy following bic criterion in deletion of false positives to optimize its specificity. by applying the modified sara on a simulated dataset mimicking a real dataset from the hapmap project, we illustrated the great performance of the modified sara on detecting change-points with snp genotyping arrays. in all the scenarios we simulated, the modified sara achieved better performance than cbs (tables 3, 4 and supplementary). qn also affected the performance of cbs to some extent. in addition, real data analyses indicated that the modified sara outperformed cbs in both sensitivity and specificity although they identified similar number of changepoints. our improvements emphasize the preference to use the modified sara in identification of cnvs. in conclusion, we propose a modified sara method by optimizing its performance in both theoretical and applicable aspects for identifying cnvs with highthroughput genotyping arrays. the better performance of the modified sara on change-points detection compared with cbs highlights the necessity and contribution of our modification. the combination of multiple bandwidths and normal mixture model strategies allows optimized sensitivity and specificity. on the one hand, using multiple bandwidths, the modified sara achieves better power of the detection of changepoints. while, on the other hand, the implementation of the normal mixture model-based clustering overcomes the over-sensitivity of the original sara to small mean changes, which is undesirable for cnv detection. thus, the modified sara has more precise identification of the change-points corresponding to true cnvs. such advantages are exhibited in the real data analysis results, in which the modified sara identified more realistic cnv segments than cbs. one concern of our modification is that larger cnv segments may be produced than the original version of sara. this is because we cluster two adjacent cnv segments together at the clustering step, when both have the same direction of change and similar jump sizes. however, as noted in the real data analysis, the proportion of short segments identified by sara was larger than cbs, which demonstrated that our modification did not mistakenly group adjacent change-points. we provide a reliable solution for the over-sensitivity issue of the original sara method in this study. to effectively filter false-positive change-points, our suggestion is to apply normal mixture model-based clustering following subset selection based on modified bic. other combinations of these two strategies were also explored in the simulation studies: (i) selection with modified bic criterion only; (ii) normal mixture model-based clustering only and (iii) selection with modified bic criterion following normal mixture model-based clustering were all applied to the simulated datasets. however, our proposed combination exhibited the best performance on subset selection of the candidate pool. the underlying mechanism is of interest and will be further investigated in our future study. investigating the association of cnvs with common quantitative traits and human complex diseases is a challenging task in current genetic community. our implementation in the sara method by optimizing its performance is of great value for cnv identification, which ensures more accurate and valid cnv calls for future association study. compared with the originally developed  
