gene expression modular analysis of gene expression data with r large sets of data, such as expression profiles from many samples, require analytic tools to reduce their complexity. the iterative signature algorithm (isa) is a biclustering algorithm. it was designed to decompose a large set of data into so-called modules. in the context of gene expression data, these modules consist of subsets of genes that exhibit a coherent expression profile only over a subset of microarray experiments. genes and arrays may be attributed to multiple modules and the level of required coherence can be varied resulting in different resolutions of the modular mapping. in this short note, we introduce two bioconductor software packages written in gnu r: the isa2 package includes an optimized implementation of the isa and the eisa package provides a convenient interface to run the isa, visualize its output and put the biclusters into biological context. potential users of these packages are all r and bioconductor users dealing with tabular (e.g. gene expression) data.the isa can be applied to identify coherent substructures (i.e. modules) from any rectangular matrix of data. to be specific, we consider here the case of transcriptomics data corresponding to a set of gene expression profiles from a collection of samples. the method has been described in detail in. here we only give a brief summary. the isa identifies modules by an iterative procedure. the algorithm starts from an input seed (corresponding to some set of genes or samples), which is refined at each iteration by adding and/or removing genes and/or samples until the process converges to a stable set, which is referred to as a transcription module. the output of isa is a collection of potentially overlapping modules. every module contains genes that are over-and/or under expressed, in samples that belong to the module. in every module, each gene and each sample is attributed a score between 1 and 1, which reflects the strength of the association with the module. moreover, if the scores of two genes of a module have the same sign, then they are correlated (across the samples of the module), opposite signs mean anti-correlation. similarly, if two sample scores have the same sign, then these samples are correlated (across the genes of the module), opposite signs indicate anti-correlation. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
