modular rate laws for enzymatic reactions: thermodynamics, elasticities and implementation motivation: standard rate laws are a key requisite for systematically turning metabolic networks into kinetic models. they should provide simple, general and biochemically plausible formulae for reaction velocities and reaction elasticities. at the same time, they need to respect thermodynamic relations between the kinetic constants and the metabolic fluxes and concentrations. results: we present a family of reversible rate laws for reactions with arbitrary stoichiometries and various types of regulation, including massaction, michaelismenten and uniuni reversible hill kinetics as special cases. with a thermodynamically safe parameterization of these rate laws, parameter sets obtained by model fitting, sampling or optimization are guaranteed to lead to consistent chemical equilibrium states. a reformulation using saturation values yields simple formulae for rates and elasticities, which can be easily adjusted to the given stationary flux distributions. furthermore, this formulation highlights the role of chemical potential differences as thermodynamic driving forces. we compare the modular rate laws to the thermodynamickinetic modelling formalism and discuss a simplified rate law in which the reaction rate directly depends on the reaction affinity. for automatic handling of modular rate laws, we propose a standard syntax and semantic annotations for the systems biology markup language. availability: an online tool for inserting the rate laws into sbml models is freely available at www.semanticsbml.org contactonce a metabolic network is available as a stoichiometric matrix or in standard formats such as systems biology markup language (sbml;), its potential dynamics can be studied by various kinds of mathematical analysis. constraint-based methods such as flux balance analysis help to predict the possible metabolic fluxes; energy balance analysis (, network-embedded thermodynamic (net) analysis or related methods also account for the thermodynamic to whom correspondence should be addressed. forces driving the fluxes. finally, given a stationary flux distribution, the potential dynamic behaviour close to this steady state can be explored by random sampling of reaction elasticities . precise dynamic simulations, in contrast, require quantitative rate laws for the enzymatic reactions. the catalytic mechanisms of key enzymes have been investigated in great detail and described by mathematical formulae (for an overview, see). but many kinetic equations are still unknown and have to be substituted by standard rate laws such as massaction kinetics, power laws , reversible hill kinetics , lin-log kinetics , convenience kinetics , generic rate equations or tkm rate laws . many mechanistically inspired rate laws share the form (the numerator t r contains turnover rates k r (in s 1 ), metabolite concentrations c i (in mm), reactant constants k m ri (in mm) and substrate and product molecularities m ri. it resembles a reversible massaction rate law, but in equation (1), it is multiplied by the enzyme amount u r and a factor f r for enzyme regulation. the denominator d r is a polynomial of scaled concentrations, e.g.the individual denominator terms correspond to different binding states of the enzyme, which effectively reduce the enzyme amount available for catalysis. terms arising from the specific enzyme regulation (see) are separately listed in the term d reg r. depending on the reaction stoichiometry, on the enzymatic mechanism and on allosteric regulation, the terms f r , t r , d r and d reg r may assume various mathematical forms. in this article, we propose several variants for each of them, which can be combined in a modular manner (see). the resulting rate laws represent a good compromise between biochemical detail (description of enzyme saturation, activation and inhibition, correct thermodynamic properties, and interpretable parameters) and mathematical abstraction (simple and standardized formulae for various reaction stoichiometries and types of allosteric regulation) and provide a good way to parameterize metabolic network models.page: 1529 15281534depend on reaction stoichiometry, rate law, allosteric regulation and on the preferred model parameterization.  
