gene expression module-based prediction approach for robust inter-study predictions in microarray data motivation: traditional genomic prediction models based on individual genes suffer from low reproducibility across microarray studies due to the lack of robustness to expression measurement noise and gene missingness when they are matched across platforms. it is common that some of the genes in the prediction model established in a training study cannot be matched to another test study because a different platform is applied. the failure of inter-study predictions has severely hindered the clinical applications of microarray. to overcome the drawbacks of traditional gene-based prediction (gbp) models, we propose a module-based prediction (mbp) strategy via unsupervised gene clustering. results: k-means clustering is used to group genes sharing similar expression profiles into gene modules, and small modules are merged into their nearest neighbors. conventional univariate or multivariate feature selection procedure is applied and a representative gene from each selected module is identified to construct the final prediction model. as a result, the prediction model is portable to any test study as long as partial genes in each module exist in the test study. we demonstrate that k-means cluster sizes generally follow a multinomial distribution and the failure probability of inter-study prediction due to missing genes is diminished by merging small clusters into their nearest neighbors. by simulation and applications of real datasets in inter-study predictions, we show that the proposed mbp provides slightly improved accuracy while is considerably more robust than traditional gbp.microarray technology is a promising methodology for predicting prognosis and response to treatment for cancer patients. however, a stable prediction model requires features selected from a large training dataset . since microarray analyses and clinical trials are expensive as well as time and effort intensive, to validate information and to predict patient outcomes from individual studies, it is crucial to utilize accumulated inter-study data. for over a decade, microarray data have been accumulated from different array technologies or different versions within technologies performed on similar clinical samples. however, to use a dataset or integrated datasets from one platform to build a model that robustly and accurately predicts clinical characteristics of a new dataset or a new sample from another platform remains a challenge . although current automated microarray assay systems have made microarray methodology straightforward, accurate use of genomic information from microarray analysis to classify patients or to predict patient prognosis is not trivial. to effectively predict clinical outcomes by genomic data requires careful data preprocessing, gene selection and model construction based on training data. the constructed model is then validated on independent test data. currently, many prediction models have been developed and crossvalidated within the single study used for the model construction . as a result, the developed prediction models are usually underrepresented or over fitted due to a lack of heterogeneity of sampling and do not account for cross platform problems when training data and test data are generated from different microarray platforms and protocols. traditional prediction methods have used a gene-based (gbp) approach in which individual genes are selected as model components . a common cross platform problem encountered with such methods involves issues of gene missingness or gene mismatching. frequently, genes in the prediction model based on training data cannot be found in the test data, which is termed as gene missingness in this article. occasionally, genes matched across platforms may contain errors (i.e. gene mismatching). the need for inter-study prediction across different platforms is commonly encountered (supplementary).. concept of gbp versue mbp methods: (a) the gbp method selects individual genes from training samples to construct a prediction model and uses the model to predict new samples. (b) the mbp method performs gene clustering a priori to form gene modules and uses these modules to construct a prediction model (color figure shown in supplementary). for example, suppose a pilot study has been performed in an old affymetrix u95 platform and an effective prediction model has been constructed. the test site of another medical center may apply another commercial system (such as agilent or illumina platforms) or the original medical center may migrate to a newer u133 system. many genes in the old training study may not be found in the new test study. current cross-platform gene prediction methods use only those genes common to both training and test datasets . there are two main drawbacks to this gbp approach. one drawback is that the prediction model must be reconstructed with each new test dataset. thus, the model cannot be created independently of the test data and the model elements must be adjusted every time different platforms of test data are used for prediction (supplementary). a second drawback involves the potential loss of important information. by ignoring the genes in the training dataset that are not found in the test dataset, important information from the training set may be lost. as a result, the prediction accuracy of gbp methods is unstable. further instability arises because these methods are sensitive to noise in expression measurements. we propose a module-based prediction (mbp) strategy to overcome these aforementioned drawbacks. in mbp, groups of genes sharing similar expression patterns rather than individual genes are used as the basic elements of the prediction model . such an approach borrows information from genes similarity when genes are absent in test sets. by overcoming expression measurement noise and avoiding the problem of missing genes across platforms, the mbp method is hypothesized to yield robust predictions completely independent of information from the test data. recently, several similar approaches, such as metagene , supergene and gene pathway module methods, which used unsupervised gene cluster or supervised gene pathway information instead of individual gene information as predictors, have been reported and successfully applied in microarray prediction. however, unlike the mbp method proposed here, these methods mostly focus on improving prediction accuracy rather than on the robustness issue in inter-study gene prediction. models constructed by most of these methods are still inevitably voided by gene missingness or expression measurement noise in the test study. in this article, we will explore properties of the mbp strategy and compare them to those of the gbp approach. we will show, by simulation and applications to real microarray datasets, that mbp is more robust to gene missingness and expression measurement noise while not sacrificing prediction accuracy. we evaluate univariate gene/module filter selection in three popular classification methods, including k-nearest neighbor (knn), linear discriminant analysis (lda) and support vector machines (svm). we also investigate an embedded method [prediction analysis of microarray (pam)] and a multivariate gene/module selection method (r-svm). conceptually, the module-based approach can generally be applied to extend any existing classification method.an ideal prediction model should be highly accurate, robust and simple for clinical utility. to pursue these standards, we developed the mbp method, which takes advantage of information from genes sharing similar expression patterns. the results of the current study show that the prediction accuracies of the mbp method are slightly better than those of the gbp method in both within-study and inter-study predictions. furthermore, the mbp method is superior to the gbp method in being robust to gene missingness and to experimental noise. the results show great potential for mbp to improve inter-study prediction in microarray studies and enhance the application of this technology to clinical practice. in the literature, it has been shown that multiple completely different prediction models may generate equally high prediction accuracy. for example, the well-known 70-gene signature to predict breast cancer patient survival was first proposed (vant). other investigators derived an additional six classifiers that performed as well as the 70-gene signature using the same dataset . also, disparity in using different gene signatures to predict similar outcomes in different studies has been reported . it is important to allow reasonable inter-study prediction validations in relevant published studies. the stability of the mbp method observed in the present study is the result of grouping genes sharing a similar expression pattern and selecting a gene that can represent the group of genes. it has been postulated that using a cluster average would yield a higher prediction accuracy under certain conditions . although the mbp method only slightly outperforms the gbp method in prediction accuracy, the prediction robustness of mbp remains its major advantage. the clinical utility of a genomic prediction model relies heavily on the models simplicity and reproducibility. recent cross-platform analyses used intersection genes across datasets , an approach that required information from all datasets involved in the analysis. this approach is appropriate for meta-analysis of biomarker detection but is inadequate for crossplatform prediction. there are two elements needed for a prediction:(i) a selected gene signature and (ii) a prediction model. when the construction of a prediction model requires the common genes of training and test studies, the selected prediction signature must be readjusted whenever a different platform of the test study is applied, making it inconvenient to validate and for clinical use. furthermore, loss of training data information by including only intersection genes to build the prediction model makes this approach less desirable. mbp is a natural solution to these hurdles. a lack of reproducibility hinders the application of genomic prediction models. many factors may affect model reproducibility. the mbp method focuses on two factors to increase model reproducibility: gene missingness and experimental noise. the robustness of the mbp method toward missing genes was provided by grouped decision in modules and the rare probability of model failure is controlled by merging small modules to nearest modules in our algorithm. the robustness of the method regarding expression measurement noise was assessed by testing on the luo dataset. although the mbp method was robust to added noise, the pattern of noise added may not adequately represent experimental variations in real data. further study will focus on evaluating real data or introducing variation other than gaussian noise. in addition to demonstrating the clinical applicability of mbp, this study demonstrated some novel approaches in the algorithm. first, this is the first time that cluster sizes generated by k-means are demonstrated to consistently follow a multinomial distribution and a cluster merging procedure is proposed to avoid model prediction failure due to gene missingness. second, we used a representative gene with the closest summed distance to all other genes within a module (similar to sample median concept in estimating mean parameter) to summarize the module information, which is an actual gene with better annotation and interpretation rather than using a pseudo-gene such as eigen-gene or averaged gene vector used in many methods. although we do not have enough evidence to prove or argue the superiority of adopting median representative genes, this procedure is conceptually more robust to accidental noises and has better interpretability. third, mbp reduced redundant gene features by summarizing similar gene expression profiles within each module, diminishing gene collinearity and adding a novel technique for data reduction. one limitation of the mbp method is the lack of correlation and interpretation of each module to known biological pathways. further investigation will be made to integrate pathways from biological databases as supervised modules to improve the performance. proper normalization across studies is another key to successful interstudy predictions. our recent publication has discussed the issue of genewise normalization in addition to commonly practiced sample-wise normalization. mbp proposed in this article focuses on robust inter-study prediction from another angle and can potentially be combined with these advanced normalization methods to enhance prediction accuracy. recently, deep sequencing technology is emerging as an attractive alternative to microarrays for genotyping, analysis of methylation patterns, identification of transcription factor binding sites and quantification of gene expression. the digital quantification is far more precise than microarray although its widespread applicability is still now limited by its high cost. as the price goes down in the near future, we expect increased popularity of this technology. our proposed mbp method can be extended to analyze deep sequencing data, where the feature dimensionality is even higher than microarray data. the fast algorithm of k-means clustering and the advantage of rapidly reducing dimensionality by gene modules make mbp a perfect tool for such type of extremely high-throughput technology.  
