systems biology an effective framework for reconstructing gene regulatory networks from genetical genomics data motivation: systems genetics approaches, in particular those relying on genetical genomics data, put forward a new paradigm of large-scale genome and network analysis. these methods use naturally occurring multi-factorial perturbations (e.g. polymorphisms) in properly controlled and screened genetic crosses to elucidate causal relationships in biological networks. however, although genet-ical genomics data contain rich information, a clear dissection of causes and effects as required for reconstructing gene regulatory networks is not easily possible. results: we present a framework for reconstructing gene regulatory networks from genetical genomics data where genotype and phenotype correlation measures are used to derive an initial graph which is subsequently reduced by pruning strategies to minimize false positive predictions. applied to realistic simulated genetic data from a recent dream challenge, we demonstrate that our approach is simple yet effective and outperforms more complex methods (including the best performer) with respect to (i) reconstruction quality (especially for small sample sizes) and (ii) applicability to large data sets due to relatively low computational costs. we also present reconstruction results from real genetical genomics data of yeast. availability: a matlab implementation (script) of the reconstruction framework is available atsystems genetics seeks to reveal complex genetic interactions in biological systems by relating genetic variations to various phenotypic data from high-throughput measurements . in contrast to the classical one gene perturbation at a time approach, systems genetics interprets naturally occurring multiple genetic variations [e.g. single nucleotide polymorphisms (snp)] as multi-factorial perturbations from which causalities can be unraveled more efficiently . systems genetics methods use properly controlled genetic crosses (segregating populations) such as recombinant congenic strains (rcs), recombinant inbred lines (ril), advanced intercross lines (ail) or chromosome substitution strains (css) to causally link genetic or chromosomal regions to observed phenotypic trait data . identifying a chromosomal region [the quantitative trait locus (qtl)] that influences a certain phenotypic trait is known as qtl mapping. in genetical genomics, a particular subclass of systems genetics, gene-expression levels are considered as phenotypic traits (called etraits), and identified qtls (comprising single genes or gene regions) are referred to as expression-qtls (eqtls). one application of eqtl maps obtained from genetical genomics approaches is the reconstruction of gene regulatory networks (grn). in the latter, nodes represent genes and edges represent interactions or dependencies between genes. grn provide the basis for systems-level understanding of interacting genes and phenotype formation in living systems. they condense different types of molecular interactions on the signaling, metabolic and genetic level to a network representation of causalities. therefore, grn represent a causal projection of gene activities, neglecting detailed molecular mechanisms . reconstructed gene regulatory networks can be used to narrow down genetic analysis by massively reducing the number of potential molecular interactions or locations of interaction sites. in the same way, grn can be used to identify putative intervention points by relating genetic spots to pathologic phenotypes . according to, the general grn reconstruction pipeline for genetical genomics data consists of three major steps: (i) eqtl mapping, (ii) candidate regulator selection and (iii) network refinement. for step (i), there exist several eqtl mapping strategies: single-etrait-single-eqtl, multiple-etraitsingle-eqtl, multiple-etrait-multiple-eqtl. a detailed review on the pipeline of eqtl mapping is, for instance, given by. in step (ii), the eqtl map in combination with a genetic map is used to select single candidate (regulator) genes from the eqtls as the latter often represent chromosomal regions due to genetic linkage. methods used include conditional correlation , local regression or analysis of between-strains snps . in the third step (iii), network refinement methods are used to the topology obtained in step (ii), e.g., with the goal to identify and eliminate (false positive) edges arising from indirect effects. here, bayesian network approaches and structural equation modeling, sem, have been used. one disadvantage of the former is, that bayesian networks cannot handle cycles if no time dimension is included . to whom correspondence should be addressed. further, inferred dependencies in bayesian networks do not necessarily represent causalities, as there may exist several alternative dependencies having the same joint probability . as one approach for structural equation modeling,construct first an encompassing directed network from the eqtl analysis which is afterwards further refined by sem. similar as baysian network inference, sem is computationally expensive, which restricts the applicability to medium-sized networks. in this work, we propose a novel strategy for reconstructing grn from genetical genomics data. the workflow (; explained in detail in section 2) encompasses implicitly the three major steps mentioned above but uses different techniques than used so far. the chosen methods were intentionally kept simple; realistic datasets show that they are nevertheless effective (section 3). the initial grn is constructed based on genotypephenotype and phenotypephenotype correlation analysis. owing to genetic linkage, there are often groups of genetically adjacent regulator candidates that target the same gene resulting into eqtls. to avoid a lot of false positive interactions, single candidate regulators are therefore identified from the eqtls. finally, as a method for network refinement, indirect path effects are removed by transwesd, a recently introduced transitive reduction approach . originally, transwesd has been developed to prune perturbation graphs derived from single knock-out data. here we show that transwesd can also be used to prune perturbation graphs obtained from genetical genomics data, thus complementing bayesian networks and sem. overall, our framework constitutes simple modules with a total number of just two threshold parameters. we tested it on in silico recombinant inbred line data that have been provided by the dream initiative (dream5, systems genetics challenge 3 a; http://wiki.c2b2.columbia.edu/dream/index.php/ d5c3;). we find that the proposed modular reconstruction approach outperforms the best performer . we also present and discuss reconstruction results from real genetical genomics data of yeast .shows the general workflow of our reconstruction framework together with a simple illustrative example. starting from a typical set of genetical genomics data that include genotyped markers, phenotyped genes and gene-to-marker association, marker linkage analysis and genotype assignment for each gene is performed in a preprocessing step. from these data an unweighted and unsigned perturbation graph g1 is derived using genotypephenotype correlation in combination with an appropriated thresholding strategy. the nodes in the graph directly correspond to genes while linkage information is kept to allow later eqtl assignment for each gene. the perturbation graph g1 is refined to g2 by quantifying each identified edge with respect to edge sign and weight, which indicate activation/repression and interaction strength, respectively. owing to genetic linkage, true regulators may be masked by other genes, e.g., on adjacent positions on the genetic map, resulting into eqtls. the eqtls of a given target gene t can be identified on the basis of all potential regulator genes of t and the marker linkage map. these relationships are captured in graph g3. graph g4 is subsequently obtained by selecting one candidate regulator per eqtl based on the maximum of the edge weights. we call g4 the final perturbation graph, whose edges reflect direct and indirect effects between genes induced by genetic variations. to remove indirect edges that can be explained by the operation of sequences of edges (paths), we apply the transitive reduction method transwesd resulting in the final graph g5. optionally, if one is left to verify the interactions experimentally, it is desirable to have a list of edges sorted with respect to edge confidences. such a list is also used by the dream5 evaluation procedures to assess the quality of a reconstructed network (section 3.1). we generate such a sorted list based on the edge weights.we applied the proposed method to (i) synthetic genetical genomics data that were provided for a recent systems genetics challenge of the dream initiative (dream 5, challenge 3 a; http://wiki.c2b2.columbia.edu/dream/index.php/d5c3), and(ii) real genetical genomics data from yeast, which were originally published in brem and kruglyak (2005).  
