morfpred, a computational tool for sequence-based prediction and characterization of short disorder-to-order transitioning binding regions in proteins motivation: molecular recognition features (morfs) are short binding regions located within longer intrinsically disordered regions that bind to protein partners via disorder-to-order transitions. morfs are implicated in important processes including signaling and regulation. however, only a limited number of experimentally validated morfs is known, which motivates development of computational methods that predict morfs from protein chains. results: we introduce a new morf predictor, morfpred, which identifies all morf types (, , coil and complex). we develop a comprehensive dataset of annotated morfs to build and empirically compare our method. morfpred utilizes a novel design in which annotations generated by sequence alignment are fused with predictions generated by a support vector machine (svm), which uses a custom designed set of sequence-derived features. the features provide information about evolutionary profiles, selected physiochemical properties of amino acids, and predicted disorder, solvent accessibility and b-factors. empirical evaluation on several datasets shows that morfpred outperforms related methods: -morf-pred that predicts -morfs and anchor which finds disordered regions that become ordered when bound to a globular partner. we show that our predicted (new) morf regions have non-random sequence similarity with native morfs. we use this observation along with the fact that predictions with higher probability are more accurate to identify putative morf regions. we also identify a few sequence-derived hallmarks of morfs. they are characterized by dips in the disorder predictions and higher hydrophobicity and stability when compared to adjacent (in the chain) residues.the existence of disordered proteins challenges the classical structure-to-function paradigm, which states that a unique 3d conformation of a given protein determines its interactions with other molecules. while this paradigm is true for many proteins, to whom correspondence should be addressed. disordered proteins (i.e. proteins without a defined structure in isolation) can also be involved in complex interaction networks. there are several examples of proteinprotein and proteinnucleic acid interactions that involve coupled folding and binding, i.e. disorder-to-order transition upon binding. such interactions are significant since they often enable binding diversity, and yet they are specific and reversible due to lower binding strength compared with classical binding. this is especially beneficial in signaling and regulation where highly specific yet dispensable/weak interactions are needed . here, we focus on molecular recognition features (morfs), which are short (525 residues) binding regions located within longer intrinsically disordered regions. although in their unbound state morfs might or might not have residual structure, they bind to protein partners typically via disorder-to-order transitions resulting in -helix (-morfs), -strand (-morfs), coil (-morfs) or mixtures of these (complexmorfs) often with partnerdependent conformational differences . these short binding regions have been studied using two computational approaches: as features observed in disorder predictions and as sequence patterns called short sequence motifs or linear motifs . long disordered binding regions (more than 30 residues) can also associate with globular partners. these long disordered binding sequences are typically conserved, so they often show up in databases derived from hidden markov models such as pfam or smart . the terms conserved predicted disorder regions (, b) and disordered domains have been used to describe these long disordered binding regions. only two related predictors are available: -morf-predii that supersedes -morf-predi and anchor . -morf-predii is a neural network-based predictor which is limited to prediction of -morfs. anchor predicts binding regions that undergo a disorder-to-order transition upon binding to a globular protein partner, some of which include morfs regions. to this end, we develop a novel sequence-based morf predictor. our approach converts an input sequence into a feature vector that represents various relevant characteristics of this chain, which  
