systems biology morpheus: a user-friendly modeling environment for multiscale and multicellular systems biology morpheus is a modeling environment for the simulation and integration of cell-based models with ordinary differential equations and reaction-diffusion systems. it allows rapid development of multiscale models in biological terms and mathematical expressions rather than programming code. its graphical user interface supports the entire workflow from model construction and simulation to visual-ization, archiving and batch processing. availability and implementation: binary packages are available at http://imc.zih.tu-dresden.de/wiki/morpheus for linux, mac osx and ms windows.systems biology is rapidly expanding its scope from the study of intracellular networks to the analysis of tissue-and organ-scale systems. this increases the need for computational methods and software that support the simulation and integration of cell-based models with models for intra-and extracellular dynamics. currently available modeling environments typically require programming or scripting to account for dynamical feedback between submodels at different scales . yet, as models grow more complex, it becomes increasingly important to separate modeling from implementation, to automate multiscale model integration and to provide intuitive user interfaces (sutterlin). morpheus is a user-friendly application for the modeling, simulation and integration of cell-based models, ordinary differential equations and reaction-diffusion systems. it supports the construction of multiscale models using biological terminology and mathematical constructs, based on a novel domain-specific language. its graphical user interface (gui) supports the whole workflow from model development and simulation to visualization and data output and features tools for archiving and batch processing.morpheus has hitherto been used in a variety of studies, including collective motion , morphogenesis (kohnkohn) and cell fate decisions (, b) .  
