mosaicfinder: identification of fused gene families in sequence similarity networks motivation: gene fusion is an important evolutionary process. it can yield valuable information to infer the interactions and functions of proteins. fused genes have been identified as non-transitive patterns of similarity in triplets of genes. to be computationally tractable, this approach usually imposes an a priori distinction between a dataset in which fused genes are searched for, and a dataset that may have provided genetic material for fusion. this reduces the genetic space in which fusion can be discovered, as only a subset of triplets of genes is investigated. moreover, this approach may have a high false-positive rate, and it does not identify gene families descending from a common fusion event. results: we represent similarities between sequences as a network. this leads to an efficient formulation of previous methods of fused gene identification, which we implemented in the python program fusedtriplets. furthermore, we propose a new characterization of families of fused genes, as clique minimal separators of the sequence similarity network. this well-studied graph topology provides a robust and fast method of detection, well suited for automatic analyses of big datasets. we implemented this method in the c program mosaicfinder, which additionally uses local alignments to discard false-positive candidates and indicates potential fusion points. the grouping into families will help distinguish sequencing or prediction errors from real biological fusions, and it will yield additional insight into the function and history of fused genes. availability: fusedtriplets and mosaicfinder are published under the gpl license and are freely available with their source code at this address: http://sourceforge.net/projects/mosaicfinder.we implemented mosaicfinder and fusedtriplets, which we used to compare the detection of composite gene families with the existing methods for detecting composite genes. as there exists no large manually curated database of composite genes to use as a test bed, we simulated the evolution of composite genes and composite gene families to test the accuracy of mosaicfinder. we also ran tests on real databases, but we have less information on the validity of our (or other) methods in this context. we focused our attention on the number of composite genes detected.we proposed a new characterization of families of composite genes, as clique minimal separators in sequence similarity networks, and implemented this method into the c program mosaicfinder. we showed that on simulated data, mosaicfinder identifies conserved composite gene families well. even if mosaicfinder was not designed to do so, it also identifies the evolutionary conserved fraction of composite genes from divergent families. in cases where divergent genes have evolved too much to show similarity to both component families, mosaicfinder proves to have a very low false positive rate. we show that mosaicfinder gives good results quickly, with the advantage that genes are grouped into families, thus avoiding the extra work of regrouping the composite genes after they are output. moreover, this information may be visualized as an annotated graph using cytoscape . supplementarygives an example. according to our results from section 3, mosaicfinder generates few false positives. since in the real dataset constructed with 30 complete prokaryote genomes, mosaicfinder detected the impressive rate of one fusion gene of 33 genes, we can conjecture that in real data, there are in fact many composite genes. future work consists in breaking up long cycles with a local approach, as long cycles may mask fusion families by connecting component families indirectly (supplementary).  
