systems biology mosaic: making biological sense of complex networks we present a cytoscape plugin called mosaic to support interactive network annotation, partitioning, layout and coloring based on gene ontology or other relevant annotations. availability: mosaic is distributed for free under the apache v2.0 open source license and can be downloaded via the cytoscape plugin manager. a detailed user manual is available on the mosaic web site (http://nrnb.org/tools/mosaic).the increasing throughput and quality of molecular measurements in the domains of genomics, proteomics and metabolomics continue to fuel the understanding of biological processes. collected per molecule, the scope of these data extends to physical, genetic and biochemical interactions that in turn comprise extensive networks. there are software tools available to visualize and analyze dataderived biological networks . one challenge faced by these tools is how to make sense of such networks often represented as massive hairballs. many network analysis algorithms filter or partition networks based on topological features, optionally weighted by orthogonal node or edge data . another approach is to mathematically model networks and rely on their statistical properties to make associations with other networks, phenotypes and drug effects, sidestepping the issue of making sense of the network itself altogether . acknowledging that there is still great value in engaging the minds of researchers in exploratory data analysis at the level of networks , we have produced a cytoscape plugin called mosaic to support interactive network annotation and visualization that includes partitioning, layout and coloring based on biologically relevant ontologies . mosaic shows slices of a given network in the visual language of biological pathways, which are familiar to any biologist and are ideal frameworks for integrating knowledge. cytoscape is a free and open source network visualization platform that actively supports independent plugin development . for annotation, mosaic relies primarily on the full gene ontology (go) or simplified slim versions (http:// to whom correspondence should be addressed. www.geneontology.org/go.slims.shtml). the cellular layout of partitioned subnetworks strictly depends on the cellular component branch of go, but the other two functions, partitioning and coloring, can be driven by any annotation associated with a major gene or protein identifier system.mosaic provides researchers with an interactive tool to evaluate biological interactions within the context of well-defined processes, functions and cellular localization while retaining all original network information. use of additional ontologies is anticipated to provide further insights into the relevance of large-scale interaction datasets and will be supported in future versions.  
