systems biology most: a software environment for constraint-based metabolic modeling and strain design most (metabolic optimization and simulation tool) is a software package that implements gdbb (genetic design through branch and bound) in an intuitive user-friendly interface with excel-like editing functionality, as well as implementing fba (flux balance analysis), and supporting systems biology markup language and comma-separated values files. gdbb is currently the fastest algorithm for finding gene knockouts predicted by fba to increase production of desired products, but gdbb has only been available on a command line interface, which is difficult to use for those without programming knowledge, until the release of most.many software packages are currently available to create constraint-based models of metabolism, load existing models, export models and run analyses on these models to predict the production of desired compounds by microbes under genetic manipulations . this software differs in data input type and display of results, where input type ranges from command line to spreadsheet, and results display as text or in spreadsheet form. many packages can load the commonly used systems biology markup language (sbml) format, and some can load text files, microsoft excel files or other formats . many packages also export sbml or other formats . in general all the software packages implement fba , and some implement optknock , evolutionary algorithms , gdls (genetic design through local search) or other analyses.extensively tested on windows xp, 7 and 8. linux and macintosh releases are also available. most requires a mixed integer linear program solver to run fba, e-flux2 and gdbb. most offers a choice of solvers, either gurobi solver (gurobi optimization, houston, tx, usa), which is free for academic use, or glpk (gnu linear programming kit; http://www.gnu. org/software/glpk/), a free solver. most also requires a quadratic solver for e-flux2, either gurobi or ipopt (interior point optimizer; http://openopt.org/ipopt), and a nonlinear solver for spot, ipopt.  
