motif comparison based on similarity of binding affinity profiles measuring motif similarity is essential for identifying functionally related transcription factors (tfs) and rna-binding proteins, and for annotating de novo motifs. here, we describe motif similarity based on affinity of targets (mosbat), an approach for measuring the similarity of motifs by computing their affinity profiles across a large number of random sequences. we show that mosbat successfully associates de novo chip-seq motifs with their respective tfs, accurately identifies motifs that are obtained from the same tf in different in vitro assays, and quantitatively reflects the similarity of in vitro binding preferences for pairs of tfs. availability and implementation: mosbat is available as a webserver at mosbat.ccbr.utoronto.ca, and for download at github.com/csglab/mosbat. contact:the sequence preference of a transcription factor (tf) or an rnabinding protein (rbp) is most commonly represented using a motif, which refers to the matrix of the probabilities of occurrence of any given nucleotide at any given position of the binding site. measuring the similarity of motifs is fundamental to several aspects of studying tfs and rbps, such as elucidating the relationship between sequence and function of these factors , assigning known tfs and rbps to de novo discovered motifs , and measuring performance of in silico motif prediction approaches . the majority of motif comparison approaches are based on alignment of two motifs, where the similarity measure is defined as the score of the best alignment . a few other methods use binding site predictions to identify overlapping sites in random sequences, allowing derivation of a motif similarity score and alignment . here, we introduce an alignmentindependent approach for measuring the similarity of two motifs. the method is based on measuring the similarity of the affinity profiles of tfs or rbps across a large number of random sequences, with the affinity profiles predicted using the associated motifs. we show that our approach for measuring motif similarity based on affinity of targets (mosbat) can accurately identify similar motifs that are derived from different experimental methods, e.g. in order to identify tfs associated with de novo motifs derived from chip-seq data. motif similarity scores reported by mosbat also closely reflect independent sequence preference similarity measures derived directly from in vitro measurements.  
