mpea—metabolite pathway enrichment analysis we present metabolite pathway enrichment analysis (mpea) for the visualization and biological interpretation of metabolite data at the system level. our tool follows the concept of gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) and tests whether metabolites involved in some predefined pathway occur towards the top (or bottom) of a ranked query compound list. in particular, mpea is designed to handle many-to-many relationships that may occur between the query compounds and metabolite annotations. for a demonstration, we analysed metabolite profiles of 14 twin pairs with differing body weights. mpea found significant pathways from data that had no significant individual query compounds, its results were congruent with those discovered from transcriptomics data and it detected more pathways than the competing metabolic pathway method did. availability: the web server and source code of mpea are available atmetabolite profiling refers to a set of techniques by which a wide range of metabolites can be detected and quantified from biological extracts . such experiments are often conducted to discover biomarkers and data resulting from these studies are analyzed using complex multivariate statistical methods . recently, tools for analysing metabolite data in the context of predefined biological metabolite sets have, however, been reported . instead of discovering specific metabolites that discriminate sample groups, the aim of these methods is to discover predefined metabolic pathways or biological networks that are co-ordinately altered in the experiment. such changes are often assessed by employing the gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) procedure to test whether the elements of some predefined biological group are enriched towards the top or bottom of a ranked list. here, we describe the metabolite pathway enrichment analysis (mpea) for the visualization and functional analysis of metabolite data at the system level. mpea tests whether metabolites in predefined pathways occur towards the top or bottom of a ranked to whom correspondence should be addressed. list. it can be applied either to pre-annotated compounds or gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (gc-ms) data consisting of mass spectral tags (msts). if msts are provided, they are characterized using gmd . this feature was included to facilitate the analysis of data generated by gcmsa popular analytical tool for metabolite profiling . furthermore, as it is unlikely that all query compounds are unambiguously resolved, mpea has been developed to handle ambiguously identified compounds. we tested mpea on a study in which adipose tissue transcriptome and metabolome were studied in 14 twin pairs discordant for body weight . mpea revealed more significantly altered pathways in acquired obesity based on metabolite data than the competing method did and its results corresponded with the pathways that gsea found from transcriptomics data.  
