mp-geneticsynth: inferring biological network regulations from time series mp-geneticsynth is a java tool for discovering the logic and regulation mechanisms responsible for observed biological dynamics in terms of finite difference recurrent equations. the software makes use of: (i) metabolic p systems as a modeling framework, (ii) an evolutionary approach to discover flux regulation functions as linear combinations of given primitive functions, (iii) a suitable reformulation of the least squares method to estimate function parameters considering simultaneously all the reactions involved in complex dynamics. the tool is available as a plugin for the virtual laboratory metaplab. it has graphical and interactive interfaces for data preparation, a priori knowledge integration, and flux regulator analysis. availability and implemention: source code, binaries, documentation (including quick start guide and videos) and case studies are freely available atbiological system modeling is a central methodology for unraveling complex interactions in molecular species and understanding the internal logic of metabolic, regulatory and signaling processes. mathematical and computational models are used to formally represent knowledge of biological processes, which is usually acquired from experiments. a key goal is represented by the automatic inference of model structure and parameters from observed data. several reverse-engineering methodologies and related software were proposed to solve this problem. simulated annealing, particle swarm intelligence, genetic algorithms (ga) and other optimization techniques were used with both differential and unconventional models . here we present mp-geneticsynth, a tool based on ga and multivariate regression for the synthesis and the analysis of flux regulation functions from observed time series within the modeling framework of metabolic p systems (mp systems) . the evolutionary approach on which the software is based provides new perspectives on the analysis of biological network regulations. main applications range from metabolic to gene expression and signaling networks , although the methodology lends itself to be applied also to other contexts where fluxes of matter or information have to be inferred from time series. the main strengths of the proposed tool are the possibility to integrate observed data with a priori knowledge, and to generate models even if exact reaction rates or parts of the stoichiometry are unknown.  
