databases and ontologies advance access publication mpid-t2: a database for sequence–structure–function analyses of pmhc and tr/pmhc structures sequencestructurefunction information is critical in understanding the mechanism of pmhc and tr/pmhc binding and recognition. a database for sequencestructurefunction information on pmhc and tr/pmhc interactions, mhc-peptide interaction database-tr version 2 (mpid-t2), is now available augmented with the latest pdb and imgt/3dstructure-db data, advanced features and new parameters for the analysis of pmhc and tr/pmhc structures. availability: http://biolinfo.org/mpid-t2.major histocompatibility complexes (mhc) or human leukocyte antigens (hlas) in human are important elements of t cell-mediated immunity. they are cell surface glycoproteins among which mhci proteins are ubiquitously expressed by most cells and mhc-ii proteins are expressed by antigen-presenting cells (apc;). mhc proteins bind immunogenic peptide epitopes (p) derived from antigens and present them as peptidemhc (pmhc) complexes on the cell surface, for subsequent recognition by t-cell receptors (tr), leading to tr/pmhc complexes, which are responsible for t-cell activation and triggering the adaptive immune response cascade . understanding the physicochemical basis for the selection of certain specific peptide epitopes by mhc alleles and the consequent recognition of pmhc ligands by tr proteins is critical for the design of t cell-based peptide vaccines . an early collection of pmhc x-ray crystal structures in the protein data bank (pdb;) led to the development of mpid , comprising 86 classical pmhc structures, reporting pmhc interaction parameters. with increasing pmhc and tr/pmhc structures in the pdb and in the imgt/3dstructure-db and reports of new interaction parameters , mpid-t was developed, with 187 pmhc and 16 tr/pmhc to whom correspondence should be addressed. structures along with interaction parameters for the analysis of pmhc structures alone. with recent rise in tr/pmhc structural data in the pdb and in imgt/3dstructure-db , and updated interaction parameters , there is an increasing demand for more effective and efficient computational protocols to predict t-cell epitopes. hence, we have updated mpid-t, augmenting it with advanced features and new parameters for the analysis of both pmhc and tr/pmhc structures, to gain an in-depth understanding of the structural determinants underlying tr/pmhc binding and recognition.mpid-t2 aims to facilitate mining of fundamental relationships and structural descriptors hidden within tr/pmhc and pmhc interactions for in-depth characterization. inclusion of structural descriptors like be, msep, tr docking angle and ca have facilitated in understanding the principles underlying tr/pmhc binding (khan and ranganathan, unpublished results). these descriptors can be used as parameters defining pmhc and tr/pmhc interactions, thereby facilitating rational development of methods to identify strong mhc binding t-cell epitopes with greater propensity to activate t cells. this highlights the utility of mpidt2 in vaccine research. we have now enabled tr-specific searches by classifying tr/pmhc structures based on tr types. future enhancements will include listing post-translational modifications (ptm) for peptides to help understand the effect of ptm on tr/pmhc binding and interaction. mpid-t2 will be updated on a quarterly basis.  
