gene expression an efficient algorithm for accurate computation of the dirichlet-multinomial log-likelihood function the dirichlet-multinomial (dmn) distribution is a fundamental model for multicategory count data with overdispersion. this distribution has many uses in bioinformatics including applications to metagenomics data, transctriptomics and alternative splicing. the dmn distribution reduces to the multinomial distribution when the overdispersion parameter is 0. unfortunately, numerical computation of the dmn log-likelihood function by conventional methods results in instability in the neighborhood of 0. an alternative formulation circumvents this instability, but it leads to long runtimes that make it impractical for large count data common in bioinformatics. we have developed a new method for computation of the dmn log-likelihood to solve the instability problem without incurring long runtimes. the new approach is composed of a novel formula and an algorithm to extend its applicability. our numerical experiments show that this new method both improves the accuracy of log-likelihood evaluation and the run-time by several orders of magnitude, especially in high-count data situations that are common in deep sequencing data. using real meta-genomic data, our method achieves manyfold runtime improvement. our method increases the feasibility of using the dmn distribution to model many high-throughput problems in bioinformatics. we have included in our work an r package giving access to this method and a vingette applying this approach to metagenomic data. availability and implementation: an implementation of the algorithm together with a vignette describing its use is available in supplementarythe analysis of count data or categorical data is an important topic in statistics and has a wide variety of applications in bioinformatics. the advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies provides unprecedented opportunities for investigating new and more powerful analysis methods on count data . the poisson distribution is a basic distribution for modeling count data. an important property of the poisson distribution is that the mean and variance are the same, which is called equidispersion. however, the mean and the variance of real count data are often not the same; in fact, the variance is often greater than the mean. this makes the poisson distribution not ideal for analyzing such data because the equidispersion assumption is violated. the phenomenon where a dataset exhibits greater variance than what would be expected in a statistical model is called overdispersion. a commonly used overdispersed model for the poisson distribution is the negative-binomial distribution. this distribution has been extensively studied in hilbe (2011) and is an indispensable model for high-throughput sequencing data . another fundamental model in count data analysis is the multinomial (mn) distribution, which is useful for analysis of count proportions among multiple categories. one important use case of the mn distribution is fishers exact test of contingency tables , which has been used in the analysis of alternative 3 0 utr utilization and splicing , as well as metagenomics . in the regression context, mn logistic regression is also commonly used . however, real data often exhibit heterogeneity that is usually thought to be caused by dependencies or the similarity of responses of members of the same cluster in cluster sampling . this leads to extra-multinomial variation , i.e. overdispersion with respect to the mn distribution. the modeling of overdispersion of the mn distribution has been addressed by extending the mn distribution to the dirichlet-multinomial (dmn) distribution . the beta-binomial (bb) distributiona special case of the dmn distribution with only two categorieshas been studied by many . because of its flexibility and its mathematical convenience, the dmn distribution is widely applied to diverse fields, such as topic modeling , magazine exposure modeling , word burstiness modeling , language modeling and multiple sequence alignment . bouguila (2008) also considered a generalization of the dmn distribution and applied it to count data to whom correspondence should be addressed. clustering. another related distribution for handling overdispersion is the dirichlet negative mn distribution allowing the modeling of correlated count data without an upper bound, which has many possible uses in biostatistics and bioinformatics . likelihood functions play a key role in statistical inference . for example, likelihood functions can be used for parameter estimation, hypothesis testing and interval estimation. in the context of the dmn distribution, there has been recent research to investigate the fisher information matrix and maximum likelihood estimation (mle) . not all statistical inference methods are based on likelihood functions. for instance kim and margolin (1992) developed a method for testing the goodness of fit of the mn distribution against the dmn distribution based on the c test statistic , a flexible framework built on the likelihood approach that enables the analysis of complex experimental designs that frequently appear in genomic and bioinformatics studies. in this article, we study the fundamental problem of the evaluation of the dmn log-likelihood function. in section 2, we demonstrate the instability and runtime problems of two existing methods for computing the dmn log-likelihood function and propose a novel parameterization of the log-likelihood function to allow smooth transition from the overdispersed case (the dmn distribution) to the non-overdispersed case (the mn distribution). for this new parameterized form, in section 3 we introduce a new formula based on a truncated series consisting of bernoulli polynomials. in section 4, a mesh algorithm is devised to increase the applicability of this new formula. in section 5, we show numerical results of the mesh algorithm, confirm its stability and runtime improvements. finally, we applied our method to human microbiome data and demonstrated its large performance improvement over the most accurate existing method.overdispersion is important and needs to be accommodated in modeling count data. to handle overdispersion in mn data, the dmn distribution is commonly used. the numerical computation of the log-likelihood function is important for performing statistical inference using this distribution. previous work has provided useful methods for this calculation, but the requirements of bioinformatics are difficult to satisfy. our method solves the accuracy and runtime challenges.. the mesh algorithm is much faster than the algorithm in vgam for the dmn log-likelihood computation. the parameters are x n1, 2, 3, p 1=6, 1=3, 1=2 and 1=60. the computation using vgam is only up to n 1 10 5 , as it takes too much runtime when n is beyond this point. each boxplot represents 100 dmn log-likelihood evaluationsoverdispersion is commonly found in high-throughput sequencing data. the overdispersed poisson model (the negative-binomial distribution) has been used to detect differential gene expression. however, the dmn distribution has seen limited use in analyzing high-throughput sequencing data, possibly because the existing methods based on the dmn distribution did not anticipate the high counts and the vast amount of such count tables extracted from the high-throughput sequencing technologies. to overcome the instability problem and the runtime problem of the existing methods for computing the log-likelihood, we derived a new approximation of the dmn log-likelihood function based on bernoulli polynomials. using a novel mesh algorithm, we are able to compute the log-likelihood for any parameters in the domains of the log-likelihood function. comparing with the existing methods, the mesh algorithm is more accurate and is much faster. we demonstrate the application of the new method in analyzing human microbiome data with a large runtime improvement. this method is generally applicable to other scenarios involving proportions, such as alternative exon utilization and alternative poly-a utilization . for example, suppose we have 10 000 alternative splicing events that need to be tested and each test requires 1000 log-likelihood function evaluations. our method can reduce the runtime to hours instead of potentially days. this work paves the way for application of the dmn distribution to model overdispersion in large-scale count data available in the high-throughput sequencing era.  
