sequence analysis abra: improved coding indel detection via assembly-based realignment motivation: variant detection from next-generation sequencing (ngs) data is an increasingly vital aspect of disease diagnosis, treatment and research. commonly used ngs-variant analysis tools generally rely on accurately mapped short reads to identify somatic variants and germ-line genotypes. existing ngs read mappers have difficulty accurately mapping short reads containing complex variation (i.e. more than a single base change), thus making identification of such variants difficult or impossible. insertions and deletions (indels) in particular have been an area of great difficulty. indels are frequent and can have substantial impact on function, which makes their detection all the more imperative. results: we present abra, an assembly-based realigner, which uses an efficient and flexible localized de novo assembly followed by global realignment to more accurately remap reads. this results in enhanced performance for indel detection as well as improved accuracy in variant allele frequency estimation.a number of realignment or assembly methods have been proposed to overcome the alignment errors and reference bias that limit indel detection. short read micro aligner locally realigns reads to regionally assembled variant graphs . pindel uses a pattern growth approach to detect indels . dindel realigns reads to candidate haplotypes and uses a bayesian method to call indels up to 50 bp in length . the genome analysis toolkit (gatk)s indelrealigner seeks to minimize the number of mismatching bases via local realignment . whole-genome de novo assembly approaches include fermi and cortex var . soapindel performs localized assembly and calling on regions containing reads where only one half of a paired read is mapped . clipping reveals structure (crest) uses soft clipped reads and localized assembly to identify somatic structural variants . targeted iterative graph routing assembler (tigra) uses targeted assembly to produce contigs from putative breakpoints . additional proprietary localized assembly methods have been developed by complete genomics and foundation medicine . our newly developed tool called abra accepts a sequence alignment/map (sam/bam) file as input and produces a realigned bam file as output, allowing flexibility in selection of variant calling algorithms and other downstream analysis. global realignment allows reads that are unaligned or improperly mapped to be moved to a correct location. abra detects variation that is not present in the original read alignments and improves allele-frequency estimates for variation that is present. abra can be used to enhance both germ-line and somatic variant detection and works with paired-end as well as single-end data.abra improves on next-generation sequencing read alignments, providing enhanced performance in detection of indels as well as greater accuracy in variant allele frequency estimation. abra accepts bam files as input and outputs realigned bam files,  
