structural bioinformatics mp-t: improving membrane protein alignment for structure prediction motivation: membrane proteins are clinically relevant, yet their crystal structures are rare. models of membrane proteins are typically built from template structures with low sequence identity to the target sequence , using a sequence-structure alignment as a blueprint. this alignment is usually made with programs designed for use on soluble proteins. biological membranes have layers of varying hydrophobicity, and membrane proteins have different amino-acid substitution preferences from their soluble counterparts. here we include these factors into an alignment method to improve alignments and consequently improve membrane protein models. results: we developed membrane protein threader (mp-t), a sequence-structure alignment tool for membrane proteins based on multiple sequence alignment. alignment accuracy is tested against seven other alignment methods over 165 non-redundant alignments of membrane proteins. mp-t produces more accurate alignments than all other methods tested (f m from 0.9 to 5.5). alignments generated by mp-t also lead to significantly better models than those of the best alternative alignment tool (one-fourth of models see an increase in gdt_ts of !4). availability: all source code, alignments and models are available atthere are only $350 unique membrane protein crystal structures (http://www.blanco.biomol.uci.edu/mpstruc). for comparison, in july 2012 there were 445 000 unique crystal structures in the protein data bank . this disparity is not due to importance: the location of membrane proteins on the surface of cells and their involvement in signalling pathways make them targets for approximately one-half of current and future drugs . the disparity arises because membrane proteins are inherently hard to crystallizethe hydrophilic conditions required for crystallization are often incompatible with the hydrophobic conditions in which a membrane protein assumes its native structure. in the absence of crystal structures, a model of a target sequence may be built using as a template a related protein of known structure (homology modelling). conceptually, homology modelling can be divided into three phases: (i) identifying a template (fold recognition), (ii) aligning the residues of the target on to the template structure, (iii) completion of the model implicit from this alignment (e.g. by modelling missing loops). many methods perform fold-recognition and alignment simultaneously. in this work, we maintain a distinction and focus solely on alignment. alignment methods differ in how they use information about protein structure and sequence. sequence information is derived from a set of sequences that are homologous to the target and template. these sequences are often combined into a profile. structure information is commonly incorporated either by the use of statistical potentials (e.g.) or by annotation of the template sequence, e.g. with secondary structure strings . the alignment of membrane proteins presents unique challenges. most soluble proteins are globular with a hydrophilic surface, whereas membrane proteins possess neither of these properties. alignment methods incorporating statistical potentials derived from soluble proteins are thus expected to perform poorly on membrane proteins. at least two such methods, pgenthreader and sparks-x , recognize this and filter transmembrane sections from their results. alignment methods that annotate a template include hhsearch and promals . these align pairs of profiles that are annotated with secondary structure strings. promals may also be used as a homology-extension method. in this approach, a multiple sequence alignment (msa) is performed, but with each sequence replaced by a profile. most msa methods, such as mafft , msaprobs and t-coffee do not use any structure information, but instead derive their accuracy from a consistency criterion and/or iterative optimization. consistency-based approaches aim to generate a msa that accords best with a library of pairwise alignments between the sequences being aligned. a small number of alignment methods have been designed specifically for membrane proteins. the alignme program has been developed to study leut-fold transporters . praline tm and tm-coffee are homology-extension (multiple profile alignment) methods that have been found to perform well on alignments of transmembrane proteins from the balibase benchmark. neither method uses secondary structure to aid alignment, but to whom correspondence should be addressed. praline tm uses different scoring in regions annotated as being transmembrane. owing to the scarcity of known structures, the best template for a membrane protein sequence is likely to have extremely low sequence identitypotentially beneath the $30 twilight zone. fortunately, even at this low level of sequence identity, accurate alignment may be possible, as biological membranes have a sandwich structure with a hydrophobic middle (lipid tail layer) and hydrophilic edges (lipid head layer). these differing hydrophobicities constrain the amino acids likely to be found in each environment . in previous work, we demonstrated that environment-specific substitution tables improved the pairwise alignment of membrane proteins . here, we incorporate these tables into a consistency-based msa program, membrane protein threader (mp-t). the evolutionary information provided by homologous sequences greatly increases alignment accuracy at low sequence identities compared with pairwise alignments. our approach involves no sequence weighting or iterative refinement, and yet it is as accurate as leading profileprofile aligners such as hhsearch and promals while introducing fewer misaligned pairs of residues. mp-t leads to models with significantly higher gdt_ts than the best alternative alignment method testedone-fourth of models see an increase in gdt_ts of at least 4.we have created a program, mp-t, to perform sequence to structure alignment for the homology modelling of membrane proteins. tested on a set of 165 diverse structure alignments, mp-t is found to introduce the fewest misaligned residues (high f m ) while aligning as accurately as the state-of-the-art methods hhsearch and promals . mp-t performs particularly well on longer membrane proteins (a category that includes drug targets such as gpcrs and ion channels) and in the twilight zone (1530 sequence identity). the accuracy of mp-t is derived from its effective use of information about accessible surface area, membrane positioning and secondary structure. this information is obtained from the template structure and used to make predictions about the same properties of homologous sequences. gap penalties and substitution scores are adjusted on a per-residue basis depending on this informationfor example, the creation of gaps in the middle of the membrane is discouraged, and substitutions within a helix are scored according to the propensity for an amino acid type to be in a helix. choice of homologues is found to be the single greatest factor affecting alignment accuracy for our method. selecting homologues to favour sequences that are more closely related to the target and template leads to substantially less accurate alignments than random selection. it is likely that improvements in accuracy can be gained by further refining the selection process: for example, by loosening cut-offs if too few sequences are returned. in agreement with previous studies, we find that guide tree construction does not strongly affect alignment accuracy. however, the general trend is that single-linkage clustering is a better method for building guide trees than neighbour joining, bionj or upgma. we perform no sequence weighting, no iterative refinement and use a simpler consistency criterion than those used in leading multiple sequence aligners such as msaprobs. despite this, the use of environment-aware gap penalties and substitution tables allows us to produce more accurate models of transmembrane domains than other methods tested. incorporation of environment awareness into a more sophisticated aligner may yield even larger improvements in the quality of membrane protein models.  
