genome analysis mrhmms: multivariate regression hidden markov models and the variants hidden markov models (hmms) are flexible and widely used in scientific studies. particularly in genomics and genetics, there are multiple distinct regimes in the genome within each of which the relationships among multivariate features are distinct. examples include differential gene regulation depending on gene functions and experimental conditions, and varying combinatorial patterns of multiple transcription factors. we developed a software package called mrhmms (multivariate regression hidden markov models and the variants) that accommodates a variety of hmms that can be flexibly applied to many biological studies and beyond. mrhmms supplements existing hmm software packages in two aspects. first, mrhmms provides a diverse set of emission probability structures, including mixture of multivariate normal distributions and (logistic) regression models. second, mrhmms is computationally efficient for analyzing large data-sets generated in current genome-wide studies. especially, the software is written in c for the speed advantage and further amenable to implement alternative models to meet users own purposes. availability and implementation: http://sourceforge.net/projects/ mrhmms/multivariate features are abundant in genomic and genetic studies. a central theme is to understand the differential relationships among features and their contribution to gene functions and phenotypes. for example, the gene expression variation can be predicted using distinct sets of histone modification levels in gene function groups . the joint occupancy of multiple transcription factors may change depending on the genome context, such that differential regulatory modules are observed and linked to distinct regulation mechanisms. mrhmms (multivariate regression hidden markov models and the variants) is based on the premise that biological factors do not interact with each other in a uniform manner across the genome. a regression hidden markov model (rhmm), for example, can be used to segment the genome or genes into groups in each of which there is a unique relationship among biological factors. in addition to rhmm, mrhmms includes five other hidden markov model (hmm) variant structures that can be alternatively applied to suit specific studies and data characteristics.  
