gene expression mrnastab—a web application for mrna stability analysis eukaryotic gene expression is regulated both at the transcription and the mrna degradation levels. the implementation of functional genomics methods that allow the simultaneous measurement of transcription (tr) and degradation (dr) rates for thousands of mrnas is a huge improvement in this field. one of the best established methods for mrna stability determination is genomic run-on (gro). it allows the measurement of dr, tr and mrna levels during cell dynamic responses. here, we offer a software package that provides improved algorithms for determination of mrna stability during dynamic gro experiments. availability and implementation: the program mrnastab is freely accessible atmrna is the messenger molecule transferring information from genes to proteins. it is by its own nature and function unstable (see parker 2012; perezperez-ortnfor discussion). there is a variable turnover that depends on synthesis (transcription rate, tr) conducted by rna polymerase ii and degradation rate (dr) conducted by a complex system of rnases and other proteins or rnas . the importance of tr in determining the levels of mrnas is widely documented; however, the parallel importance of dr in it is only starting to be recognized (perezperez-ortn). there are several methods currently available for dr determination. some of them are able to measure mrna stabilities genome-wide (seeand supplementary data for a critical description and comparison). the most popular, although prone to mistakes and biases , is the transcription shut-off and subsequent determination of mrna decay: assuming first-order kinetics, the degradation constant (k d ) and the mrna half-life (hl ln2/k d ) can be calculated. the tr and mrna concentrations can be determined genome-wide by using a genomic run-on protocol (gro), which allows to estimate the hls of mrnas even under non steady-state conditions . this possibility is extremely interesting because it allows to determine tr, mrna levels and hls in a single experiment during the fast transcriptional response to an imposed environmental change (castells-roca et al., 2011 and references therein). this is the simplest protocol currently available for monitoring mrna turnover in dynamic situations. however, it involves complex numerical analysis and costly computing. now we describe here the mrnastab package that offers two alternative algorithms (programs stepk and rampk) for determining mrna hls from data generated by gro experiments. additionally, it also includes a program (shutoff) to calculate k d from simple decay experiments . all three programs are devised to cope with genome-wide data [tr and/or (mrna) time sequences for thousands of genes].  
