msa: an r package for multiple sequence alignment although the r platform and the add-on packages of the bioconductor project are widely used in bioinformatics, the standard task of multiple sequence alignment has been neglected so far. the msa package, for the first time, provides a unified r interface to the popular multiple sequence alignment algorithms clustalw, clustalomega and muscle. the package requires no additional software and runs on all major platforms. moreover, the msa package provides an r interface to the powerful package shade which allows for flexible and customizable plotting of multiple sequence alignments. availability and implementation: msa is available via the bioconductor project:multiple sequence alignment is one of the most fundamental tasks in bioinformatics. it serves as the basis for the detection of homologous regions, for detecting motifs and conserved regions, for detecting structural building blocks, for constructing sequence profiles, and as an important prerequisite for the construction of phylogenetic trees. since exact methods scale exponentially with the number of aligned sequences, approximative methods have been introduced that try to obtain decent, yet not necessarily optimal, alignments with reasonable computational effort. clustalw is a classic, but still very commonly used, method . t-coffee and muscle (, b) are other methods that are widely used. clustalomega is a more recent top-notch method that has been designed to align large numbers of sequences in relatively short time. for a more comprehensive overview of multiple sequence alignment methods, we refer to, edgar and batzoglou (2006) and notredame (2007). all methods mentioned above are available as command line programs or via web interfaces (e.g. on the embl-ebi server http://www.ebi.ac.uk/tools/msa/). however, for the r platform that is widely used in bioinformatics, the possibilities to perform multiple sequence alignment are limited. the biostrings package , which is the standard package for sequence analysis within the bioconductor project, provides data structures for storing and manipulating multiple sequence alignments, but not methods for computing them. only recently, the muscle package that provides a simple interface to muscle has been released via bioconductor. for other methods, users still need to resort to external stand-alone programs. this article presents msa, an r package released as part ofbioconductor 3.1 in april 2015. the package provides a unified interface to the three most common multiple sequence alignment methods and further integrates shade for customizable pretty printing of multiple sequence alignments.  
