data and text mining msacquisitionsimulator: data-dependent acquisition simulator for lc-ms shotgun proteomics data-dependent acquisition (dda) is the most common method used to control the acquisition process of shotgun proteomics experiments. while novel dda approaches have been proposed, their evaluation is made difficult by the need of programmatic control of a mass spectrometer. an alternative is in silico analysis, for which suitable software has been unavailable. to meet this need, we have developed msacquisitionsimulatora collection of c programs for simulating ground truth lc-ms data and the subsequent application of custom dda algorithms. it provides an opportunity for researchers to test, refine and evaluate novel dda algorithms prior to implementation on a mass spectrometer. availability and implementation: the software is freely available from its github repository http:// www.github.com/dennisgoldfarb/msacquisitionsimulator/ which contains further documentation and usage instructions.mass spectrometry is an analytical technique used in proteomics to identify and quantify proteins. many of its applications share the underlying goal of uncovering the full protein complement in a biological sample. however, for complex samples this is rarely achieved partly because the number of ion populations exceeds that which contemporary instruments can individually target for sequence analysis with a tandem mass spectrum scan (ms/ms) . acquisition algorithms are necessary to control the data acquisition process and manage the limited scan speed. data-dependent acquisition (dda) constitutes a major class of data acquisition methods. dda methods perform a precursor scan to determine the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and abundance of ions currently entering the mass spectrometer, followed by sequence determining ms/ms scans on ions from a subset of detected peaks. the standard dda algorithm, topn, selects ions for ms/ms scans that contributed to peaks of greatest signal intensity from the latest precursor scan. several other approaches, as well as adjustments to topn, have been proposed in order to increase peptide and protein identifications . however, topn continues to be the dominant choice for acquisition control despite its bias toward abundant proteins and relatively poor reproducibility. currently, evaluation of novel acquisition strategies requires access to both a mass spectrometer and its application programming interface (api). unfortunately, few instrument vendors provide an api, and therefore the pool of researchers with the necessary tools to explore this field is extremely limited. an alternative is to evaluate). however, the size of the simulations is limited due to speed, memory and/or disk space requirements. most importantly, the simulated ms/ms spectra lead to nearly perfect peptide-spectrummatches (psms) when analyzed with existing database search algorithms. the reasons for this include the absence of co-fragmentation from neighboring ions within an isolation window, the difficulty of predicting fragmentation patterns, and potentially other not yet understood phenomena. this limitation makes evaluating any acquisition strategy impractical as the metrics for success are based on the number of confident peptide and protein identifications. here, we present an acquisition simulator that produces psms with realistic peptide sequence and probability assignments for dda strategies by foregoing fragmentation simulation and instead directly generating psms based on the precursor ion fractions of ms/ms scans. it builds upon previous work on lc-ms simulations and scales to larger datasets due to probabilistic models of ion generation and subsequent pruning of rare ions. this allows for an increased number of proteins, peptides and post-translational modifications that can be simulated.dda simulation will assist in the development and assessment of novel methods. the next generation of algorithms will likely further integrate data generation with data analysis, such as real-time peptide sequencing and protein inference. they may also become more goal-oriented, seeking to identify subsets of proteins, specific modifications or to improve quantification. their sophistication may also come at a computational cost too great for their implementation on contemporary mass spectrometers. for such a scenario, msacquisitionsimulator will be a great tool for their evaluation.  
