sequence analysis msaprobs: multiple sequence alignment based on pair hidden markov models and partition function posterior probabilities motivation: multiple sequence alignment is of central importance to bioinformatics and computational biology. although a large number of algorithms for computing a multiple sequence alignment have been designed, the efficient computation of highly accurate multiple alignments is still a challenge. results: we present msaprobs, a new and practical multiple alignment algorithm for protein sequences. the design of msaprobs is based on a combination of pair hidden markov models and partition functions to calculate posterior probabilities. furthermore, two critical bioinformatics techniques, namely weighted probabilistic consistency transformation and weighted profileprofile alignment, are incorporated to improve alignment accuracy. assessed using the popular benchmarks: balibase, prefab, sabmark and oxbench, msaprobs achieves statistically significant accuracy improvements over the existing top performing aligners, including clustalw, mafft, muscle, probcons and probalign. furthermore, msaprobs is optimized for multi-core cpus by employing a multi-threaded design, leading to a competitive execution time compared to other aligners. availability: the source code of msaprobs, written in c++, is freely and publicly available from http://msaprobs.sourceforge.net.multiple sequence alignment is of central importance to bioinformatics and computational biology. the approach for producing an optimal multiple sequence alignment is to simultaneously align multiple sequences using dynamic programming. unfortunately, this approach is impractical for alignments of more than a few sequences, due to its high computational cost. therefore, many heuristics have been proposed to compute nearly optimal alignments, such as progressive alignment , iterative alignment and alignment based on profile hidden markov models . state-of-the-art multiple sequence alignment algorithms tend to share some common techniques to improve alignment accuracy, including combining iterative alignment with progressive alignment, and introducing consistency-based schemes. these algorithms are typically assessed on publicly available to whom correspondence should be addressed. benchmark data sets, including: balibase , prefab , sabmark (van) and oxbench . currently, the best performing multiple sequence alignment algorithms based on these benchmark tests are t-coffee , mafft , muscle , probcons and probalign . clustalw is historically one of the most popular multiple sequence alignment programs (with more than 26 000 citations in the isi web of science), complying with the typical progressive alignment pipeline. t-coffee introduced a consistency-based objective function coffee to progressive alignment by employing a primary library generated from pairwise global and local alignments to form three-way alignments. mafft uses the fast fourier transform method for rapid identification of homologous regions. it then iteratively refines alignment results after performing an initial progressive alignment. the accuracy of mafft is further improved by introducing a consistency approach incorporating pairwise information into the objective function. muscle works by iteratively refining alignment results with progressive alignment at the core, adopting a log-expectation scoring scheme instead of the conventional weighted sum-of-pairs scoring systems. probcons employs maximum expected accuracy as an objective function, and introduces a probabilistic consistency approach, based on pair hidden markov model (pair-hmm) posterior probabilities , to form three-way alignments. probalign adopts a very similar strategy to probcons, but employs a partition function to calculate posterior probabilities instead of using a pair-hmm. in this article, we present msaprobs, a new and practical multiple protein sequence alignment algorithm designed by combining a pairhmm and a partition function to calculate posterior probabilities. we further investigate two critical bioinformatics techniques, namely weighted probabilistic consistency transformation and weighted profileprofile alignment, to achieve high alignment accuracy. in addition, msaprobs is optimized for modern multicore cpus by employing a multi-threaded design in order to reduce execution time. assessed on the four popular benchmarks: balibase, prefab, sabmark and oxbench, msaprobs demonstrates significant alignment accuracy improvements over several leading aligners: clustalw, mafft, muscle, probcons and probalign, with competitive execution time. since t-coffee has been proven to be inferior to mafft, muscle and probcons in these papers ,msaprobs we have decided not to include the comparison to it. clustalw is compared because of its very fast speed (see the results section).  
