msaviewer: interactive javascript visualization of multiple sequence alignments the msaviewer is a quick and easy visualization and analysis javascript component for multiple sequence alignment data of any size. core features include interactive navigation through the alignment, application of popular color schemes, sorting, selecting and filtering. the msaviewer is web ready: written entirely in javascript, compatible with modern web browsers and does not require any specialized software. the msaviewer is part of the biojs collection of components. availability and implementation: the msaviewer is released as open source software under the boost software license 1.0. documentation, source code and the viewer are available at http:// msa.biojs.net/.multiple sequence alignment (msa) is a fundamental procedure to capture similarities between sequences of nucleotides (dna/rna) or of amino acids (protein). biologically meaningful msas highlight and capture sites with significant evolutionary conservation. msas are essential to predict aspects of protein structure (e.g. secondary structure or protein disorder ) and function [e.g. binding sites or localization (. msas can be used to understand genomic rearrangements , to derive sequence homology and to identify evolutionary rates . msas are widely used to display complex annotations relating to structure and function, and to transfer those annotations to sequences that lack annotations . many tools are available to view and analyze msas, including standalone applications and web applets . with the recent widespread adoption of javascript as the leading programming language for interactive web applications, new msa viewing tools compatible with modern web browsers have been developed and made available . biojs is one particular collection of javascript components with growing applications in biology ; it is interoperable with many other data visualization tools. here, we describe the biojs msaviewer. it is readily loaded into web pages to visualize and analyze msa datasets of arbitrary sizes. msaviewer implements most features commonly available in other popular msa viewing software, including scrolling, selecting, highlighting, cross-referencing with protein feature annotations and phylogenetic trees (a detailed comparison of features is in supplementary table s1).). percentage sequence identities relative to consensus (consensus sequence not shown) are listed for each sequence. filled red rectangles indicate sequence annotations provided by the user [here: secondary structure predictions of predictprotein (. red frames (indicated by two black arrows) are clusters of residues of ebolavirus vp24 responsible for binding to karyopherin alpha nuclear transporters to suppress antiviral defense mechanism in human . (d) a compact overview msa showing a birds eye view of the full alignment. yellow rectangles are two highlighted clusters in the main msa panel. despite the overall sequence homology, the highlighted regions in ebolavirus (ebov) proteins binding karyoprotein differ from those in llovu cuevavirus (llov) and lake victoria marburgvirus (marv). marv is known to not suppress hosts antiviral defense mechanism . though no experimental information on binding of llov vp24 to karyoproteins is available to date, the comparison of its sequence and structural features suggests a mechanism that is more similar to ebov than to marv  
