systems biology mseasy: unsupervised and untargeted gc-ms data processing mseasy performs unsupervised data mining on gas chro-matographymass spectrometry data. it detects putative compounds within complex metabolic mixtures through the clustering of mass spectra. retention times or retention indices are used after clustering, together with other validation criteria, for quality control of putative compounds. the package generates a fingerprinting or profiling matrix compatible with nist mass spectral search program and aristo webtool (automatic reduction of ion spectra to ontology) for molecule identification. most commonly used file formats, netcdf, mzxml and ascii, are acceptable. a graphical and user-friendly interface , mseasytkgui, is available for r novices. availability: mseasy and mseasytkgui are implemented as r packages available at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/mseasy/index .html and http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/mseasytkgui/index .htmlunveiling metabolic profiles of biological systems and their interface with their environment are being studied increasingly in an untargeted holistic manner. indeed, global metabolic profiling or fingerprinting provides a very powerful means of classifying, comparing and discriminating groups of samples. gas chromatographymass spectrometry (gc-ms) is one of the leading analytical platforms for this approach . this hyphenated mass spectrometric technique produces large multidimensional data with retention times and peak quantification from gas chromatography and mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and fragment intensity from mass spectrometer. handling such complex datasets requires efficient bioinformatics processing tools. in a recent review of bioinformatics tools in metabolomics,have shown that the alignment (i.e. the elimination of retention time shifts between datasets) is still a challenging step associated with numerous technical difficulties. here, we present an alternative approach for gc-ms data processing, insensitive to shift in retention time. mseasy works directly on the raw mass spectra (ms) rather than on extensively corrected chromatograms. unsupervised clustering algorithms group ms into putative compounds. the optimal number of putative compounds in the dataset is identified when the total number of molecules is unknown. mseasy accelerates the data processing and helps to interpret complex gc-ms datasets by extracting human-understandable structure and supplying quality control criteria. the method was developed as an r package offering substantial flexibility and opportunities for further developments.the novel r package mseasy is a free, easy-to-use and powerful raw data processing pipeline that extracts essential information from raw gc-ms data with minimal effort. it is insensitive to shift in retention time and does not require chromatogram alignment. mseasy speeds up greatly gc-ms data processing, allows handling large amount of data and limits labor-intensive and error-prone tasks.  
