sequence analysis msisensor: microsatellite instability detection using paired tumor-normal sequence data motivation: microsatellite instability (msi) is an important indicator of larger genome instability and has been linked to many genetic diseases , including lynch syndrome. msi status is also an independent prognostic factor for favorable survival in multiple cancer types, such as colorectal and endometrial. it also informs the choice of chemother-apeutic agents. however, the current pcrelectrophoresis-based detection procedure is laborious and time-consuming, often requiring visual inspection to categorize samples. we developed msisensor, a c program for automatically detecting somatic microsatellite changes. it computes length distributions of microsatellites per site in paired tumor and normal sequence data, subsequently using these to statistically compare observed distributions in both samples. comprehensive testing indicates msisensor is an efficient and effective tool for deriving msi status from standard tumor-normal paired sequence data. availability and implementation: https://microsatellites are repetitive sequences with unit length varying from 16 bp. during dna replication, those repetitive sequences may expand or shrink due to strand slippage . those errors are often recognized and repaired by the dna mismatch repair machinery, which includes genes such as mlh1 and msh2 . however, when mismatch repair enzymes are defective, replication errors will evade repair and will persist in somatic cells, as occurs in patients with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer, also known as lynch syndrome . levels of microsatellite instability (msi) are traditionally determined experimentally. the sizes of microsatellite marker sets in tumor dna are compared via electrophoresis with corresponding dna isolated from a normal tissue sample of the same patient. the most widely used set of markers was recommended by a national cancer institute consensus group and consists of either five or seven repeat markers . samples are normally classified as microsatellite instability high (msi-h), microsatellite instability low (msi-l) and microsatellite stable (mss). although the experimental approach is considered the gold standard, its detection procedure is expensive and its scope is limited to only a small subset of microsatellites. conversely, paired tumor-normal genome sequencing allows for comprehensive investigation of msi sites simultaneously and will likely become a routine part of diagnosis and treatment procedures. recently, it was reported that msi status can be derived from rna-seq data , but no stand-alone pipeline is provided in that study. here, we describe msisensor, a software tool that quantifies msi in paired tumor-normal genome sequencing data and reports somatic status of corresponding microsatellite sites in the human genome.msisensor is an efficient and effective software tool for deriving msi status from tumor-normal paired genome sequencing data. we will apply it to tcga data for msi screening and anticipate a wider usage of this tool in cancer clinical sequencing.. msisensor differentiates msi (microsatellite instable) samples from mss (microsatellite stable) ones. the x-axis is clinical classification of msi and mss. the y-axis is the percentage of microsatellite sites with a somatic indel  
