msprogene: integrative proteogenomics beyond six-frames and single nucleotide polymorphisms ongoing advances in high-throughput technologies have facilitated accurate proteomic measurements and provide a wealth of information on genomic and transcript level. in proteoge-nomics, this multi-omics data is combined to analyze unannotated organisms and to allow more accurate sample-specific predictions. existing analysis methods still mainly depend on six-frame translations or reference protein databases that are extended by transcriptomic information or known single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps). however, six-frames introduce an artificial sixfold increase of the target database and snp integration requires a suitable database summarizing results from previous experiments. we overcome these limitations by introducing msprogene, a new method for integrative proteogenomic analysis based on customized rna-seq driven transcript databases. msprogene is independent from existing reference databases or annotated snps and avoids large six-frame translated databases by constructing sample-specific transcripts. in addition, it creates a network combining rna-seq and peptide information that is optimized by a maximum-flow algorithm. it thereby also allows resolving the ambiguity of shared peptides for protein inference. we applied msprogene on three datasets and show that it facilitates a database-independent reliable yet accurate prediction on gene and protein level and additionally identifies novel genes. availability and implementation: msprogene is written in java and python. it is open source and available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/msprogene/.high-throughput technologies in both genomics and proteomics have driven the development of a variety of methods to analyze the large amounts of data generated. rna-seq techniques measure the transcriptome , while mass spectrometry allows identification and quantification of proteins that were expressed . the field of proteogenomics combines this multi-omics data for more accurate and sample-specific analyses . in recent years, proteogenomic studies have become more and more popular, focusing on deeper understanding of model organisms or exploring currently unannotated genomes . despite this popularity, methods that are jointly focusing on genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics so far mainly rely on sixframe translations or extensions of existing reference protein databases . six-frame translation has the advantage of being independent from any a priori annotation of the nucleotide sequence. however, it introduces an artificial sixfold increase of the (unknown) target database, which can result in a bias in peptide identification . in contrast, reference protein databases, for instance extended by known single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) from databases such as dbsnp , are not as prone to this bias as six-frame translations. but these approaches depend on existing annotations and thus cannot be applied to unannotated organisms without reference proteomes. further, they might not contain all information necessary to identify mutated or novel genes, and even error-tolerant search approaches may not be sufficient to recover these unannotated genes. thus, recent studies also rely on transcriptome information to provide better suited databases (  
