systems biology msstats: an r package for statistical analysis of quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic experiments msstats is an r package for statistical relative quantification of proteins and peptides in mass spectrometry-based proteomics. version 2.0 of msstats supports label-free and label-based experimental workflows and data-dependent, targeted and data-independent spectral acquisition. it takes as input identified and quantified spectral peaks, and outputs a list of differentially abundant peptides or proteins, or summaries of peptide or protein relative abundance. msstats relies on a flexible family of linear mixed models. availability and implementation: the code, the documentation and example datasets are available open-source at www.msstats.org under the artistic-2.0 license. the package can be downloaded from www.msstats.org or from bioconductor www.bioconductor.org and used in an r command line workflow. the package can also be accessed as an external tool in skyline (broudy et al., 2014) and used via graphical user interface.quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics is a technology of growing importance in biological and clinical research. modern proteomic workflows are complex and diverse, and a statistical approach is required to reduce bias and inefficiencies, distinguish the systematic variation from random artifacts and maximize the reproducibility of the results (k all and vitek, 2011). although some of these goals can be achieved with standard statistical methods, or with methods developed for other technologies such as gene expression microarrays, this is typically insufficient. specialized methods and software are needed to characterize the stochastic properties of the data in a way that reflects the details of sample preparation and spectral acquisition, and to implement the statistical analysis workflows in a way that is useful for both experimentalists and statisticians. msstats is an open-source r-based package that provides such statistical functionalities for relative quantification of proteins and peptides using a flexible family of linear mixed models. for some special cases, the methods and the implementation were previously described . here we present msstats 2.0, a package that integrates the methodology across several mass spectrometric workflows and data acquisition strategies, contains new functionalities for model-based analyses, provides example datasets, enables interoperability with the existing popular computational tools and facilitates their use by both statistical and proteomic communities.  
