data and text mining mtide: an integrated tool for the identification of mirna–target interaction in plants motivation: small rna sequencing and degradome sequencing (also known as parallel analysis of rna ends) have provided rich information on the microrna (mirna) and its cleaved mrna targets on a genome-wide scale in plants, but no computational tools have been developed to effectively and conveniently deconvolute the mirnatarget interaction (mti). results: a freely available package, mtide, was developed by combining modified mirdeep2 and cleaveland4 with some other useful scripts to explore mti in a comprehensive way. by searching for targets of a complete mirnas, we can facilitate large-scale identification of mirna targets, allowing us to discover regulatory interaction networks. availability and implementation: http://bis.zju.edu.cn/mtidemicrornas (mirnas) are a kind of small endogenous noncoding rnas that negatively control gene expression at the post-transcriptional level by degrading target mrnas in plants . to make the functions of mirna totally clear, it is essential to exactly identify the conserved and species-specific mirnas and their target genes. small rna sequencing and degradome sequencing have been widely used in plants to identify mirnas and target genes on a genome-wide scale. many tools have been developed to handle small rna sequencing and degradome data separately, but no specialized tool exists for a one-stop survey of this kind of interaction. mirnas are cleaved from stem-loop structured precursors called pre-mirnas by dicer-like 1 . maturation of mirnas releases rna fragments derived from different parts of pre-mirnas with asymmetric abundance. mirdeep2 , a new version of mirdeep, uses the position and frequency of sequenced reads along with the secondary structure of pre-mirnas and uses a probabilistic model of mirna biogenesis in animals to score the possible mirna sequence. compared with animals, mirna precursors are much longer with more variable lengths and more mirnas belong to paralogous families with multiple members in plants . therefore, it cannot be applied to the plant systems straightforward . cleaveland was developed specifically to analyze degradome data. however, because of the algorithms implemented in it, it is impractical to analyze all possible mirnatarget interactions (mtis) in a reasonable timescale for mirnas identified from small rna sequencing data. moreover, it only reports targets cleaved between the 10th and 11th nucleotides, but cleavages between 9th and 10th or 11th and 12th nt have also been reported . here, we present mtide, an integrated tool for exploring mti in plants. it consists of a modified mirdeep2 with plant-specific parameters, a modified cleaveland4 with more targets reports and some other useful scripts. to control the running timescale in a low level, we add multiple threads support for mirdeep2, cleaveland4 and other time-consuming parts.  
