genome analysis mtoolbox: a highly automated pipeline for heteroplasmy annotation and prioritization analysis of human mitochondrial variants in high-throughput sequencing motivation: the increasing availability of mitochondria-targeted and off-target sequencing data in whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing studies (wxs and wgs) has risen the demand of effective pipelines to accurately measure heteroplasmy and to easily recognize the most functionally important mitochondrial variants among a huge number of candidates. to this purpose, we developed mtoolbox, a highly automated pipeline to reconstruct and analyze human mito-chondrial dna from high-throughput sequencing data. results: mtoolbox implements an effective computational strategy for mitochondrial genomes assembling and haplogroup assignment also including a prioritization analysis of detected variants. mtoolbox provides a variant call format file featuring, for the first time, allele-specific heteroplasmy and annotation files with prioritized variants. mtoolbox was tested on simulated samples and applied on 1000 genomes wxs datasets. availability and implementation: mtoolbox package is available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/mtoolbox/.emerging discoveries in human mitochondrial genetics, driven by the advent of next-generation sequencing, have revealed that individuals exhibit a complex mixture of mitochondrial genotypes and carry low-level heteroplasmic variants . on the other hand, the deeper the sequencing coverage, the higher the number of mitochondrial dna(mtdna) variants and the variety of heteroplasmic ranges found per individual . in this frame, the deep sequencing of mtdna raises the demand of effective pipelines to accurately measure heteroplasmy and to easily recognize the most functionally important variants among a huge number of candidates. to this purpose, we developed mtoolbox, a highly automated bioinformatics pipeline to reconstruct and analyze human mtdna from high-throughput sequencing (hts) data. the mtoolbox workflow includes a computational strategy to assemble mitochondrial genomes from whole-exome sequencing (wxs) and/or whole-genome sequencing (wgs) data , which was further updated to detect insertions and deletions (ins/dels) and to assess the heteroplasmic fraction (hf) of each variant allele with the related confidence interval (ci), reported as sample-specific meta-information in an enhanced version of the variant call format (vcf) file (version 4.0). the mtoolbox pipeline analyzes the reconstructed genomes for haplogroup assignment and variant prioritization.  
