mucor: mutation aggregation and correlation motivation: there are many tools for variant calling and effect prediction, but little to tie together large sample groups. aggregating, sorting and summarizing variants and effects across a cohort is often done with ad hoc scripts that must be rewritten for every new project. in response, we have written mucor, a tool to gather variants from a variety of input formats (including multiple files per sample), perform database lookups and frequency calculations, and write many types of reports. in addition to use in large studies with numerous samples, mucor can also be employed to directly compare variant calls from the same sample across two or more platforms, parameters or pipelines. a companion utility , depthgauge, measures coverage at regions of interest to increase confidence in calls. availability and implementation: source code is freely available at httpsexamination of genomic variants from multiple samples is a common procedure in bioinformatics. whether to use existing tools or custom scripts depends on many factors, including the number of samples, source(s) of data and scope of the project. a typical workflow may involve variant annotation, extraction of variants from vcf files, binning loci into features, calculating summary statistics, filtering, limiting by region and writing to a tab-separated values table. finally, this table is imported into a statistical package for calculations or to microsoft excel for use by end-users or inclusion as a data supplement to a paper. existing tools provide only parts of this workflow. the genome analysis toolkit function combinevariants, joinx (http://gmt.genome.wustl.edu/pack ages/joinx/), and vcftools all can merge records from vcf files, but produce only another vcf file in turn. the resultant vcf is necessarily focused on individual genomic locations, and a study of features (e.g. genes) requires additional work on the part of the bioinformatician. further, a multi-sample vcf file may be viewed interactively in a genome browser but is not suitable as a locus-wise frequency table for the biologist or statistician. transformation of such a vcf to a detailed report again requires additional processing. some commercial products purport to be end-to-end solutions, but these are not available to all. variant toolchest is open-source, but is designed around subsetting and has only preliminary support for non-vcf reporting. motivated by these factors, we developed mucor, a flexible tool for variant aggregation and summarization. mucor collects variants from an arbitrary number of sources, assigns them to user-defined features (typically but not necessarily genes), looks them up in variant databases, calculates metrics and generates reports, all within a configurable and extensible framework.  
