mugbas: a species free gene-based programme suite for post-gwas analysis genome wide association studies between molecular markers and phenotypes are now routinely run in model and non-model species. however, tools to estimate the probability of association of functional units (e.g. genes) containing multiple markers are not developed for species other than humans. here we introduce mugbas (multi species gene-based association suite), software that estimates the p-value of a gene using information on annotation, single marker gwa results and genotype. the software is species and annotation independent, fast, highly parallelized and ready for high-density marker studies. availability and implementation: https://bitbucket.org/capemaster/mugbas contact:with the availability of high-density snp panels, genome wide association studies (gwas) have become a standard for dissecting the architecture of complex traits . this is true for humans, and other species. the underlying idea of gwas is simple: find marker-trait associations exploiting the linkage disequilibrium (ld) that exists between causative mutations which we ignoreand flanking markers of known chromosomal position. a number of well established approaches can be used in a standard gwas . these generally use many thousand and sometimes millions of markers. statistical thresholds are set considering multiple comparisons and may exclude a number of moderate or small effects actually associated with the traits investigated. reducing the number of tests while maintaining all the information provided by high-density panels would be a clear advantage. in addition, once significant signals are detected, different strategies are used to tag the candidate causative genes. sometimes, all genes lying in the significant snp(s) flanking region are included in further analyses, sometimes only the gene closest to the signal is further investigated. these choices are arbitrary, may end up in choosing the wrong genes or in including a large number of false candidate genes. methods have recently been proposed to overcome these limitations using a priori knowledge. the candidate pathway analysis , and gene-based association strategies restrict gwa studies to known genes or gene subsets, resizing the multiple testing problem and increasing the power of the analyses. bioinformatics pipelines are generally developed for the analysis of human and model organisms, and are often not suited to the analysis of other species. this is the case of the vegas software , developed for gene-based analyses in humans. in fact, this plink-based software expects data from 22 autosomes and pre-calculated ld values available for human hapmap phase 2 data. here, we introduce mugbas, a software based on vegas that uses gwas data and a given annotation (typically genes but any region is suitable) to estimate gene-based and region-based association p-values. the suite is species and annotation free, ready to analyze high-density data from any diploid species.  
