genetics and population analysis an efficient gene–gene interaction test for genome-wide association studies in trio families motivation: several efficient genegene interaction tests have been developed for unrelated case control samples in genome-wide association studies (gwas), making it possible to test tens of billions of interaction pairs of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) in a reasonable timeframe. however, current family-based genegene interaction tests are computationally expensive and are not applicable to genome-wide interaction analysis. results: we developed an efficient family-based genegene interaction test, gcore, for trios (i.e. two parents and one affected sib). the gcore compares interlocus correlations at two snps between the transmitted and non-transmitted alleles. we used simulation studies to compare the statistical properties such as type i error rates and power for the gcore with several other family-based interaction tests under various scenarios. we applied the gcore to a family-based gwas for autism consisting of approximately 2000 trios. testing a total of 22 471 383 013 interaction pairs in the gwas can be finished in 36 h by the gcore without large-scale computing resources, demonstrating that the test is practical for genome-wide genegene interaction analysis in trios. availability and implementation: gcore is implemented with c and is available at http://genome-wide association studies (gwas) have been widely used in complex disease studies to identify the association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) with the disease. although gwas have successfully identified many significant snps, most snps exhibit modest effects on the disease and can only explain a small proportion of the heritability of the disease . as complex diseases are caused by the joint effects of multiple genes, genegene interactions may also play an important role in disease etiology. significant genegene interactions have been identified for several diseases, such as alzheimers disease, autism and schizophrenia . therefore, it is important to develop powerful and efficient genegene interaction methods for gwas. two major challenges are faced when performing interaction analysis in gwas. the first is the computational burden resulting from tens of billions of tests when considering all possible pairwise interactions between snps. several computationally efficient algorithms have been developed for pairwise interaction analysis for casecontrol gwas, such as the fast epistasis test implemented in plink , snpharvester , snpruler , boost and team . the second challenge is the multipletesting correction burden resulting from the extremely large number of tests. to achieve genome-wide significance for these interaction tests, a large sample size or strong interaction effects between snps are required. several genegene interaction methods have also been developed for family-based association studies. for families with at least one v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com affected and unaffected child, conditional logistic regression (clr) and logistic regression based on generalized estimating equations (gee) can be used for testing interactions . clr has further been extended to accommodate families with one affected child and two parents (i.e. trios), using the affected offspring as a case and pseudocontrols created based on the parental genotypes . unphased is a likelihood ratio test that can be used for testing interactions by comparing the likelihoods of genotypes given the disease status with and without modeling the interaction . multifactor dimensionality reduction (mdr) , a machine-learning method developed for casecontrol studies, has been extended to several family-based interaction tests, such as mdr-pdt , pgmdr and fam-mdr . a summary of tools available for genegene interaction analysis is shown inand a more detailed overview of these tools can be found in the supplementary materials. also more comprehensive reviews of genegene interaction methods can be found in some review papers . as shown in, current family-based interaction methods are applicable to only candidate gene regions. iterative algorithms such as the newtonraphson method are used in parameter estimations in clr or gee, as well as in the likelihood ratio tests. mdr-based approaches use cross-validation for model evaluation and permutations to approximate the distributions of the test statistics. these algorithms require intensive calculations. hence, these tests would not be applicable for analyzing genomewide interactions with tens of billions of tests. we developed an efficient genegene interaction test which considers correlations in trios (gcore). the gcore is extended from the fast epistasis test in plink. the gcore statistic compares interlocus correlations at two snps between the transmitted and nontransmitted alleles. we used theoretical distributions to model the statistic and calculate the variance and covariance. thus, the test does not use any iterative algorithms, ensuring that the test is fast and applicable to genome-wide interaction studies. we performed a comprehensive simulation study to evaluate the type i error rates for the gcore and other genegene interaction tests capable of analyzing family data with available software, including gee, unphased and mdr-pdt. simulations were also used to compare the power of the gcore with the three tests under various scenarios. our simulation results suggest that the gcore can be used as a screening tool to efficiently identify the potential pairs of snps with interaction effects, and other tests with higher power such as the likelihood ratio test implemented in unphased can be further used to evaluate the significance of the snp pairs. finally, we applied the gcore to a familybased gwas for autism to screen all possible pairs of snps within genes, and unphased was used to further test the pairs of snps identified by the gcore.  
