structural bioinformatics multicom: a multi-level combination approach to protein structure prediction and its assessments in casp8 motivation: protein structure prediction is one of the most important problems in structural bioinformatics. here we describe multicom, a multi-level combination approach to improve the various steps in protein structure prediction. in contrast to those methods which look for the best templates, alignments and models, our approach tries to combine complementary and alternative templates, alignments and models to achieve on average better accuracy. results: the multi-level combination approach was implemented via five automated protein structure prediction servers and one human predictor which participated in the eighth critical assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction (casp8), 2008. the multicom servers and human predictor were consistently ranked among the top predictors on the casp8 benchmark. the methods can predict moderate-to high-resolution models for most template-based targets and low-resolution models for some template-free targets. the results show that the multi-level combination of complementary templates, alternative alignments and similar models aided by model quality assessment can systematically improve both template-based and template-free protein modeling. availability: the multicom server is freely available atknowing protein tertiary structure is useful for determining protein protein interactions, protein function and evolution, and designing drugs. at present, x-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) spectroscopy are the two most commonly used experimental methods employed to determine protein structure. however, both methods are far too expensive and time consuming to be used to process the millions of proteins produced by highthroughput genome sequencing . computer-aided protein structure prediction, in contrast, is less expensive, much faster, and able to generate protein structures on a large scale. as a result, computational protein structure prediction has received much attention in recent years, particularly from those working in computer science, chemistry, molecular biology, and molecular physics, and their efforts have led to steady progress in the area . to whom correspondence should be addressed. recently, the eighth critical assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction, 2008 (casp8) assessed state-of-the-art protein modeling techniques in two categories: template-based modeling (tbm) and template-free modeling (fm). tbm deals with proteins for which suitable templates can be found. it can also be referred to as comparative modeling or fold recognition depending on the availability of sequentially or structurally related proteins. fm deals with proteins for which no suitable templates can be found. this category includes both fragment-based modeling and purely ab initio, or de novo modeling, in which predictions are made based solely on chemical and physical principles . tbm typically contains five steps . the first step is to identify templates that have a similar structure to the protein to be modeled (target). once templates have been selected, the target protein is then aligned with the templates. at this point, models can be built from the alignments and the structural information of each template. after model generation, the models are evaluated and refined. here we present a multi-level combination approach to improve protein structure prediction during all facets of tbm. our approach first attempts to combine complementary templates, alignments, and model generation methods to produce a number of alternative models. it then uses a novel model combination process guided by model quality evaluation to refine the models. five fully automated servers (multicom-cluster, multicom-refine, multicomcmfr, multicom-rank and muprot) and one human predictor (multicom) implemented various forms of this approach and participated in casp8. the casp8 results show that the multi-level combination approach is effective for the full spectrum of protein modeling, including high-accuracy tbm, hard tbm and fm.  
