multilabel classification for exploiting cross-resistance information in hiv-1 drug resistance prediction motivation: antiretroviral treatment regimens can sufficiently suppress viral replication in human immunodeficiency virus (hiv)-infected patients and prevent the progression of the disease. however, one of the factors contributing to the progression of the disease despite ongoing antiretroviral treatment is the emergence of drug resistance. the high mutation rate of hiv can lead to a fast adaptation of the virus under drug pressure, thus to failure of antiretroviral treatment due to the evolution of drug-resistant variants. moreover, cross-resistance phenomena have been frequently found in hiv-1, leading to resistance not only against a drug from the current treatment, but also to other not yet applied drugs. automatic classification and prediction of drug resistance is increasingly important in hiv research as well as in clinical settings, and to this end, machine learning techniques have been widely applied. nevertheless, cross-resistance information was not taken explicitly into account, yet. results: in our study, we demonstrated the use of cross-resistance information to predict drug resistance in hiv-1. we tested a set of more than 600 reverse transcriptase sequences and corresponding resistance information for six nucleoside analogues. based on multi-label classification models and cross-resistance information, we were able to significantly improve overall prediction accuracy for all drugs, compared with single binary classifiers without any additional information. moreover, we identified drug-specific patterns within the reverse transcriptase sequences that can be used to determine an optimal order of the classifiers within the classifier chains. these patterns are in good agreement with known resistance mutations and support the use of cross-resistance information in such prediction models.the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) is one of the major human diseases leading to about 2 million deaths yearly. although antiretroviral treatment is working well in principle, the high mutation rate of hiv frequently leads to a fast adaptation of the virus and thus to the development of drug-resistant viral strains.performed stochastic simulations of the within-host evolution of hiv-1. by estimating the structure of the hiv-1 quasispecies, they were able to calculate an error threshold of hiv-1. they discovered that hiv-1 has a mutation rate that is close to error catastrophe and that the error threshold depends heavily on the recombination rate of hiv-1 . pennings (2012) analyzed the evolution of resistance in hiv-1 due to standing genetic variation. she ascertained that, depending on the treatment, probabilities of evolution of drug resistance due to standing genetic variation vary between 0 and 39. the most important parameters for the evolution of drug resistance are the effective population size of the virus before treatment and the fitness of the resistant virus during treatment. evolution of drug resistance finally leads to a failure of antiretroviral treatment and thus to the progression of disease. experimental testing of viral resistance in patients has been widely used in research as well as in clinical settings to gain information about the way drug resistance evolves. in contrast to these experimental phenotypic assays, computational approaches offer the possibility to predict drug resistance in hiv-1 in an easy and fast way based on short sequence information of the viral genotype, e.g. the sequence of the viral reverse transcriptase (rt). such computational models for predicting drug resistance in hiv-1 have been developed and widely applied. these computational models are mainly based on statistical or machine learning methods that try to find a mapping from the sequence information to a resistance factor. usually, the ic 50 ratios [the concentration of a specific drug inhibiting 50 of viral replication compared with cell culture experiments without the drug is defined as ic 50 (50 inhibitor concentration).] are used in these models to define resistance. in general, drug resistance means reduced inhibition of viral replication by antiretroviral drugs, resulting in increased ic 50 values. the ic 50 values of the drug resistant isolates and hiv wild type are used to calculate resistance factors ic 50 drug concentration for resistant strain ic 50 drug concentration for wild type , as a standardized measure of hiv drug resistance. the data are separated into the classes susceptible and resistant based on a drug-specific cutoff of the resistance factor. a computational model is then trained based on these data pairs (sequence and corresponding class), which can then be used to predict the resistance factor or the resistance class for new unseen sequences. for instance,sico-chemical changes of mutated sequences compared with the wild-type strain to predict rt inhibitor resistance in hiv-1. moreover, the same group developed the first systems biology approaches to hiv-1 drug resistance, showing networks of interacting positions . one important finding, however, has not been exploited in these models so far, namely the occurrence of cross-resistance. in the context of hiv-1, cross-resistance means that mutations leading to a resistance against a specific drug, which is currently part of the antiretroviral treatment of a specific patient, also leads to resistance (in some cases, albeit less frequently, it could also lead to a re-sensitization for other drugs.) against other drugs (that may or may not be part of the same treatment). in the current study, we analyzed cross-resistance in hiv-1 for a dataset of more than 600 rt sequences and six nucleoside analogues (nas), namely lamivudine (3tc), abacavir (abc), zidovudine (azt), stavudine (d4t), didanosine (ddi) and tenofovir (tdf). moreover, we developed a model that exploits knowledge about cross-resistance to improve the overall prediction accuracy for the whole repertoire of drugs used in this study. to this end, we made use of novel methods for so-called multilabel classification (mlc), a generalization of conventional (polychotomous) classification that has recently gained increasing attention in machine learning . to the best of our knowledge, this is the first time information about rt inhibitors cross-resistance has been explicitly integrated in hiv-1 drug resistance prediction models. in contrast to protease inhibitors (pis) as well as non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (nnrtis), nas have less side effects . moreover, the combination of different drug classes during therapy may lead to unpredictable interactions of pis and nnrtis with the cytochrome p450 system and thus may complicate the therapy. therefore, one option might be the use of quadruple nucleoside therapy (sturmer).we conclude with an affirmative answer to one of the main questions of our study, namely whether or not cross-resistance information can be used to improve overall accuracy in drug resistance prediction. by using mlc methods, a relatively recent development in machine learning, we were able to exploit cross-resistance information for rt inhibitors. more concretely, our results are based on a specific mlc method called ccs. we consider these results as promising and, therefore, intend to further explore this direction in future work. on the methodological side, we would like to try alternative mlc methods, including the probabilistic variant of ccs proposed by dembczynskibut also approaches that are not based on the idea of chaining. as an interesting property of the former, let us mention that it does not only produce binary predictions, but proper probability estimates of single labels or label combinations. predictions of that kind are interesting, not only for the minimization of various loss functions, but also for the purpose of representing uncertainty. moreover, we want to include multiclass and regression models to be able to predict more classes, e.g. intermediate resistance, and even the resistance factors. on the application side, our study has focused on nas so far, although a typical clinical treatment includes drugs from several classes. it might of course be interesting to test our approach for other types of antiretroviral drugs, for example, non-nucleoside rt inhibitors, and for other target proteins, such as hiv-1 protease and corresponding pis. by now, our approach is limited to specialized treatment cases and thus is currently not well applicable in clinical settings. however, in the future we plan to adapt our approach for nnrtis as well as for pis. moreover, all sequences used in the current study originated from subtype b strains, thus the results of our model might be misleading if it is applied to other subtypes.  
