genetics and population analysis multi-objective tag snps selection using evolutionary algorithms motivation: integrated analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) and structure variations showed that the extent of linkage disequilibrium is common across different types of genetic variants. a subset of snps (called tag snps) is sufficient for capturing alleles of bi-allelic and even multi-allelic variants. however, accuracy and power of tag snps are affected by several factors, including genotyping failure, errors and tagging bias of certain alleles. in addition, different sets of tag snps should be selected for fulfilling requirements of various genotyping platforms and projects. results: this study formulates the problem of selecting tag snps into a four-objective optimization problem that minimizes the total amount of tag snps, maximizes tolerance for missing data, enlarges and balances detection power of each allele class. to resolve this problem, we propose evolutionary algorithms incorporated with greedy initialization to find non-dominated solutions considering all objectives simultaneously. this method provides users with great flexibility to extract different sets of tag snps for different platforms and scenarios (e.g. up to 100 tags and 10 missing rate). compared to conventional methods, our method explores larger search space and requires shorter convergence time. experimental results revealed strong and weak conflicts among these objectives. in particular, a small number of additional tag snps can provide sufficient tolerance and balanced power given the low missing and error rates of todays genotyping platforms. availability: the software is freely available at bioinformatics online andgenetic differences between two individuals range from single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) to large structure variations (e.g. deletions and duplications). based on analysis of linkage disequilibrium (ld) among snps, the entire human genome is shown to be composed of high-ld blocks interspersed by recombination hotspots . a small subset of snps (termed tag snps) is capable of capturing haplotype information in a high-ld block . recently, large structure variations have been discovered by array comparative genomic hybridization (acgh) to whom correspondence should be addressed. or massively parallel sequencing platforms. integrated analysis of snps and structure variations showed that the extent of ld is not limited to snps. for example, a number of copy number variations (cnvs) are found to exhibit high ld with flanking snps, implying the copy number of each individual is now inferable by tag snps . in an analysis of an inversion polymorphism at 8p23, the orientation of each haplotype can be predicted by 13 tag snps . these results suggest that a single snp genotyping platform and well-chosen tag snps are sufficient for capturing alleles of structure variations. owing to the limited capacity of a genotyping platform, the number of tag snps is often minimized to increase genome-wide coverage, which is ordinarily done by capturing extent of ld (e.g. r 2 and d ) or haplotype diversity . however, alleles of tag snps may be missed or miscalled due to defective quality of signals during genotyping . these missing data and genotyping errors greatly reduce the accuracy of tag snps, because alleles of tagged variations may be wrongly inferred . recently, variants of these methods have also been developed for tagging multi-allelic variations (e.g. cnv) . nevertheless, the power of tag snps is further affected by tagging bias toward certain alleles. some alleles may be well distinguished by many tag snps, whereas others are distinguished by only a few tags. thus, subsequent association studies using the tag snps will fail to provide unbiased detection power for each allele. these issues can be formulated into different objectives in tag snps selection. a small number of tag snps, on the one hand, is always desired given the limited capacity of a genotyping platform . on the other hand, the number of tag snps has to be increased in order to tolerate the influence of missing data and genotyping errors . additionally, the distance and diversity among haplotype backgrounds of different allele classes should be considered for providing sufficient and unbiased power in distinguishing each allele. however, some of these objectives are intrinsically conflict, e.g. genotyping cost and tolerance. existing methods for tag snps selection fail to take multiple objectives into account. moreover, different sets of tag snps are required to accommodate various platforms and scenarios (e.g. maximum 100 tags and tolerance for 10 missing data). thus, a method that can simultaneously address these issues and generate multiple non-dominated solutions satisfying distinct constraints of each objective is highly demanded. this study formulates the tag snp selection problem into a fourobjective optimization problem that minimizes the total amount of tag snps, maximizes tolerance for missing snps, enlarges  
