gene expression multiple gene expression profile alignment for microarray time-series data clustering motivation: clustering gene expression data given in terms of time-series is a challenging problem that imposes its own particular constraints. traditional clustering methods based on conventional similarity measures are not always suitable for clustering time-series data. a few methods have been proposed recently for clustering microarray time-series, which take the temporal dimension of the data into account. the inherent principle behind these methods is to either define a similarity measure appropriate for temporal expression data, or pre-process the data in such a way that the temporal relationships between and within the time-series are considered during the subsequent clustering phase. results: we introduce pairwise gene expression profile alignment, which vertically shifts two profiles in such a way that the area between their corresponding curves is minimal. based on the pairwise alignment operation, we define a new distance function that is appropriate for time-series profiles. we also introduce a new clustering method that involves multiple expression profile alignment, which generalizes pairwise alignment to a set of profiles. extensive experiments on well-known datasets yield encouraging results of at least 80 classification accuracy.an important process in functional genomic studies is clustering microarray time-series data, where genes with similar expression profiles are expected to be functionally related . a bayesian approach , a partitional clustering based on k-means and a euclidean distance approach have been proposed for clustering time-series gene expression profiles. they have applied selforganizing maps (soms) to visualize and to interpret the gene temporal expression profile patterns. a hidden phase model was used for clustering time-series data to define the parameters of a mixture of normal distributions in a bayesian-like manner that are estimated by using expectation maximization (em;). also, the methods proposed inare based on correlation measures. a method that uses jackknife correlation with or without using seeded candidate profiles was proposed for clustering time-series microarray data as well , where the resulting clusters depend upon the initially chosen template genes, because there is a possibility of missing important genes. a regression-based method was proposed into address the challenges in clustering short time-series expression data. analyzing gene temporal expression profile data that are non-uniformly sampled and can contain missing values has been studied in. clustering temporal gene expression profiles was studied by identifying homogeneous clusters of genes in. the shapes of the curves were considered instead of the absolute expression ratios. fuzzy clustering of gene temporal profiles, where the similarities between co-expressed genes are computed based on the rate of change of the expression ratios across time, has been studied in, the idea of order-restricted inference levels across time has been applied to select and cluster genes, where the estimation makes use of known inequalities among parameters. in, pairs of profiles represented by piece-wise linear functions are aligned in such a way to minimize the integrated squared area between the profiles. an agglomerative clustering method, combined with an area-based distance measure between two aligned profiles, was used to cluster microarray time-series data. using natural cubic spline interpolations, we re-formulated the pairwise gene expression profile alignment problem ofin terms of arbitrary functions that are continuously integrable on a finite interval, and extended the concept of pairwise alignment to multiple expression profile alignment. finally, we combined k-means and em clustering with multiple alignment to cluster microarray time-series data, yielding at least 80 classification accuracy on well-known data.  
