multiple instance learning of calmodulin binding sites motivation: calmodulin (cam) is a ubiquitously conserved protein that acts as a calcium sensor, and interacts with a large number of proteins. detection of cam binding proteins and their interaction sites experimentally requires a significant effort, so accurate methods for their prediction are important. results: we present a novel algorithm (mi-1 svm) for binding site prediction and evaluate its performance on a set of cam-binding proteins extracted from the calmodulin target database. our approach directly models the problem of binding site prediction as a large-margin classification problem, and is able to take into account uncertainty in binding site location. we show that the proposed algorithm performs better than the standard svm formulation, and illustrate its ability to recover known cam binding motifs. a highly accurate cascaded classification approach using the proposed binding site prediction method to predict cam binding proteins in arabidopsis thaliana is also presented. availability: matlab code for training mi-1 svm and the cascaded classification approach is available on request. contact:calmodulin (cam) is an intracellular calcium sensor protein that interacts with a large number of proteins to regulate their biological functions and exhibits sequence conservation across all eukaryotes . ca 2+ plays a very important role in many cellular functions ranging from fertilization and cellular division to neuronal spiking . due to the importance of calcium signaling in cells, identifying proteins that bind cam and determining the location of the cam binding site in them can help in gaining a better understanding of cellular function in general, and the role of calcium in different cellular processes in particular. this article presents a highly accurate computational approach that can identify the location of a cam binding site in a protein solely on the basis of its amino acid sequence, helping avoid the significant effort of performing such experiments in the lab . our approach uses sequence information alone, which ensures its wider applicability in comparison to methods that rely on structural modeling . cam binding sites are known to be contiguous in sequence, often occurring through an amphiphilic alpha helix (o). this makes cam binding site prediction amenable to a sliding-window classification approach, as applied in recent work . the method byuses a hierarchical neural network classifier trained on the basis of amino acid properties averaged over a fixedsize window.showed that a simple sliding window to whom correspondence should be addressed. support vector machine (svm) trained on average amino acid composition achieves similar performance. in this article, we present a novel formulation of the binding site prediction problem that is based on the framework of multiple instance learning (mil;). in mil positive examples come in bags. for a positive bag, it is assumed that at least one of the examples is indeed positive whereas negative bags contain only negative examples. we use this for binding site prediction by forming a positive bag out of fixed-size sequence windows that overlap the annotated binding site. this allows us to model the uncertainty in actual binding site locationexperimental methods may not precisely locate a binding site, and may include a region that is larger than the true binding site due to limitations of budget and experimental procedures. furthermore, modeling binding sites this way facilitates the use of sequence representations that are position dependent, yielding a more detailed model of the binding site. this allows learning of motifs that are characteristic of the binding site. mil has been applied in a variety of other problem domains such as object tracking , protein identification , and prediction of proteinligand binding affinities . our results show that the proposed mi-1 svm has higher accuracy than the classical multiple instance svm , and is also faster to train. mi-1 also performs better than a standard svm, thereby improving on existing work of . we also compare the merits of several ways of representing binding sites, and demonstrate the ability of our method to learn motifs that are associated with cam binding. finally, we show how the resulting binding site predictor can be used as the basis for a classifier that predicts cam binding proteins, with improved accuracy over earlier work.  
