data and text mining multiqc: summarize analysis results for multiple tools and samples in a single report motivation: fast and accurate quality control is essential for studies involving next-generation sequencing data. whilst numerous tools exist to quantify qc metrics, there is no common approach to flexibly integrate these across tools and large sample sets. assessing analysis results across an entire project can be time consuming and error prone; batch effects and outlier samples can easily be missed in the early stages of analysis. results: we present multiqc, a tool to create a single report visualising output from multiple tools across many samples, enabling global trends and biases to be quickly identified. multiqc can plot data from many common bioinformatics tools and is built to allow easy extension and customization.advances in next-generation sequencing are leading to an avalanche of data. whilst opening doors to new analysis types and experimental designs, expanding sample numbers make studies increasingly vulnerable to confounding batch effects . such biases are often subtle and difficult to detect and require careful quality control measures. most bioinformatics programs produce logs detailing their results. dedicated qc tools such as fastqc (http://www.bioinfor matics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc), qualimap and rseqc are excellent at highlighting potential problems in data. however, nearly all of these logs and reports are produced on a per-sample basis, requiring the user to find and compile qc results. this process is time consuming, repetitive and complex, making it prone to errors. multiqc addresses this problem by scanning given analysis directories for log files and qc reports, creating a single summary report visualizing results across all samples. collecting data within a single report provides a fast way to scan key statistics quickly and easily . shared plots allow accurate comparison between samples, allowing detection of subtle differences not noticeable when switching between different files. data visualization aids batch effect detection and minimizes the risk of confounding factors affecting the results of the study. multiqc is the first tool of its type within the field; it has the potential to greatly improve quality control and reporting for researchers involved in next-generation sequencing, removing the need for custom comparative scripts.as the field of next-generation sequencing matures, there are increasing numbers of bioinformatics tools producing ever more verbose descriptions of data. integrating these statistics across tools with large sample sets is difficult and time-consuming. multiqc can automate the parsing of this metadata, providing powerful visualizations with a simple interface. extension and data export allow multiqc to function as a central collection point at the terminus of analysis pipelines. routine use can aid quality control steps early on in data processing, reducing risk of batch effects and other downstream analysis problems.  
