an efficient network querying method based on conditional random fields motivation: a large amount of biomolecular network data for multiple species have been generated by high-throughput experimental techniques, including undirected and directed networks such as proteinprotein interaction networks, gene regulatory networks and metabolic networks. there are many conserved functionally similar modules and pathways among multiple biomolecular networks in different species; therefore, it is important to analyze the similarity between the biomolecular networks. network querying approaches aim at efficiently discovering the similar subnetworks among different species. however, many existing methods only partially solve this problem. results: in this article, a novel approach for network querying problem based on conditional random fields (crfs) model is presented, which can handle both undirected and directed networks, acyclic and cyclic networks and any number of insertions/deletions. the crf method is fast and can query pathways in a large network in seconds using a pc. to evaluate the crf method, extensive computational experiments are conducted on the simulated and real data, and the results are compared with the existing network querying methods. all results show that the crf method is very useful and efficient to find the conserved functionally similar modules and pathways in multiple biomolecular networks.the high-throughput experimental techniques have been dramatically improved in past decades and a large amount of biomolecular network data have been produced. for example, proteinprotein interaction (ppi) networks are available in many databases such as dip , which catalogs experimentally determined protein interactions for many species including saccharomyces cerevisiae, drosophila melanogaster, escherichia coli and caenorhabditis elegans. since the biomolecular networks contain many conserved functionally similar modules and pathways, to whom correspondence should be addressed. it is important to analyze the similarity among multiple biomolecular networks to discover signaling pathways, find conserved modules and reveal new biological function subnetworks. network querying approaches attempt to address this problem via optimally mapping the queried network into a subnetwork of the given biomolecular network. there already exist many methods for network querying in literature. pathblast is a network alignment and search tool for comparing ppi networks, but it only could be used to query a short protein path.devised an algorithm called metapathwayhunter for querying metabolic networks. metapathwayhunter could find queries for more general pathways, but it only could be applied to small networks without cycles. qpath is a comprehensive framework for querying a linear pathway in a network of interest, while qnet extends the type of queried network from the linear pathways to trees and networks of bounded tree width.proposed an efficient framework for finding pathways based on hidden markov models (hmms) and it only could deal with the simple path. the efficiency, accuracy and capability to handle general network structures are three major criteria for devising network querying approaches. many previous methods are either limited by the size of networks, the types of networks or the maximum allowable number of insertions/deletions. for example, pathblast, qpath and hmm method only consider the simple path (i.e. linear chain), while metapathwayhunter and qnet cannot query the network with cycles. some recent approaches advanced the step to the network querying problem with general network structure. saga is an approximate graph matching technique that minimizes a subgraph distance function with a parameter over all possible matchings to get the similar subgraph. pathmatch/graphmatch formally define the path matching and graph matching problems and give algorithms for these problems, respectively. they reduced the path matching problem to find a longest weighted path in a directed acyclic graph, and the graph matching problem to find the highest scoring subgraphs in a large graph. mnaligner is a network alignment method based on the integer quadratic programming. it only works well for the small network alignment problem since solving the largescale integer quadratic programming is time consuming. torque is a topology-free querying algorithm. given a query, torque finds a matching set of proteins that are sequence similar to the query and then span a connectedthe proposed crf method is implemented by using matlab. the matlab toolbox ugm developed by mark schmidt (http://www.di. ens.fr/mschmidt/software/ugm.html) is used to solve the crf model, and the lengths of shortest paths for all pairs of nodes in the network g are calculated by the matlab toolbox matlabbgl (http:// www.stanford.edu/dgleich/programs/matlab_bgl/). several simulated and real data are used to evaluate the crf method on both undirected and directed network querying problems. in this study, we set d = 10 10 , c = 0.5, e = 1 and s = 1.  
