muscle: automated multi-objective evolutionary optimization of targeted lc-ms/ms analysis developing liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (lc-ms/ms) analyses of (bio)chemicals is both time consuming and challenging, largely because of the large number of lc and ms instrument parameters that need to be optimized. this bottleneck significantly impedes our ability to establish new (bio)analytical methods in fields such as pharmacology, metabolomics and pesticide research. we report the development of a multi-platform, user-friendly software tool muscle (multi-platform unbiased optimization of spectrometry via closed-loop experimentation) for the robust and fully automated multi-objective optimization of targeted lc-ms/ms analysis. muscle shortened the analysis times and increased the analytical sensitivities of targeted metab-olite analysis, which was demonstrated on two different manufacturers lc-ms/ms instruments. availability and implementation: available atliquid chromatography mass spectrometry (lc-ms) is widely used in analytical laboratories for measuring a range of (bio)chemicals and as the principal technology for metabolomics and proteomics. developing new lc-ms methods and transferring existing methods between instruments and laboratories are time consuming and challenging, mostly because of the large number of lc and ms parameters that require optimization. varying all these parameters systematically to optimize the analysis of selected chemicals is generally regarded as impossible because of the large search space. previously, a fully automated closed-loop strategy was reported that successfully optimized gas chromatography (gc)-ms and lc-ms methods for non-targeted metabolite analyses, resulting in increased analytical sensitivity (o). although highlighting the value of closed-loop optimization in mass spectrometry, each of these implementations was for a specific manufacturers analytical platform. extending this to further instruments would have required extensive reprogramming, therefore significantly limiting the deployability of this approach. here, we present muscle (multi-platform unbiased optimization of spectrometry via closed-loop experimentation), a software tool for robust and fully automated optimization of targeted lc-ms/ms analyses. muscle is instrument-manufacturer independent and requires no knowledge of computer programming to operate. using a process called visual scripting, users create a set of configuration scripts, which instruct muscle how to operate an lc-ms/ms. these scripts can be imported and exported from muscle to facilitate sharing and re-use across laboratories.  
