mybionet: interactively visualize, edit and merge biological networks on the web mybionet is a web-based application for biological network analysis, which provides user-friendly web interfaces to visualize, edit and merge biological networks. in addition, mybionet integrated kegg metabolic network data from 1366 organisms and allows users to search and navigate interesting networks. availability and implementation: all kegg metabolic network data are organized and stored in the mysql database. mybionet is implemented in flex/actionscript and php languages and deployed on an apache web server. mybionet is accessible through all the flash-embedded browsers atowning to the emergence and rapid proliferation of new highthroughput sequencing technologies, more and more biological data are produced and are used to infer underlying networks by means of various methods in systems biology. network visualization can map different sorts of biological information onto the graph, giving researchers new biological insight. in this respect, network visualization is becoming increasingly important for analyzing large amounts of data. developed network visualizations can be roughly classified as either web-based or stand-alone . traditional web-based visualization tools, e.g. visant , are mostly implemented as java applets, whereas a few web-based visualization tools have been developed using the flash platform that is browser independent and more flexible for users to design their custom templates. cytoscape web is a web-based visualization tool based on the cytoscape algorithm, using the flash platform as a client component to visualize network data on websites. another visualization tool, string , utilizes the flash platform to visualize proteinprotein interactions data on a web server. both to whom correspondence should be addressed. these applications do not allow users to edit and update a network. yworks developed a commercial web application yfiles flex, which integrates complicated graph visualization and editing functionality with an internet application relying on flash player (http://www.yworks.com/en/products_yfilesflex_about.html). however, this is a canonical network tool, not particularly tailored for analyzing biological networks, and in addition it is commercial software. in this article, we have developed a web application, mybionet, on a flash platform. mybionet is designed to be a lightweight, easy to use, web-based tool for analyzing biological networks. it has important features for biological network operations, including visualization, editing and merging networks. kegg metabolic networks are integrated into mybionet, allowing users to search and navigate the kegg data conveniently.  
