genetics and population analysis nam: association studies in multiple populations motivation: mixed linear models provide important techniques for performing genome-wide association studies. however, current models have pitfalls associated with their strong assumptions. here, we propose a new implementation designed to overcome some of these pitfalls using an empirical bayes algorithm. results: here we introduce nam, an r package that allows user to take into account prior information regarding population stratification to relax the linkage phase assumption of current methods. it allows markers to be treated as a random effect to increase the resolution, and uses a sliding-window strategy to increase power and avoid double fitting markers into the model. availability and implementation: nam is an r package available in the cran repository. it can be installed in r by typing install.packages (nam).since the advent of high-throughput genotyping technology, extensive efforts have focused on creating efficient mixed linear models (mlm) to address relatedness and computational issues in genomewide association studies . however, major pitfalls that still must be improved , including issues with resolution and detection power. furthermore, mlm methods do not take into account the linkage phase associated with the multiple populations that comprise the association panel. association studies rely on persistent linkage disequilibrium (ld) between markers and quantitative trait loci (qtl). such associations decay over time through recombination events, triggering ld that allows differentiation between populations . therefore, association panels containing multiple populations are more likely to display diverging linkage phases, what makes qtl undetectable .here we introduce nam, a statistical package for association studies that aims to overcome some limitations of the mixed model framework and supports users to work with multiple populations when a stratification factor is known.  
