gene expression nanostringnorm: an extensible r package for the pre-processing of nanostring mrna and mirna data motivation: the nanostring ncounter platform is a new and promising technology for measuring nucleic acid abundances. it has several advantages over pcr-based techniques, including avoidance of amplification, direct sequence interrogation and digital detection for absolute quantification. these features minimize aspects of experimental error and hold promise for dealing with challenging experimental conditions such as archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples. however, systematic inter-sample technical artifacts caused by variability in sample preservation, bio-molecular extraction and platform fluctuations must be removed to ensure robust data. results: to facilitate this process and to address these issues for nanostring datasets, we have written a pre-processing package called nanostringnorm in the r statistical language. key features include an extensible environment for method comparison and new algorithm development, integrated gene and sample diagnostics, and facilitated downstream statistical analysis. the package is open-source, is available through the cran package repository, includes unit-tests to ensure numerical accuracy, and provides visual and numeric diagnostics. availability: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/nanostringnormthe nanostring ncounter platform is an emerging mediumthroughput technology for measuring mrna and mirna abundances and for assessing copy number variants . nanostring technology has several potential benefits relative to microarray-and pcr-based technologies. first, its parallelized nature and small number of manual manipulations generate data faster than many pcr-based methods. second, the hybridization method used directly interrogates target sequences, avoiding the need for bias-prone amplification steps, even for low-abundance to whom correspondence should be addressed. transcripts. third, measurement is achieved using digital detection of uniquely bar-coded probes, providing absolute quantification. this combination of advantages is thought to provide favorable conditions for testing formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (ffpe) samples. ffpe preparation is a standard protocol for the longterm storage of human clinical specimens. despite some positive reports , the degradation of rna in ffpe samples challenges existing mrna quantitation assays. the ability to reliably process ffpe samples would greatly facilitate retrospective studies. accordingly there has been a dramatic increase in the uptake of nanostring technology in our research facility. in some cases, it is used as a validation procedure; in others as a discovery tool using candidate genes. a common rationale is the desire to exploit large, clinically well-annotated ffpe collections. since nanostring is a new technology, many details of its analysis remain unexplored: optimal methods of data pre-processing are unknown, although this is well-known to impact biological conclusions . nanostring currently recommends pre-processing using microsoft excel spreadsheet functions. this has significant limitations. first, manual analysis is both hard to reproduce and prone to errors : gene-and sample-name auto-formatting are well-known issues . second, macros and worksheets cannot easily be adapted to changing experimental designs or pre-processing methods: spreadsheet software lacks the sophisticated statistical tools common in bioinformatics (e.g. survival or mixed models). third, it is highly desirable to integrate workflows in a single environment, and downstream analyses are typically performed in statistical environments. fourth, the quality of data pre-processing requires careful assessment with data visualizations that are difficult to automate using spreadsheets. for these reasons we have developed an open-source r package, called nanostringnorm, to implement a reference set of preprocessing techniques. we chose the r statistical environment to allow integration with bioconductor libraries , and to exploit its data-visualization and statistical tools. nanostringnorm outlines a pipeline of pre-processing steps with multiple options at each stage and provides a framework for method development and comparison. by standardizing code and automating error capture, nanostringnorm will enable more reproducible and robust analysis of nanostring datasets.  
