navigating protected genomics data with ucsc genome browser in a box genome browser in a box (gbib) is a small virtual machine version of the popular university of california santa cruz (ucsc) genome browser that can be run on a researchers own computer. once gbib is installed, a standard web browser is used to access the virtual server and add personal data files from the local hard disk. annotation data are loaded on demand through the internet from ucsc or can be downloaded to the local computer for faster access. availability and implementation: software downloads and installation instructions are freely available for non-commercial use at https://genome-store.ucsc.edu/. gbib requires the installation of open-source software virtualbox, available for all major operating systems, and the ucsc genome browser, which is open source and free for non-commercial use. commercial use of gbib and the genome browser requires a licensecustom data display is a popular feature of modern genome browsers, allowing users to view their own private genome annotations alongside publicly available data. the university of california santa cruz (ucsc) genome browser has supported user-generated custom annotation tracks since 2001, and recently added support for track and assembly data hubs that allow the user to host collections of large data files on a local server and configure many details of the visualization. however, these solutions require the data files to be uploaded onto a web server or stored on a genome browsers servers, a drawback that has become increasingly problematic as data file sizes expand and analysis involves sensitive genomic patient data. locally installed genome browser applications like integrative genomics viewer mitigate this problem but typically include significantly fewer genome annotations.the ucsc genome browser in a box (gbib) circumvents these issues, offering secure local use of private data files while still providing access to the full suite of ucsc genome browser tools and annotations. we use an x86 virtual machine, which simulates a complete computer (guest) on a normal pc (host). thanks to the hardware support offered by current cpus, this configuration has become almost as fast as a real machine. this kind of virtualization technology is the basis of cloud computing, typically used in bioinformatics to distribute analysis tasks on-demand on machines offered by external providers . virtualization tools have become very easy to install on personal computers, and therefore have been used to simplify the installation of complex bioinformatics analysis tools like clovr and the encode project analysis pipeline . for a website like the ucsc genome browser, the large amount of annotation data makes virtualization more difficultat the time of writing, ucscs database includes more than 5 tb of data for the v c the author 2014. published by oxford university press.  
