genome analysis nbc: the naïve bayes classification tool webserver for taxonomic classification of metagenomic reads motivation: datasets from high-throughput sequencing technologies have yielded a vast amount of data about organisms in environmental samples. yet, it is still a challenge to assess the exact organism content in these samples because the task of taxonomic classification is too computationally complex to annotate all reads in a dataset. an easy-to-use webserver is needed to process these reads. while many methods exist, only a few are publicly available on webservers, and out of those, most do not annotate all reads. results: we introduce a webserver that implements the nave bayes classifier (nbc) to classify all metagenomic reads to their best taxonomic match. results indicate that nbc can assign next-generation sequencing reads to their taxonomic classification and can find significant populations of genera that other classifiers may miss. availability: publicly available at: http://nbc.ece.after acquiring a sample and using next-generation technology to perform shotgun sequencing, the next step in metagenomic analysis it to assess the taxonomic content of the sample. this methodology, also known as phylogenetic analysis, gives a simple look at who is in this sample? the first tool ever used (which is still widely used) for taxonomic assessment is basic local alignment search tool (blast;). in recent years, several specialized webservers have been made available to the public to ease the process of taxonomically classifying reads, namely phylopythia , camera , webcarma , mg-rast and galaxy . unlike blast, phylopythia and webcarma return more specific taxonomic information and assign reads to higher level taxonomic levels using a consensus of blast top-hit taxonomies [aka last common ancestor algorithms (. in this article, we focus our comparison to remote stand-alone webservers and not to methods that only have locally installable software. ultimately, all the metagenomic analysis webservers aim to ease analysis of complex environmental samples for users that do not have resources to maintain their own databases and systems. to whom correspondence should be addressed. phylopythia was the first taxonomic classification webserver to be implemented. phylopythia is based on a support vector machine (svm) classification method and produces very good accuracy for long (1 kbp) reads . webcarma is a homology-based approach that matches environmental gene tags to protein families and reports good results for long and ultrashort 35-bp reads using (i) blastx to find candidate environmental gene tags (egts) and (ii) using pfam (protein family) hidden markov models (hmms) to match the egts against protein families during an egt candidate selection process. mg-rast (metagenome rapid annotation using subsystem technology) , camera (community cyberinfrastructure for advanced microbial ecology research and analysis) and the galaxy project are high-throughput metagenomic pipelines that aim to be an all-in-one one-stop analysis for metagenomic samples. for taxonomic classification of shotgun sequencing, mg-rast offers a homology-based approach, seed . camera and galaxy provide highthroughput implementations and custom databases for blastn. blastn yields best hit sequence matches and is known to have reasonable accuracy . previously, rosen et al. have explored a machine learning method, nave bayes classifier (nbc), as a possible way to classify fragments that can annotate more sequences than blast . we now implement the algorithm on a webserver for public use and benchmark it against other web sites.in, we show the percentage of reads (out of the whole dataset) that ranked in the top eight genera for each algorithm. we see that all methods are in unanimous agreement for clostridium and bacillus, while most methods (except galaxy) agree for prominence of methanoculleus. camera supports nbcs findings of pseudomonas and burkholderia, known to be found in sewage treatment plants . [the biogas reactor contained 2 chicken manure so it can have the traits of sludge waste (. in, pseudomonas and sorangium have been found in sludge wastes. streptosporangium and streptomyces are commonly found in vegetable gardens , which is quite reasonable since this is an agricultural bioreactor. therefore, nbc potentially has found significant populations of genera that other classifiers have missed. thermosinus is not in nbcs completed microbial training database and therefore, it did not find any matches. nbc took 21 h to run and classified all 100 of the reads compared with 12 h/23 for webcarma, 5 h/99 for camera, 23 h/140 for galaxy 1 , and a few weeks 2 /56.2 for mg-rast. nbc runs on a 4-core intel machine and speed would linearly increase with distributed computing in the future.the nave bayes classification tool is implemented on a web site for public use. we demonstrate that the tool can handle a complete pyrosequencing dataset, and it gives the full taxonomy for each read, so that users can easily analyze the taxonomic composition of their datasets. nbc classifies every read unlike other tools and is easy tothe biogas reactor community. camera and nbc tend to agree for over 70 of the genera shown while mg-rast agrees with camera and nbc near 50. webcarma bins fewers reads, and galaxy has high variability. for the first 5602 reads (1.5 mb web site limit), phylopythia only classifies eight reads to the phylum level and is not included in the graph due to its inability to make assignments at the genus level. use, runs an entire dataset in a reasonable amount of time and yields competitive results.  
