nbspred: a support vector machine-based high-throughput pipeline for plant resistance protein nbslrr prediction the nucleotide binding site leucine-rich repeats (nbslrrs) belong to one of the largest known families of disease resistance genes that encode resistance proteins (r-protein) against the pathogens of plants. various defence mechanisms have explained the regulation of plant immunity , but still, we have limited understanding about plant defence against different pathogens. identification of r-proteins and proteins having r-protein-like features across the genome, tran-scriptome and proteome would be highly useful to develop the global understanding of plant defence mechanisms, but it is laborious and time-consuming task. therefore, we have developed a support vector machine-based high-throughput pipeline called nbspred to differentiate nbslrr and nbslrr-like protein from non-nbslrr proteins from genome, transcriptome and protein sequences. the pipeline was tested and validated with input sequences from three dicot and two monocot plants including arabidopsis thaliana, boechera stricta, brachypodium distachyon solanum lycopersicum and zea mays. availability and implementation: the nbspred pipeline is available at http://soilecology.biol.lu.se/ nbs/.r-proteins are well known as plant defence proteins against pathogens that contain different domains like nucleotide binding domain (nb-arc), leucine-rich repeat (lrr), toll-interleukin-like receptor (tir), coiled-coiled (cc) and kinase (kin). five different kinds of r-protein domain association categories were found as majority including tir-nbs-lrr (tnl), cc-nbs-lrr (cnl), receptor-like kinase, receptor-like proteins and last category others. a number of hypotheses have been proposed for explaining the regulation of plant immunity against pathogens such as the guard hypothesis, the receptorligand hypothesis and the structure-based functional hypothesis . but several questions are still unanswered: how many r-genes need to be expressed to acquire resistance against microorganisms acting as pathogens in plants? how many other proteins are involved directly or indirectly in the resistance process ? how is the dynamic intracellular localization achieved, as the majority of nucleotide binding site leucine-rich repeat (nbslrr) proteins lack signal peptides (currently, sequence and motif similarity, domain matching and domain association-based methods are in use, each demanding a lot of data processing and time for genome-wide identification of r-proteins . disease resistance analysis and gene orthology (drago) pipeline of the prg database is also based on blast search and domain analysis , whereas the nlr-parser is based on mast motif search . prediction of r-proteins on the basis of sequence and domain similarity with a small set of reference r-genes is challenging due to the high level of diversity, as r-genes are under high selection pressure to adapt their immunity to the rapidly evolving effector genes in the pathogens . experimental screening of r-genes in plants would be difficult to perform at large scale. but presently, a large number of plant genomes and transcriptomes have been sequenced and assembled. despite data availability, identification of nbslrr sequences in sequenced plants is still limited at large scale with present available tools. nowadays, machinelearning techniques are used much more efficiently for answering biological questions. as a solution, the nbspred an automated pipeline have been proposed by using support vector machine (svm) technique. nbspred is facilitating the high-throughput identification of nbslrr sequences from genome, transcripts and protein sequences as input.  
