systems biology ncc-auc: an auc optimization method to identify multi-biomarker panel for cancer prognosis from genomic and clinical data downloaded from motivation: in prognosis and survival studies, an important goal is to identify multi-biomarker panels with predictive power using molecular characteristics or clinical observations. such analysis is often challenged by censored, small-sample-size, but high-dimensional genomic profiles or clinical data. therefore, sophisticated models and algorithms are in pressing need. results: in this study, we propose a novel area under curve (auc) optimization method for multi-biomarker panel identification named nearest centroid classifier for auc optimization (ncc-auc). our method is motived by the connection between auc score for classification accuracy evaluation and harrells concordance index in survival analysis. this connection allows us to convert the survival time regression problem to a binary classification problem. then an optimization model is formulated to directly maximize auc and meanwhile minimize the number of selected features to construct a predictor in the nearest centroid classifier framework. ncc-auc shows its great performance by validating both in genomic data of breast cancer and clinical data of stage ib non-small-cell lung cancer (nsclc). for the genomic data, ncc-auc outperforms support vector machine (svm) and support vector machine-based recursive feature elimination (svm-rfe) in classification accuracy. it tends to select a multi-biomarker panel with low average redundancy and enriched biological meanings. also ncc-auc is more significant in separation of low and high risk cohorts than widely used cox model (cox proportional-hazards regression model) and l 1-cox model (l 1 penalized in cox model). these performance gains of ncc-auc are quite robust across 5 subtypes of breast cancer. further in an independent clinical data, ncc-auc outperforms svm and svm-rfe in predictive accuracy and is consistently better than cox model and l 1-cox model in grouping patients into high and low risk categories. conclusion: in summary, ncc-auc provides a rigorous optimization framework to systematically reveal multi-biomarker panel from genomic and clinical data. it can serve as a useful tool to identify prognostic biomarkers for survival analysis.survival analysis studies the time to occurrence of a certain event. identifying significant biomarkers for prediction is longstanding as an important topic to provide better understanding. here one key challenge is that the outcome variable of interest for survival analysis is sometimes censored, which means the survive time is only partially known. in addition, the candidate features are always in high-dimension with the rapid development of high-throughput measurement technologies. as a result, discovering feature combinations is suffering from curse of dimensionality. how to overcome the above difficulties and identify the most accurate prognostic multi-biomarker panel from survival data to assist clinicians is the problem we want to address. the most widely used model for survival analysis is cox proportional-hazards regression model (cox model). it can handle the censored survival data in a rigorous way and provides an estimation of the hazard ratio and its confidence interval. however, cox model directly utilizes the noisy and censored data to predict the survival ratio thus often leads to poor prognosis. also cox model uses all features with high dimensionality in general. it is trained on a particular dataset and usually generalized poorly to other independent datasets. to avoid overfitting, l 1 penalized cox model (l 1-cox model) was proposed to perform variable selection and shrinkage, which makes it very useful for de-noising and identifying the most meaningful features . nonetheless, both cox model and l 1-cox model heavily depend on the quality of input survival time. in reality, harrells concordance index (ci) is a widely used performance measure for assessing prediction models in survival analysis. the main idea is that it doesnt consider the value of survival time but the rank of patients by their survival times . in dream breast cancer prognosis challenge, challenge models will be scored by calculating the ci between the predicted survival and the true survival information in the validation dataset. the final assessment of models and the determination of the best performer will be based on the ci of predictions on the test dataset (http://www.the-dream-project.org/). recently, ci is used to assess the clinical utility of cancer genomic and proteomic data across tumor types in the cancer genome atlas (tcga) project . in this sense, it is natural to directly optimize ci to select biomarkers and construct predictive models. however maximizing ci is a non-convex optimization problem with non-differentiable objective function and hard to solve . we notice that ci and auc (area under roc curve) are identical and equate the mann-whitney statistics in the absence of censored data . we could use auc to assess the classification accuracy and further to approximate ci. with this connection, our motivation is to convert survival time regression to a binary classification problem and then maximizing auc. for example, we choose the 5-year threshold in practice without loss of generality, i.e. we predict whether the patient can live longer than 5 years. in clinical study, the 5-year survival rate is commonly used as a survival rate for estimating the prognosis of a particular disease. it serves as a general accepted standard by the american cancer society to assess the cancer malignancy. in addition, 5-year threshold leads to the balanced positive and negative datasets (supplemental). in this way we focus to solve a classification problem about maximizing auc. classical classification methods, such as support vector machine , logistic regression , k-nearest neighbor , have been widely used in survival analysis and achieved good performance. moreover,proposed the time-dependent auc, which was adopted as evaluation for the model performance . nevertheless, none of these methods optimize auc directly to construct classifiers. auc is an important performance measure that has been widely used . some algorithms have been developed to optimize auc based on surrogate loss . those technologies can be borrowed in optimizing auc to deal with the censored survival data. meanwhile, the rapidly developed high-throughput measuring techniques usually generate high dimensional genomic or clinical data. feature selection is necessary along with model estimation to reduce data dimension and model complexity. also it helps to provide intuitive understanding. here, we denote selected features having potential diagnostic usage as biomarkers. importantly, features combine in linear or nonlinear ways to improve diagnostic accuracy. this useful feature combination is named as multi-biomarker panel. its a challenging task to select a biomarker subset to maximize accuracy in computation. here wrapper methods give a good example for its complexity. the idea of these state-of-art feature selection algorithms is to use each subset to train a model and then test on a hold-out dataset. since wrapper methods need to go through all the possible subsets, they are computationally intensive. for example if there are 50 features, it should train 2 50 models to select the best subset by comparing models error rates on the hold-out validation dataset. to reduce the computational complexity, some heuristic methods have been proposed. for example, support vector machine-based recursive feature elimination (svm-rfe) has become one of the leading methods and is being widely used . it adopts an intuitive strategy to remove a feature with the smallest coefficient in svm model one step. we note that this stepwise feature selection strategy may miss some critical feature combinations. in this article, we convert the survival time regression to a classification problem aiming to select a small group of biomarkers and maximize auc score. specially, we propose a single optimization model based on nearest centroid classifier with feature selection, which maximizes auc and minimizes the number of selected features simultaneously. to make the computation tractable, maximizing auc is slacked to minimize a loss function. meanwhile, we use l 1 norm to minimize the number of selected features instead of l 0 norm thus make it could be efficiently solved by a linear programming. finally our method predicts whether a patient survives longer than 5 years in a fast and efficient way. to validate the performance, we apply the new method to gene expression data of breast cancer and clinical data of stage ib non-small-cell lung cancer (nsclc). the results show that our method can identify panels of biomarkers with good survival prediction performance.  
