sequence analysis ncpro-seq: a tool for annotation and profiling of ncrnas in srna-seq data non-coding rna (ncrna) profiling in small rna (srna)-seq (ncpro-seq) is a stand-alone, comprehensive and flexible ncrna analysis pipeline. it can interrogate and perform detailed profiling analysis on srnas derived from annotated non-coding regions in mirbase, rfam and repeatmasker, as well as specific regions defined by users. the ncpro-seq pipeline performs both gene-based and family-based analyses of srnas. it also has a module to identify regions significantly enriched with short reads, which cannot be classified under known ncrna families, thus enabling the discovery of previously unknown ncrna-or small interfering rna (sirna)-producing regions. the ncpro-seq pipeline supports input read sequences in fastq, fasta and color space format, as well as alignment results in bam format, meaning that srna raw data from the three current major platforms (roche-454, illumina-solexa and life technologies-solid) can be analyzed with this pipeline. the ncpro-seq pipeline can be used to analyze read and alignment data, based on any sequenced genome, including mammals and plants. availability: source code, annotation files, manual and online version are available at http://research on small non-coding rnas (ncrnas) has advanced tremendously over recent years as a consequence of the widespread adoption of small rna (srna)-seq, which has helped to characterize members of known srna families, such as micrornas (mirnas), small interfering rnas (sirnas) and piwi-interacting rna (pirna) (;). in addition, analysis of srna-seq data has led to the identification of several novel small ncrna families, including heterochromatic srna , small nucleolar rna (snorna)-derived rnas (sdrnas) , transfer rna (trna)-derived rna fragments (trfs) , transcription initiation rnas (tirnas), splice-site rnas (splirnas) and enhancer rnas (ernas) . given that most of the genome is transcribed , further small ncrna families are still probably hidden in unannoated regions, awaiting detailed exploration. despite this, most of the existing srna-seq analysis tools only focus on mirnas , whereas some other tools are applicable to the prediction of special or general sirna loci . as far as we are aware, only two approachesseqcluster and dario are currently available for annotating and classifying whole srna-seq data in an unbiased way. seqcluster not only carefully groups non-mirna reads into units but also provides classification and annotation of unit-srnas. dario web server contains both srna annotation and prediction engines, but cannot be used to process repeat-associated srnas, owing to the size limitation of data submission. furthermore, these tools perform mostly gene-based analyses, providing information about read mapping in each ncrna gene/region. however, to systematically investigate small ncrna species in a given annotation family (i.e. mirna, other srnas families or repeats families), profiling analyses, which refers to detailed descriptions of diverse features of read distribution in annotation families, are necessary. the ncrna profiling in srna-seq (ncpro-seq) pipeline circumvents these limitations by providing detailed information on all types of small ncrnas and identifying unannotated regions that are significantly enriched in matching srnas. to whom correspondence should be addressed.the ncpro-seq pipeline provides a comprehensive approach for the annotation and prediction of small ncrnas in srna-seq data. the pipeline can analyse different annotation families rather than just focusing on mirnas. various sequence and alignment inputs from different metazoan and plant genomes are supported. the great advantage of the pipeline over others is the capacity to perform profiling analyses of annotation families, which is critically important to investigate known small ncrna families and to define novel small ncrna families. the significant regions predicted in the pipeline can be further interpreted to identify novel mirna loci and sirna clusters.  
