genome analysis ncs: incorporating positioning data to quantify nucleosome stability in yeast motivation: with the spreading technique of mass sequencing, nucleosome positions and scores for their intensity have become available through several previous studies in yeast, but relatively few studies have specifically aimed to determine the score of nucleosome stability. based on mass sequencing data, we proposed a nucleo-some center score (ncs) for quantifying nucleosome stability by measuring shifts of the nucleosome center, and then mapping ncs scores to nucleosome positions in brogaard et al.s study. results: we demonstrated the efficiency of ncs by known preference of a/t-based tracts for nucleosome formation, and showed that central nucleosomal dna is more sensitive to a/t-based tracts than outer regions, which corresponds to the central histone tetramer-dominated region. we also found significant flanking preference around nucleosomal dna for a/t-based dinucleotides, suggesting that neighboring sequences could affect nucleosome stability. finally, the difference between results of ncs and brogaard et al.s scores was addressed and discussed. contacts:the nucleosome is a fundamental repeating unit of dna packaging in eukaryotic chromatin. in yeast, it is composed of a core containing $147-bp segments of dna wrapped around a histone octamer, which consists of two h2ah2b dimers and one (h3h4) 2 tetramer. most of the dna is wrapped in nucleosomes to resemble a string with beads, and neighboring nucleosomes are generally separated by linker dna. approximately 7590 of genomic dna is packaged in nucleosomes. a previous study indicated that in saccharomyces cerevisiae, 81 of the genome sequences appear to be wrapped in nucleosomes . the positioning of nucleosomes influences the accessibility of proteins to dna or blocks transcription factorbinding sites. consequently, nucleosomes are strongly associated with chromatin and gene expression, and they can regulate transcription initiation, dna replication and dna repair . nucleosome positions, combined with histone variants and histone modifications, are the key to genome regulation and gene expression. in s.cerevisiae, an increasing number of studies have focused on nucleosome positioning by using several technologies over the past several years. early studies for identifying nucleosome positions primarily relied on the tiled microarray hybridization approach. the first set of high-throughput positioning data was generated in 2005 , followed by the complete high-resolution map of nucleosome occupancy on a whole genome . with the maturity of high-throughput dna sequencing technology, many high-resolution maps of genome-wide nucleosome positions have been made in recent years . among those data, some nucleosomes have very consistent positions within the genome, but others are unstable and varied. divergence between the data can be caused by both artificial and natural factors. the artificial factors, including the biological procedure of nucleosome digestion , quality of high-throughput technology and computational method of data processing, make the comparisons between different datasets more complicated. as for natural factors, several determinants, such as distinct dna sequences, dna methylation, histone variants, post-translational modifications, transcription factors and chromatin remodelers, can affect nucleosome positions . this phenomenon of divergence in nucleosome positions led to studies on the fuzziness or stability of nucleosome positions, such as position cluster . during processing of nucleosome positioning data, the nucleosome position and the intensity for that position can be calculated using several computational methods; the standard deviation of intensity values was usually directly used as fuzziness scores to measure the nucleosome dynamics or stability in some relevant studies . however, based on the design of biological procedures, such as different concentrations of micrococcal nuclease digestion, this standard deviation might not truly represent the dynamics or stability of nucleosome position, and could possibly result from digestion preference or bias, or could be affected by the binding strength between the histone and dna, instead of nucleosome dynamics or stability. in this study, we quantified nucleosome stability by considering the shift of nucleosome centers, treating nucleosome stability as the probability of a nucleosome center in a specific position, and determined the probability of shifting by observing differences between diverging data. because high-throughput sequencing data have been easily available in recent years, we developed to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com a computational approach using the gaussian function to define the nucleosome center score (ncs) based on several published sequencing data of s.cerevisiae under different conditions. then, we used both ncs and precise nucleosome positions at base-pair resolution to demonstrate the efficiency of ncs and to represent a clear relationship between ncs and sequence characteristics. with the help of high-resolution brogaard et al.s nucleosome data and a reliable ncs, clear patterns of dinucleotide preference around nucleosomal dna and its neighboring dna were illustrated in our study. finally, we also indicated differences between ncs and scores from brogaard et al.s study, and discussed their significance.the calculation of ncs is based on the incorporation of mass raw sequencing data, and it provides reliability in measuring. the frequency change rate (smoothing window size 5 bp) surrounding the central nucleosome, illustrating the preference of each dinucleotide for nucleosomes with a higher score in (a) ncp/noise (b), ncp and (c) noise. the poly(da:dt) ratio of nucleosomal dna for different levels of nucleosome score, under four score schemes and different tolerating a/t switches on inner and outer nucleosomal dna regions. the distribution of average nucleosome occupancies around the tss and tts for ncs and ncp/noise shows that the patterns under the two different score schemes are similar, but the ncs supports the model of the 1 barrier nucleosome after the tss to a greater degree nucleosome stability. this is because using a unifying processing method for all raw sequencing data can diminish the variance of each positioning data, and combining different pns can supplement the insufficiency of single data. in this study, we applied ncs on the precise nucleosome positioning data from brogaard et al.s work. we then represented the efficiency of ncs based on known sequence characteristics of nucleosomal dna, and showed the differences and possible limits of original brogaard et al.s scores at the same time. based on ncs, a clear dinucleotide preference for stable nucleosomes was illustrated, and significant flanking tendencies around nucleosomal dna were also revealed for the dinucleotides aa/tt, at and ta. the results of a/t-based dinucleotide and poly(da:dt) show that the degrees of sequence preference for the central and outer regions of nucleosomal dna are different, which is basically due to the fact that core histone (h3-h4) 2 tetramers dominate the free energy of histonedna interactions. in the comparison of ncs and brogaard et al.s score, the pattern of ncs showed more reasonable behaviors on the influence of central nucleosomal dna regions, and disfavored the a/t tract across nucleosomal dna, but we cannot judge or find definite reasons to explain the behaviors of the score from brogaard et al.s study. nevertheless, some possible assumptions based on observations of sequence characteristics were provided in our study. because brogaard et al.s data support precise nucleosome positions and ncs reliably reflects the nucleosome stability, combing two data sources can enhance the future studies on epigenetic regulation or nucleosome stability, which is affected by several factors besides sequence preference. moreover, we also provide the data of original ncs for each base pair in the supplementary data, so it will be easy to apply ncs to genome-wide-related data, such as data of histone variant, site of histone modification or even transcriptional factor binding site, to investigate the relationship with nucleosome stability.  
