genome analysis nebula—a web-server for advanced chip-seq data analysis motivation: chip-seq consists of chromatin immunoprecipitation and deep sequencing of the extracted dna fragments. it is the technique of choice for accurate characterization of the binding sites of transcription factors and other dna-associated proteins. we present a web service, nebula, which allows inexperienced users to perform a complete bioinformatics analysis of chip-seq data. results: nebula was designed for both bioinformaticians and biologists. it is based on the galaxy open source framework. galaxy already includes a large number of functionalities for mapping reads and peak calling. we added the following to galaxy: (i) peak calling with findpeaks and a module for immunoprecipitation quality control, (ii) de novo motif discovery with chipmunk, (iii) calculation of the density and the cumulative distribution of peak locations relative to gene transcription start sites, (iv) annotation of peaks with genomic features and (v) annotation of genes with peak information. nebula generates the graphs and the enrichment statistics at each step of the process. during steps 35, nebula optionally repeats the analysis on a control dataset and compares these results with those from the main dataset. nebula can also incorporate gene expression (or gene modulation) data during these steps. in summary, nebula is an innovative web service that provides an advanced chip-seq analysis pipeline providing ready-to-publish results. availability: nebula is available atchromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (chip-seq) is a technique that allows identification of binding sites of dna-associated proteins. most of the existing tools for chip-seq data analysis are ifficult to use by non-bioinformaticians. these tools map sequenced reads to the reference genome or predict binding site locations (chip-seq peaks) (, for a review;). several tools exist for peak filtering , motif discovery and genome feature association . such tools are often command-line applications, r packages or their use on the web is restricted to a limited number of sequences/data quantity. chip-seq data analysis solutions offering a graphical interface such as the main galaxy server , cistrome , cisgenome and the web version of ceas can be very useful (in particular for biologists) when performing the first steps of chip-seq data analysis (galaxy main) or further analysis of predicted binding sites (cistrome, cisgenome and ceas). however, none of these solutions provides the full set of tools needed for a complete chip-seq data analysis (supplementary). our goal was to develop a framework in which biologists could analyze their chip-seq data with minimal help of bioinformaticians, from read mapping to the analysis of binding site properties. however, bioinformaticians can also benefit from using such a framework.we developed a pipeline for advanced chip-seq data analysis that (i) is web-based, (ii) modular, (iii) includes several tools for data quality control and (iv) produces graphical output and necessary statistics.  
