nemo: a tool for analyzing gene and chromosome territory distributions from 3d-fish experiments three-dimensional fluorescence in situ hybridization (3d-fish) is used to study the organization and the positioning of chromosomes or specific sequences such as genes or rna in cell nuclei. many different programs (commercial or free) allow image analysis for 3d-fish experiments. one of the more efficient open-source programs for automatically processing 3d-fish microscopy images is smart 3d-fish, an imagej plug-in designed to automatically analyze distances between genes. one of the drawbacks of smart 3d-fish is that it has a rather basic user interface and produces its results in various text and image files thus making the data post-processing step time consuming. we developed a new smart 3d-fish graphical user interface, nemo, which provides all information in the same place so that results can be checked and validated efficiently. nemo gives users the ability to drive their experiments analysis in either automatic, semi-automatic or manual detection mode. we also tuned smart 3d-fish to better analyze chromosome territories. availability: nemo is a stand-alone java application available for windows and linux platforms. the program is distributed under the creative commons licence and can be freely downloaded from https://www-lgc.now that genome sequencing has been mastered and cell imaging techniques have vastly improved our understanding of cell structure and function, there is an increasing demand in life science studies for cell imaging techniques and for ways to provide accurate localization of genes and their products within cells and tissues. threedimensional fluorescence in situ hybridization, 3d-fish , is used to study the organization and positioning of chromosomes, sub-chromosomal regions and/or specific sequences such as genes or rna in cellular preparations with the 3d structure of the chromatin preserved by hybridization of probes with complementary sequences. many different programs allow image analysis for 3d-fish experiments (commercial or free) and onereliable and fast measurements of the relative positioning of genes toward their chromosomal territories are essential to analyze the role of nuclear architecture on the regulation of gene expression in three dimensions. nemo is a user-friendly interface to interactively analyze and visualize fish 3d images. nemo automatically detects objects in the images (spots, cts or nuclei) nevertheless the user has the possibility to interact with the program to delete or add objects. the results are then stored in a relational database (mysql) for further analyses.  
