netcmpt: a network-based tool for calculating the metabolic competition between bacterial species netcmpt is a tool for calculating the competitive potential between pairs of bacterial species. the score describes the effective metabolic overlap (emo) between two species, derived from analyzing the topology of the corresponding metabolic models. netcmpt is based on the emo algorithm, developed and validated in previous studies. it takes as input lists of species-specific enzymatic reactions (ec numbers) and generates a matrix of the potential competition scores between all pairwise combinations. availability and implementation: netcmpt is provided as both a web tool and a software package, designed for the use of non-computational biologists. the netcmpt web tool, software, examples, and documentation are freely available online atthe availability of many fully sequenced genomes together with several generic metabolic schemes allows the systematic reconstruction of the metabolic networks of hundreds of species across the tree of life . analyses of the structure and topology of such genome-scale metabolic networks enabled, despite ignoring thermodynamic properties, various systematic, cross-species, studies of lifestyle and evolution in the microbial world . beyond studying various aspects of genome evolution, such metabolic-driven approaches allow further processing genomic information into ecological information by using the topological structure of the network for predicting the biochemical composition of speciesenvironment. . such reverse ecology approaches predict the set of nutrients a species extract from its environment, providing a proxy for its habitat. the recently published netseed web tool allows to freely calculate the environments of the selected input species . on top of predicting the species-specific biochemical habitat, the systematic inference of biochemical habitats together with the availability of a large collection of species-specific metabolic networks, enabled the conductance of several studies indicating that computational, systems-biology, approaches can be applied to study microbial ecology . in particular, network-driven approaches allow studying the complex set of interactions microbes form with other species thriving in similar habitats . notably, within a community of bacterial species sharing limited resources, competitive and cooperative interactions are to a large extent derived by metabolism. accordingly, a growing number of studies testify for the ability of metabolic-driven computational approaches to describe the metabolic interaction between two species . the effective metabolic overlap (emo) score was introduced by), providing a systematic approach for the quantification of the level of competition between bacterial species through the processing of genomic-driven, metabolic information. several lines of evidence point at the ecological relevance of the emo score as a tool for predicting the metabolic competitive potential between bacterial species, b) and supplementary. based on the emo algorithm, here we provide netcmpta publically available, easy to use, tool, for computing the competitive potential between selected input species. notably, the emo score is solely aimed at the metabolic dimension while putting aside other aspects and mechanisms of inter-species competition. the rapid increase in the number of metagenomic projects and whole-community analysis techniques highlights the need for accessible tools allowing delineating the web of interactions in a given environment . netcmpt, the first free tool for calculating inter-species competition, is available online as a web tool and software package at http://app.agri.gov.il/shiri/netcomp. php. the relevance of the netcmpt tool for analyzing data derived from metagenomic data was verified through simulations using incomplete datasets (supplementary note 2).in this example, the pair-specific environment of species a and b is composed of metabolite . emo score denotes 1 minus the fraction of produced essential metabolites. species b cannot produce any of its target metabolites leading to an emo score 1. species a can produce half of its target metabolites leading to an emo score 0.5. the metabolic environment species c is composed solely of non-overlapping metabolites, hence species c is not metabolically affected by the presence of the other species  
