netexplore: a web server for modeling small network motifs motivation: quantitative and qualitative assessment of biological data often produces small essential recurrent networks, containing 35 components called network motifs. in this context, model solutions for small network motifs represent very high interest. results: software package netexplore has been created in order to generate, classify and analyze solutions for network motifs including up to six network components. netexplore allows plotting and visualization of the solutions phase spaces and bifurcation diagrams. availability and implementation: the current version of netexplore has been implemented in perl-cgi and is accessible at the following locations: http://line.bioinfolab.net/nex/netexplore.htm andthe analysis of biological systems using quantitative and experimental methods often produces small gene regulatory networks or network motifs which perform critical functions. network motifs including 25 nodes became the major subjects of modeling and analysis . many types of network motifs have been identified and described . however, even motifs with identical topologies (order of regulatory links) may produce surprisingly rich spectrums of dynamic solutions. constraining network parameters given biological data is routinely used to model networks and network motifs; this approach has advantages and limitations. major limitations include: (i) the availability of adequate biological data to fit the network parameters, (ii) overfitting problems, caused by imbalance between the amount of experimental data and the number of unknown parameters . constraining parameters may produce many alternative solutions. recent progress in genomics and the accumulation of large amounts of high-throughput data allows reconstruction of gene regulatory networks (grns) and finding essential network motifs in silico . collection of data and validation of these predicted network motifs is difficult, but prediction of their likely behavior is desirable. solutions may be obtained by assigning random sets of parameters, centered on biologically relevant parameter values. collection and classification of many emitted random solutions predicts probable behavior of network motifs.  
