net-ge: a web-server for network-based human gene enrichment motivation: gene enrichment is a requisite for the interpretation of biological complexity related to specific molecular pathways and biological processes. furthermore, when interpreting ngs data and human variations, including those related to pathologies, gene enrichment allows the inclusion of other genes that in the human interactome space may also play important key roles in the emergency of the phenotype. here, we describe net-ge, a web server for associating biological processes and pathways to sets of human proteins involved in the same phenotype results: net-ge is based on proteinprotein interaction networks, following the notion that for a set of proteins, the context of their specific interactions can better define their function and the processes they can be related to in the biological complexity of the cell. our method is suited to extract statistically validated enriched terms from gene ontology, kegg and reactome annotation databases. furthermore, net-ge is effective even when the number of input proteins is small. availability and implementation: net-ge web server is publicly available and accessible at http:// net-ge.biocomp.unibo.it/enrich.big data production in biomedicine is rapidly changing the way in which molecular knowledge is translated into health care . the spread and establishment of high throughput sequencing (hts) technologies allows retrieving lists of interesting variations characterizing the investigated phenotype. in the context of functional genomics, each phenotype needs annotations for reconciling variations with known and putatively common biological processes and pathways, such as gene ontology (, kegg2015), based on the extraction of subnetworks connecting proteins that share the same functional terms from a proteinprotein interaction (ppi) network . differently from other methods also based on networks, our approach extracts modules that are function-specific by constructions and include all the seeds (proteins annotated with the same term) that in the ppi network are related to a specific functional annotation. one peculiarity of net-ge is the possibility to enrich terms that are not present in the annotation of the starting protein set (and thus not detectable through a standard enrichment). when tested on the omim-derived benchmark sets, net-ge is able to enrich sets of genes related to the same disease with biologically meaningful terms neglected by other methods . the server, in addition, allows annotation based on kegg and reactome pathways and a comparison between standard and network based enrichment.tion term we collect the seeds and evaluate the quality of the connecting nodes among seeds (for more details, see supplementary). after constraining seed distance, we determine the subset associated to a specific annotation term by retaining the minimal connecting subnetwork . considering string, net-ge presently includes 20 391 annotation subsets (see http:// net-ge.biocomp.unibo.it/enrich/statistics), 14 845 of which contain from two to 10 700 genes. the number of genes per subset is inversely proportional to the information content and the most informative terms correspond to small networks . the server implements both a standard and a network-based gene enrichment. given a gene/protein list, each gene/protein is located in the different subsets of the annotation database. with a fishers exact test, the method estimates the overrepresentation significance of input genes/proteins in each precomputed subset for the corresponding annotation term. standard enrichment includes only annotations of seed nodes; network-based enrichment includes seeds and their connecting nodes. for multiple testing correction, we use both the bonferroni and the benjamini-hochberg (false discovery rate, fdr) procedures and evaluate a corrected p-value . updating of the system, including human interactome and annotation databases is planned once a year, following the major releases.  
