data and text mining netpathminer: r/bioconductor package for network path mining through gene expression netpathminer is a general framework for mining, from genome-scale networks, paths that are related to specific experimental conditions. netpathminer interfaces with various input formats including kgml, sbml and biopax files and allows for manipulation of networks in three different forms: metabolic, reaction and gene representations. netpathminer ranks the obtained paths and applies markov model-based clustering and classification methods to the ranked paths for easy interpretation. netpathminer also provides static and interactive visualizations of networks and paths to aid manual investigation. availability: the package is available through bioconductor and from github atmining subnetworks from genome-scale biological networks is an important step in biological data analysis because as their size and complexity increase, manual analysis becomes infeasible. various methods for subnetwork mining from experimental data are available, where output subnetworks are expressed as sets of nodes , frequent subgraphs or linear paths . we focus on linear paths, which are particularly useful by carrying an intuitive meaning, as in metabolic reaction paths and signaling cascades. currently, software for mining paths from networks is hampered by two main challenges: (i) the lack of a universal parsing tool for different pathway types and database file formats. in fact, pathways can be diverse, such as metabolic or signaling, representing chemical conversions or protein interactions, respectively. also, pathway information in databases can be accessed through different file formats, with each format representing pathway structure and annotation differently. (ii) the lack of effective visualizations for (a) different network types and (b) up to thousands of paths. currently available tools are either specific to particular pathway types or file formats. an earlier approach, pathranker , is limited to mining paths from metabolic networks constructed from kgml files, providing static visualization on one network representation only. tools like pathview and rbiopaxparser also construct networks from only one file format. we present netpathminer, an r package, to overcome the two main challenges.describes the process flow implemented in our package (see next section and supplementary materials for details). netpathminer implements a flexible module-based process flow for network path mining and visualization, which can be fully integrated with user-customized functions. netpathminer enables fast processing for all kgml, sbml and biopax formats into genome-scale metabolic or signaling networks (see supplementary figures s1 and s2 in detail). netpathminer also provides path highlighting over three different representations and interactive visualizations, making the analysis of even thousands of output paths possible.we present netpathminer, an easy-to-use r package for network path mining. netpathminer constructs genome-scale networks from kgml, sbml and biopax files, overcoming the limitations of current tools. netpathminer summarizes output paths using machine learning methods and provides different visualizations, easing manual investigations. all modules in netpathminer can be used independently, particularly the pathway file processing module, and replaced with user-customized modules. future developments include supporting other network representations, such as rule-based modeling formats, as inputs and outputs for broader integration.(rows) and their reactions (columns). (e) probability that a top path belongs to a cluster  
