netseed: a network-based reverse-ecology tool for calculating the metabolic interface of an organism with its environment netseed is a web tool and perl module for analyzing the topology of metabolic networks and calculating the set of exogenously acquired compounds. netseed is based on the seed detection algorithm, developed and validated in previous studies. availability: the netseed web-based tool, open-source perl module, examples and documentation are freely available online at: http://depts.washington.edu/elbogs/netseed.genome-scale, in silico metabolic models provide powerful tools for studying the capacity, function and dynamics of microbial metabolism. specifically, network-based models have been shown to capture essential features of microbial metabolism revealed through careful analysis of their structure and topology . such topology-based analysis has been used to characterize various functional and evolutionary properties including scaling , modularity , essentiality , transcriptional regulation of metabolism and adaptation . however, as organisms evolve and adapt to their environments, the structure of their metabolic networks clearly contains information not only about their metabolic capacity but also about their habitat. the topology of the metabolic network of an organism can therefore be used to characterize its environment and to obtain insights into its ecology. this reverse ecology approach was introduced by, who proposed an algorithm for analyzing the topology of metabolic networks of microbial species and predicting the set of nutrients they acquire from the environment (termed seed set). this framework allows for the quantification of an organisms metabolic dependence on its environment and enables the transformation of high-throughput genomic data into large-scale ecological data. formally, the seed set of a directed network, such as a metabolic network, is defined as the minimal subset of nodes necessary to access every other node in the network. accordingly, for a metabolic network, the seed set corresponds to the minimal subset of the compounds in the network that cannot be synthesized from other compounds in the network and whose existence permits thea directed graph, with nodes as metabolites and edges as reactions linking substrates to products. the seed set of the network is calculated in two steps. first, the network is decomposed into its strongly connected components (sccs) using kosarajus algorithm . sccs of a directed network are defined as maximal subsets of the network where there exists a path from each node to every other node in the subset. due to this interconnectivity, sccs have the property that either all or none of their nodes are potential seeds. the second step then determines which sccs are sources, having no incoming edges. the nodes in these source sccs are the potential candidates of the seed set of the network. seed candidates that belong to the same scc (seed group) have the property that the presence of one in the seed set will generate all the other in the group and therefore cannot be distinguished in terms of their seed status. to quantify this relationship, each seed in the network is given a confidence level corresponding to the inverse of the size of their seed group. seefor more details. the netseed web tool is a perl cgi built on top of the netseed perl module, which performs the seed set calculation. the user first selects a network (several formats are supported) and determines whether to restrict the calculation by component size (e.g. only the giant component or those of a minimum size) and whether to view the seeds in cytoscape web . if cytoscape web is enabled, the user may specify the minimum confidence level for labeling seeds; this will not affect the analysis. when user then selects analyze network, the network file is uploaded and the seed set calculated. the results page displays statistics on the analysis and links to files containing a list of seeds with their confidence levels, seed groups, nodes ignored by the calculation (as specified by the user) and non-seed nodes. if requested, the network is rendered in cytoscape web with the highlighted seed set. if the node names correspond to kegg ids, links to the kegg database are generated. detailed examples and an in-depth manual for both the netseed web tool and perl module are available on the netseed website.  
