gene expression network-based analysis identifies epigenetic biomarkers of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma progression motivation: a rapid progression of esophageal squamous cell carcin-oma (escc) causes a high mortality rate because of the propensity for metastasis driven by genetic and epigenetic alterations. the identification of prognostic biomarkers would help prevent or control meta-static progression. expression analyses have been used to find such markers, but do not always validate in separate cohorts. epigenetic marks, such as dna methylation, are a potential source of more reliable and stable biomarkers. importantly, the integration of both expression and epigenetic alterations is more likely to identify relevant biomarkers. results: we present a new analysis framework, using escc progression associated gene regulatory network (grn escc), to identify differentially methylated cpg sites prognostic of escc progression. from the cpg loci differentially methylated in 50 tumornormal pairs, we selected 44 cpg loci most highly associated with survival and located in the promoters of genes more likely to belong to grn escc. using an independent escc cohort, we confirmed that 8/10 of cpg loci in the promoter of grn escc genes significantly correlated with patient survival. in contrast, 0/10 cpg loci in the promoter genes outside the grn escc were correlated with patient survival. we further characterized the grn escc network topology and observed that the genes with methylated cpg loci associated with survival deviated from the center of mass and were less likely to be hubs in the grn escc. we postulate that our analysis framework improves the identification of bona fide prognostic biomarkers from dna methylation studies, especially with partial genome coverage. contact:recently, systematic biological approaches to study cancer have provided unprecedented views of molecular changes in many cancers. for example, the mutagenesis within a network of general human cancer signaling genes and the protein expression within a proteinprotein interaction network have led to the discovery of subnetworks involving cancer-related genes. the combination of proteinprotein networks with gene expression microarray datasets has also been used to distinguish metastatic from non-metastatic tumor samples or to identify biomarkers correlated with patient survival . more recently,used a genetic network as a reference to estimate the penalty score of a conditional logistic regression model and applied it on a matched tumornormal analysis of dna methylation array data to identify a list of candidate cpg sites associated with hepatocellular cancer development.attempted to integrate more biological resources like the epigenomic, transcriptomic and protein interactome data to identify glioblastoma prognostic biomarkers using gene expression and dna methylation-based networks. although dna methylation can be used as a powerful and promising prognostic indicator alone , none of the aforementioned network-based studies, integrating dna methylation, gene expression or protein expression information performed experimental validation of the identified biomarkers. this can be because of the large number of candidate biomarkers within networks, making their validation and use in the clinic more difficult. affecting 4450 000 patients annually, esophageal carcinoma with squamous cell carcinoma (escc) as the predominant histological subtype worldwide is the sixth leading cause of cancerrelated mortality, with 4400 000 deaths per year . late presentation with already existing lymph node metastasis (lnm) followed by rapid progression explains the poor outcome of the disease . metastasis requires certain steps like primary tumor initialization and proliferation, blood vessel/ lymphatic channel intravasation, cell arrest and extravasation to whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. and proliferation at secondary target sites/organs . metastasis can arise from tumor cells that have undergone phenotypic changes called epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (emt), gaining plasticity and circulating and seeding ability. there is no observable change in dna methylation during the transforming growth factor beta-mediated emt in aml12 mouse hepatocyte . but such dna methylation is able to be involved in gene regulation during the emt of prostate cell line, ep156t . identifying epigenetic alterations occurring during escc progression is therefore not only essential for a detailed understanding of the molecular biology underlying the disease progression but also to improve clinical prognosis and develop more sophisticated treatment strategies. until now, only few genomic regions, such as the retrotransposon-related long interspersed element 1 or the gene regulatory elements, showing methylation alterations have been identified as possible biomarkers for lnm and/or patient survival in escc. of the gene annotation-based studies, hyper-methylation at cpg islands (cgis) in the vicinities of pax6 (paired box 6) and rn7skp211 (rna, 7sk small nuclear pseudogene 211) were significantly associated with lnm and disease-free survival in 96 patients . hyper-methylated cgis located within uchl1 (ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal esterase l1) , fhit (fragile histidine triad) , grin2b (glutamate receptor, ionotropic, n-methyl d-aspartate 2b) and gadd45g (growth arrest and dna-damage-inducible, gamma) promoter regions were associated with poor survival. however, these studies only validated cpg sites in a small set of candidate genes, therefore limiting the scope of the findings. a more comprehensive analysis is likely to reveal new dna methylation as biomarkers associated with lnm and survival. in this study, we use a new comprehensive approach to efficiently identify and validate dna methylation sites as putative prognostic biomarkers of escc progression. we propose an intuitive framework, and demonstrate its ability to identify cpg sites of prognostic value. the framework leverages an escc progression-associated gene regulatory network (grn escc ) to identify methylated sites with significant prognostic value. by taking into account differentially methylated cpg sites whose corresponding gene promoters are ranked, the ranked cpg sites are purified/selected via a top-k precision test in network. we validate the results on a selection of 20 cpg loci in a separate cohort of escc patients and demonstrate that this framework is capable of identifying novel sites of dna methylation with prognostic impact that had not been discovered by previous approaches.  
