gene expression network-based comparison of temporal gene expression patterns motivation: in the pursuits of mechanistic understanding of cell differentiation, it is often necessary to compare multiple differentiation processes triggered by different external stimuli and internal perturbations. available methods for comparing temporal gene expression patterns are limited to a gene-by-gene approach, which ignores co-expression information and thus is sensitive to measurement noise. methods: we present a method for co-expression network based comparison of temporal expression patterns (nacep). nacep compares the temporal patterns of a gene between two experimental conditions, taking into consideration all of the possible co-expression modules that this gene may participate in. the nacep program is available at http://biocomp.bioen.uiuc.edu/nacep. results: we applied nacep to analyze retinoid acid (ra)-induced differentiation of embryonic stem (es) cells. the analysis suggests that ra may facilitate neural differentiation by inducing the shh and insulin receptor pathways. nacep was also applied to compare the temporal responses of seven rna inhibition (rnai) experiments. as proof of concept, we demonstrate that the difference in the temporal responses to rnai treatments can be used to derive interaction relationships of transcription factors (tfs), and therefore infer regulatory modules within a transcription network. in particular, the analysis suggested a novel regulatory relationship between two pluripotency regulators, esrrb and tbx3, which was supported by in vivo binding of esrrb to the promoter of tbx3. availability: the nacep program and the supplementary documents are available at http://biocomp.bioen.uiuc.edu/nacep.embryonic stem (es) cells are capable of differentiating into all cell types in an adult body, and can be triggered by different external and internal signals . one of the major themes in es cell research is to find efficient ways of guiding es cells to differentiate into a desired cell type. we chose to approach this theme by comparing the differentiation processes triggered by different external stimuli or internal perturbations. differentiating mouse es cells by withdrawing certain growth factors [usually leukemia inhibitory factor (lif)] leads to generating a mixture of all cell types (spontaneous differentiation) . alternatively, exposing es cells to certain growth factors can lead to enrichment of certain cell lineages during differentiation. examples include retinoid acid (ra)-induced differentiation that enriches neuronal cells , and activininduced differentiation that enriches mesendoderm cells . besides growth factors, repressing individual regulatory proteins can also induce differentiation. although we previously showed that the repression of a chromatin modeling factor may encourage es cells to differentiate and express neural markers , in general, it is not clear whether the repression of es cell regulators may encourage differentiation toward any specific cell lineages . we hypothesized that if two es cell regulators are in the same regulatory pathway, the temporal transcriptional responses to repressing them should be similar, as opposed to the temporal responses of repressing a third es regulator that is not in this regulatory pathway or acting to inhibit this pathway. we also hypothesized that if a transcription factor (tf) inhibits a signaling pathway, the temporal responses to repressing this tf may be closer to the transcriptional responses to adding a growth factor that induces this signaling pathway as compared with the temporal responses to repressing another tf. with these hypotheses in mind, we applied the new method called nacep to compare spontaneous differentiation against eight types of induced differentiation, including one external stimulation (ra induced) and seven internal perturbations (repressing es cell regulators). the goals of these comparisons are as follows. first, we wish to gain mechanistic insights into how ra treatment leads to differentiation toward the neural lineage. second, we wish to test whether any of these induced differentiation processes resemble one another, and thus to infer the relative proximities of these regulators in an es cell regulatory network. these questions inspired us to revisit analytical methods for comparing time-course gene expression data. to date, there are very few methods for comparing timecourse gene expression data. one method suppresses the temporal information and compares the neighborhood genes between two conditions . other methods explicitly model the temporal information, but treat every gene independently . for example, one of these methods fits a spline to the time-course data of a gene in each of two experimental conditions, and then it compares the fitted splines.page: 2945 29442951  
