systems biology network-based inference from complex proteomic mixtures using snipe motivation: proteomics presents the opportunity to provide novel insights about the global biochemical state of a tissue. however, a significant problem with current methods is that shotgun proteomics has limited success at detecting many low abundance proteins, such as transcription factors from complex mixtures of cells and tissues. the ability to assay for these proteins in the context of the entire proteome would be useful in many areas of experimental biology. results: we used network-based inference in an approach named snipe (software for network inference of proteomics experiments) that selectively highlights proteins that are more likely to be active but are otherwise undetectable in a shotgun proteomic sample. snipe integrates spectral counts from paired casecontrol samples over a network neighbourhood and assesses the statistical likelihood of enrichment by a permutation test. as an initial application, snipe was able to select several proteins required for early murine tooth development. multiple lines of additional experimental evidence confirm that snipe can uncover previously unreported transcription factors in this system. we conclude that snipe can enhance the utility of shotgun proteomics data to facilitate the study of poorly detected proteins in complex mixtures. availability and implementation: an implementation for the r statistical computing environment named sniper has been made freelythe proteins expressed in a tissue are critical to determining its identity and proper function. characterizing these proteins is the goal of proteomics; however, current mass spectrometer technology is largely incapable of detecting many of the low-abundance proteins in complex mixtures, such as mammalian whole tissue lysates . the common approaches to deal with this problem include enrichment assays or selective on-line monitoring of specific ions or reactions. the primary issue with these methods is that by design, they only capture a fraction of the proteome. as a result, comprehensive proteome analysis remains a difficult task , and an as-yet unsolved problem for multi-cellular eukaryotes. because of this, the biochemical state of a tissue must often be inferred from gene expression data and a few select trusted antibodies, leaving the vast majority of the proteome invisible and essentially unapproachable. the ability to assay the complete proteome would be desirable for fields such as developmental biology. however, in addition to technical challenges discussed previously, developmental biologists often study highly complex tissues available in limited amounts. also, many of the key proteins of interest, including transcription factors and signalling molecules, are present only at low abundance and are not well detected by whole proteome analysis. gene expression microarrays or rna-seq are used as a stand-in for an effective whole-proteome assay, but it has been repeatedly established that quantitative proteomic measurements correlate poorly to gene expression levels , rendering this approach problematic for assaying the proteome. thus, although a clear need exists for effective proteomics approaches, current technology does not meet the needs of researchers when tissue quantity or machine time is constrained. a common goal in developmental biology is to define the mechanisms that determine the states of cells and tissues in time and space. these mechanisms are carried out by the coordinated tissue-specific action of a large number of proteins. the activity of these proteins can be differentially regulated in several ways. first, the proteins themselves can be expressed at different levels. alternately, although being expressed at the same level, they can change their localization or function because of modifications. these proteins do not act individually but are members of genetic pathways, in which the regulation of one member will have an impact on other pathway members. thus, the expression and function of other pathway members is indicative of the activity of a given protein. for example, the role of a transcription factor in specific tissue or developmental time point can be evident from the differential regulation of its transcriptional targets. similarly, the role of a secreted signalling molecule can be inferred from the changes in protein levels or localization of other canonical pathway members. to whom correspondence should be addressed.we hypothesized that the coordinated expression of associated proteins can be used to infer the identity of proteins involved in development. this approach can be applied to proteomic data, where the protein of interest cannot be readily identified or quantified. to test this hypothesis, we have developed a wholly computational method named snipe (software for network inference of proteomics experiments). snipe integrates previous biological knowledge encoded in a pre-existing network with the simple spectral counts obtained from any mass spectrometry experiment to select proteins whose network neighbourhoods are enriched between samples. proteins that are involved in development, but otherwise undetected in the sample, would be expected to have enriched surrounding subnetwork and may be thus detectable by snipe. as part of an effort to use systems biology approaches for mammalian organ engineering, we focused on a mouse model for the development of snipe. the developing mouse tooth is a premier model for organogenesis through epithelialmesenchymal interactions, which comprise a fundamental principle for the development of numerous mammalian organs. these interactions are characterized in all tissues, including the tooth, by the exchange of signalling molecules leading to the induction of transcription factors and other signalling molecules that are responsible for the development of the organ . as these low-abundancy proteins form the core of the developmental mechanism driving the formation of many organs, it is important to be able to assay them. applying snipe to the study of the developing tooth would, therefore, be an optimal test-case for the method, as its performance could be judged by its ability to assay these critical, but challenging to detect, proteins. here, we report the snipe algorithm and software implementation and its ability to correctly infer the presence of proteins known to be expressed in and functionally important in tooth development, as well as its ability to infer the presence of transcription factors previously undescribed in the developing tooth.  
