systems biology network inference using steady-state data and goldbeter–koshland kinetics motivation: network inference approaches are widely used to shed light on regulatory interplay between molecular players such as genes and proteins. biochemical processes underlying networks of interest (e.g. gene regulatory or protein signalling networks) are generally non-linear. in many settings, knowledge is available concerning relevant chemical kinetics. however, existing network inference methods for continuous, steady-state data are typically rooted in statistical formulations , which do not exploit chemical kinetics to guide inference. results: herein, we present an approach to network inference for steady-state data that is rooted in non-linear descriptions of biochemical mechanism. we use equilibrium analysis of chemical kinetics to obtain functional forms that are in turn used to infer networks using steady-state data. the approach we propose is directly applicable to conventional steady-state gene expression or proteomic data and does not require knowledge of either network topology or any kinetic parameters. we illustrate the approach in the context of protein phos-phorylation networks, using data simulated from a recent mechanistic model and proteomic data from cancer cell lines. in the former, the true network is known and used for assessment, whereas in the latter, results are compared against known biochemistry. we find that the proposed methodology is more effective at estimating network top-ology than methods based on linear models. availability: mukherjeelab.nki.nl/code/gk_kinetics.zip contactnetworks of molecular components play a prominent role in molecular and systems biology. a graph g (v(g), e(g)) can be used to describe a biological network, with vertex set v(g) identified with molecular components (e.g. genes or proteins) and edge set e(g) with regulatory interplay between the components. edges in a biological network are often associated with the causal notion that intervention on a parent node influences its child node(s). data-driven characterization of the graph structure e(g) (often referred to as the topology) is known as network inference and has emerged as an important problem class in bioinformatics and systems biology. network inference can aid in efficient generation of biological hypotheses from highthroughput data. further, network inference can aid in exploring molecular interplay that is associated with specific phenotypes, such as disease states. from a statistical perspective, network inference entails reverse-engineering a graph g using biochemical data d and, where available, prior knowledge regarding aspects of the topology. over the last decade, many methods for network inference have been proposed (see e.g.). to date, most methods for network inference have been rooted in discrete or linear formulations . as discussed in oates and mukherjee (2012a), a wide range of existing approaches can be viewed as variants of the statistical linear model (linear refers to linearity in parameters, so that nonlinear basis functions may be used within a linear framework). moreover, a number of approaches based on ordinary differential equations (odes;) are ultimately reducible to linear statistical models, as described in. however, the biochemical processes underlying biological networks are often highly non-linear. when the data-generating process is non-linear, use of linear models may produce inefficient or inconsistent estimation, attributing causal status to artifacts resulting from model misspecification . indeed, such bias can prevent recovery of the correct network even in favourable asymptotic limits of large sample size and low noise . on the other hand, in many settings, non-linear dynamical models of relevant biochemical processes are available. for example, gene regulation may be modelled using michaelis menten functionals , and metabolism may be modelled using mass action chemical kinetics . here, we describe an approach by which kinetic models can be used to inform network inference from steady-state data. as we show below, such information can be valuable in guiding exploration of network topologies. kinetic formulations have been widely studied in the systems biology literature, and recently, there has been much interest in statistical inference for such systems (e.g.). our work is in a similar vein but focuses on network to whom correspondence should be addressed. inference per se and on the steady-state rather than time-course setting. although biochemical assays have become cheaper, it remains the case that experimental designs must often negotiate a trade off between more conditions (e.g. perturbations, biological samples and technical replicates) and temporal resolution. methodologies, which can exploit knowledge concerning relevant dynamical systems in the steady-state setting, are therefore potentially valuable. in brief, we proceed as follows. we consider a class of non-linear biochemical dynamical systems that are relevant to the biological process of interest (we focus on protein signalling, discussed in detail later). steady-state analysis leads to a class of functional relationships between parent and child. these functional relationships are used to formulate a statistical model for network inference from steady-state data. in this way, network inference is rooted in functional relationships derived from non-linear kinetics. importantly, we do not assume detailed knowledge of the dynamical system, but only the broad class to which dynamics and associated equilibria may belong. indeed, the approach we describe does not require any kinetic parameters to be known a priori nor knowledge of the network topology and is in that sense directly comparable with conventional network inference methods. its potential advantage stems from then rich yet constrained nature of the class of functional relationships that are considered. as recently discussed in, non-linear functional forms can aid in identification of underlying causal relationships. we develop these ideas in the context of protein signalling mediated by phosphorylation. enzyme kinetics have been extensively studied, and dynamical formulations are widely available in the literature (see e.g.). for some proteins and pathways, regulation has been studied in considerable causal and mechanistic detail. indeed, there exist detailed computational models for canonical protein signalling pathways, which have been validated against experimental data (e.g.). further, proteomic technologies now allow multivariate, data-driven study of phosphorylation, facilitating biological validation of network inference methodologies. we take advantage of these factors to examine the performance of our approach using both simulated and real data. in the phosphorylation setting, goldbeterkoshland kinetics form the functional class that underlies our network inference approach. goldbeterkoshland kinetics are well known to be capable of highly non-linear behaviour including exquisite sensitivity. it has been experimentally demonstrated that this so-called ultrasensitivity is biologically relevant to signalling network dynamics, facilitating abrupt and precise decision making (e.g). we carry out statistical inference in a bayesian framework, using reversible-jump markov chain monte carlo (rjmcmc) to explore the joint model and parameter space. this yields posterior probability scores for edges in the network that are analogous to scores obtained in existing statistical network inference approaches for steady-state data . the remainder of this article is organized as follows. in section 2, our approach is laid out, followed by an exposition of the associated computational statistics. in section 3, we present results on data simulated from a recently developed dynamical model of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk) signalling that has been validated against experimental data . we then show results on real proteomic data from breast cancer cell lines. finally, section 4 closes with a discussion of practical implications and opportunities for network inference based on functional models, along with associated technical challenges.in this section, we empirically assess our methodology and compare its performance against network inference based on the linear model. in section 3.1, we show results using a recently published dynamical model of the mapk signalling pathway due to, where the underlying network is known exactly. in section 3.2, we apply our approach to a real proteomic dataset. in both cases, for fair comparison between different methods, no informative model priors were used (i.e. we set 8i; m 0 i ;).  
