systems biology networkprioritizer: a versatile tool for network-based prioritization of candidate disease genes or other molecules the prioritization of candidate disease genes is often based on integrated datasets and their network representation with genes as nodes connected by edges for biological relationships. however, the majority of prioritization methods does not allow for a straightforward integration of the users own input data. therefore, we developed the cytoscape plugin networkprioritizer that particularly supports the integrative network-based prioritization of candidate disease genes or other molecules. our versatile software tool computes a number of important centrality measures to rank nodes based on their relevance for network connectivity and provides different methods to aggregate and compare rankings. availability: networkprioritizer and the online documentation are freely available at http://www.networkprioritizer.de.an important objective of medical bioinformatics is to elucidate the genetic foundations of human diseases. to this end, it is crucial to identify genes that might predispose to or cause specific diseases. to rank candidate genes, e.g. from some genome-wide association study, according to their disease relevance, the existing plethora of computational prioritization methods exploits the available biomedical knowledge. many methods combine multiple genotypic and phenotypic data sources, e.g. gene expression, protein interactions and overlapping disease characteristics . integrated information of biological and molecular relationships and interactions is naturally represented as networks. the biological connections between known disease genes and the remaining genes in a network are of particular interest, as they can point to new disease genes according to the guilt-by-association principle. the majority of prioritization methods are available only as web services . since these require the upload of the users input data, they do not allow for the analysis of confidential data. furthermore, most web services rely on predefined background data. for example, genewanderer ranks candidate genes based on their distance to disease genes in a pre-defined proteinprotein interaction network. genedistiller and endeavour combine multiple data sources, but do not allow the user to include own data. additionally, the rank aggregation used by endeavour cannot be modified by the user. existing cytoscape plugins for prioritization tasks are also subject to major limitations. the plugin ictnet queries only a specific database to construct networks, but a straightforward integration of own data is not possible. the plugins cytohubba and gpec rank network nodes using their close neighborhood and random walks in the network, respectively. however, neither one supports multiple rankings or further analysis of the rankings. the plugin networkanalyzer and the java application centibin feature a large set of centrality measures, but they cannot compute the measures for a userdefined set of seed nodes or for weighted networks. here, we present networkprioritizer, a novel cytoscape plugin for the integrative network-based prioritization of candidate genes or other molecules. it comprises two main functionalities. first, it facilitates the estimation of the relevance of network nodes, e.g. candidate genes, with regard to a set of seed nodes, e.g. known disease genes. second, our plugin allows for the userguided aggregation and comparison of multiple node rankings derived according to different relevance measures. users can supply their own data and tailor the network analysis as well as the rank aggregation to their needs.  
