gene expression networktrail—a web service for identifying and visualizing deregulated subnetworks the deregulation of biochemical pathways plays a central role in many diseases like cancer or parkinsonss disease. in silico tools for calculating these deregulated pathways may help to gain new insights into pathogenic mechanisms and may open novel avenues for therapy stratification in the sense of personalized medicine. here, we present networktrail, a web service for the detection of deregulated pathways and subgraphs in biological networks. networktrail uses a state-of-the-art integer linear programming-based approach for this task and offers interfaces to the biological network analyzer (bina) and cytoscape web for visualizing the resulting subnetworks. by providing an accessible interface to otherwise hard-to-use command line tools, the new web service enables non-experts to quickly and reliably carry out this type of network analyses. availability and implementation: networktrail is a javaserver pages-based web service. the algorithm for finding deregulated sub-networks has been implemented in c. networktrail is available atthe deregulation of cell signaling pathways plays an important role during tumor development. to identify such pathways a number of approaches have been developed during the past decade. the method offor the detection of active subgraphs is available as a cytoscape plug-in. the bionet software developed bycan be downloaded as an r package (http://www.r-project.org).have developed hotnet, which is available as matlab source or through a web interface. the algorithms developed byare provided as c source code. we have recently published an efficient approach based on integer linear programming (ilp) , which is available as executable.although a multitude of approaches for the analysis of expression data is exposed through web services (e.g. martnmartn), the tools for the search of deregulated subnetworks aforementioned (except hotnet) have to be downloaded and installed before usage. furthermore, the majority of the tools do neither provide a graphical user interface nor an option to visualize the resulting subgraphs directly. instead, most of the programs have to be executed from the command line, and their outputs need to be processed using third party packages. thus, besides installing the required software properly, users are required to possess intricate technical knowledge of the complete tool chain. according to our experiences, both tasks can be challenging for non-expert users. an easy-to-use web interface hiding such technical details, and thereby allowing the user to focus on the analysis, would overcome these problems. therefore, we have developed a web interface called networktrail that enables the user to detect deregulated pathways and subgraphs in biological networks using our recently published ilp-based approach . based on a score for each node that measures the degree of deregulation of the corresponding gene or protein, the heaviest connected subnetwork of a specified size k is computed. here, connectivity means that the subnetwork contains a designated root node from which all other nodes in the subnetwork are reachable. this node can be interpreted as a potential molecular key player responsible for the observed deregulation. by computing all such subnetworks in a specified size range, it is possible to directly assess the stability of the computed result. as input, the user can specify a gene expression omnibus (geo) record. if the user desires to analyze raw expression data, she/he currently is required to normalize the data and provide per-gene expression scores. after the computations are completed, the resulting subnetwork can then be visualized using cytoscape web or the biological network analyzer (bina, http://bina.sourceforge.net/).in this article, we presented networktrail, a web service for detecting deregulated subnetworks in biological network data. the availability of such a web service allows non-experts to carry out network analyses without having to struggle with technical details, such as compiling/installing software or learning cryptic commands. we are convinced that such easy-to-use web services will help to elucidate pathogenic mechanisms, and that they may also prove to be useful for therapy stratification in cancer therapy. in the future, networktrail will be enhanced by including further analysis methods and pre-defined networks.. the user is guided through the workflow from uploading data to visualizing the results. for each step, a detailed tutorial is available  
