data and text mining new kegg pathway-based interpretable features for classifying ageing-related mouse proteins motivation: the incidence of ageing-related diseases has been constantly increasing in the last decades, raising the need for creating effective methods to analyze ageing-related protein data. these methods should have high predictive accuracy and be easily interpretable by ageing experts. to enable this, one needs interpretable classification models (supervised machine learning) and features with rich biological meaning. in this paper we propose two interpretable feature types based on kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg) pathways and compare them with traditional feature types in hierarchical classification (a more challenging classification task regarding predictive performance) and binary classification (a classification task producing easier to interpret classification models). as far as we know, this work is the first to: (i) explore the potential of the kegg pathway data in the hierarchical classification setting, (i) use the graph structure of kegg pathways to create a feature type that quantifies the influence of a current protein on another specific protein within a kegg pathway graph and (iii) propose a method for interpreting the classification models induced using kegg features. results: we performed tests measuring predictive accuracy considering hierarchical and binary class labels extracted from the mouse phenotype ontology. one of the kegg feature types leads to the highest predictive accuracy among five individual feature types across three hierarchical classification algorithms. additionally, the combination of the two kegg feature types proposed in this work results in one of the best predictive accuracies when using the binary class version of our datasets, at the same time enabling the extraction of knowledge from ageing-related data using quantitative influence information.ageing-related diseases are affecting an increasing number of people. at the same time, delaying ageing in humans seems to be more and more plausible in the not so distant future. biologists can already extend the lifespan of several animal species such as the fruit fly and the mouse. the potential economical benefit of investing on this type of research is clear: it is projected that the economical value of adding 2.2 extra healthy years to the human population is $7.1 trillion dollars over 50 years in the united states alone . one of the aims of ageing-research is to treat ageing as a whole, reducing the incidence of many different ageing-related diseases at the same time, instead of focusing on individual diseases. this approach promises to be much more effective than the current approach of treating individual diseases and has the potential of stopping the trend of increasing costs of treating ageing-related diseases . one way to study the ageing process holistically is to use data mining algorithms to find connections between genes or proteins that are known to be ageing-related and other genes or proteins that have unknown function using the ever increasing freely accessible biological data. two databases of interest for ageing experts are the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg) and the mouse phenotype informatics (mpi) databases. the mpi database contains, among other data, the definition of an ontology of ageing-related terms that describe the phenotype of several allele-mutations. the kegg database also contains several types of information about genes and proteins, including pathway information presented in a graphical way that allows biologists understanding the interactions of proteins in complex biological processes. we address two types of classification (supervised machine learning) problems: binary classification, where instances (proteins) are annotated with the presence or absence of a class (indicating if the protein is ageing related); and hierarchical classification; where the classes to be predicted (protein functions) are organized into a hierarchy, where more generic functions are ancestors of more specific functions (silla jr. and freitas, 2011a). note that this is a more complex but more rewarding problem than conventional classification, since the latter ignores hierarchical relationships among classes. we address the hierarchical classification task because the terms in the mpi ontology are hierarchical, and address the binary classification task because it produces classification models easier to interpret, from an ageing-biology perspective. in both tasks, it is crucial to describe each instance (protein) by a set of features (protein properties) that has both good predictive power and rich biological meaning. the contributions of this work are three-fold: (i) the integration of data from the mpi and kegg databases to create a new numerical kegg feature type with rich biological meaning. this new feature type quantifies how an instance (protein) influences other proteins, the idea being that proteins that influence other proteins in a similar way have similar function; (i) the new investigation of the use of the binary kegg feature type in the context of hierarchical classification; and (i) proposing a method for interpreting classification models generated using kegg features. the construction of specially tailored, meaningful features for specific problems is part of the feature engineering process . the objective is to introduce carefully crafted features for the type of problem being addressed. in the bioinformatics field, it has been common to use features that are easily extractable from the protein sequence or from some database containing several protein properties. these features, although valuable, often lack the preciseness an expert needs to reach a meaningful biological conclusion. this works differs from current practice by creating a new kegg pathway-based feature type that encodes precise and meaningful relations between proteins. this paper is organized as follows: section 2 describes how we built our ageing-related datasets, including the proposed kegg features. section 3 reports the predictive power of our features across hierarchical and binary classification algorithms and the interpretation of a binary classification model using some of the proposed features. finally, in section 4 we discuss the results of our work and draw conclusions.we have presented the construction of two kegg feature types for the classification of ageing-related protein functions engineered specifically with the goal of predicting protein function using interpretable features. the advantages of using the kegg-derived features types are two-fold: (i) the good predictive performance of the models induced using these two features together and (ii) the improved interpretation potential of using richer features to represent the instances. in fact, the kegg pathway seems to be a very appropriate database to use when interpretation is required, since it is focused on integrating not only biological data from several sources, but also concepts about the data . the downside of relying on such rich source of data is that, in order to compute values of the keggp and keggi features for an instance, the corresponding gene or protein must first be characterized into some kegg pathway, which involves laborious wet-lab experimentation. so, an uncharacterized protein represented only by its amino acid sequence cannot be classified using keggp and keggi features (nor using ppi and motif features). in fact, in this scenario, out of the five feature types used in this work, only the numeric feature type could be used, which is arguably the most difficult to interpret due to its low level of abstraction. the kegg pertinence (keggp) feature type, used for the first time for hierarchical classification in this work, had the best performance according to our statistical analysis compared to three other feature types and the keegi feature type, a new kegg feature type proposed here. the combined keggpi dataset (using both keggp and keggi features) had the best mean rank on the binary class dataset, tied with the keggp feature type. although the keggp feature type has a simpler interpretation, if a richer, more precise modelthe first column presents a keggi feature; its name shows the uniprot id of the protein that is being potentially influenced by an instance and (after the _) the id of the kegg pathway where the influence can occur. the next 7 columns show binary keggp features, indicating whether or not an instance belongs to the corresponding kegg pathway. the last two columns show the coverage and the accuracy of each rule. due to lack of space, we have suppressed the mmu0 prefix in the kegg pathways ids. each row shows the conditions that must be satisfied for a protein to be predicted as ageingrelated. the selected kegg pathways are: mmu04110 (cell cycle), mmu04151 (pi3k-akt signaling pathway), mmu05168 (herpes simplex infection), mmu04660 (t cell receptor signaling pathway), mmu04380 (osteoclast differentiation), mmu04350 (tgf-beta signaling pathway), mmu04917 (prolactin signaling pathway) and mmu03420 (nucleotide excision repair).. graphical representation of the kegg pathway mmu04110 (cell cycle) with highlighted interesting proteins and interactions. the protein complex highlighted with a solid black line contains the protein cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (cdk1), which occurs in the feature selected by the dt algorithm (see). the highlighted dashed grey proteins represent ageing-related proteins that influence cdk1. the highlighted solid grey proteins represent nonageing-related proteins that influence cdk1. solid grey edges represent all possible influence paths from a solid grey protein to cdk1. dashed grey edges represent all possible influence paths from the dashed grey protein to cdk1 new kegg pathway-based interpretable features for classifying ageing-related mouse proteinsinterpretation is desired (as it is the case here), the combined keggpi feature type is more suitable, as it contains both the easier to interpret keggp feature type (at a higher level of abstraction) and the keggi feature type (with finer-grain information). to illustrate this point, we have shown how the keggpi feature type can be used for generating biological knowledge using the decision table algorithm, which generates interpretable classification models. we have also contrasted the interpretation of the keggi feature type with the interpretation of the simpler keggp feature type and concluded that the complementary nature of these two feature types provides a good range of biological information: the keggi feature type presents more precise information to the user, enabling a richer interpretation of the classification model: it quantifies the influence of a current (reference) protein on another specific protein in a given kegg pathway. on the other hand, the keggp feature type tells the user the higher-level information of which kegg pathways are important for discriminating between ageing and non-ageing related proteins.  
