sequence analysis nextclip: an analysis and read preparation tool for nextera long mate pair libraries illuminas recently released nextera long mate pair (lmp) kit enables production of jumping libraries of up to 12 kb. the lmp libraries are an invaluable resource for carrying out complex assemblies and other downstream bioinformatics analyses such as the characterization of structural variants. however, lmp libraries are intrinsically noisy and to maximize their value, post-sequencing data analysis is required. standardizing laboratory protocols and the selection of sequenced reads for downstream analysis are non-trivial tasks. nextclip is a tool for analyzing reads from lmp libraries, generating a comprehensive quality report and extracting good quality trimmed and deduplicated reads. availability and implementation: source code, user guide and example data are available from https://github.com/richardmleggett/ nextclip/.long mate pair (lmp) reads are an important tool in the scaffolding of complex genome assemblies because they allow bridging of large repeat regions. equally, long-range information provided by lmp libraries is one of the key tools used for the characterization of structural variants. however, lmp libraries can be technically challenging to make requiring large amounts of high-quality and high-molecular weight dna and generating low library yields with variable levels of contaminants that are best removed before scaffolding. illuminas recently released nextera mate pair sample preparation kit (illumina fc-1321001) is an attractive system providing library insert sizes of up to 12 kb, while requiring less dna and generating highcomplexity libraries . under the nextera protocol, a transposase enzyme fragments dna and attaches a 19 bp biotinylated adaptor to either end of each fragment in a process known as tagmentation. the tagmented dna is circularized, resulting in the joining of the two biotinylated junction adaptors. the circularized dna is fragmented and biotin enrichment used to obtain the fragments containing the adaptors that mark the junction. during sequencing, reads are produced from both ends of a fragment, reading inwards toward and through the junction adaptors . in an ideal library, the junction adaptor would appear in the middle of every fragment and the fragments would be sized such that the adaptor is found in the last 19 bases of each read, resulting in most of the read being available for use. in reality, the adaptor can occur anywhere in the read and the read has to be trimmed at the point the adaptor is found . similarly, fragments can be large enough that the adaptor does not appear in either of a pair of reads. a related problem is that the biotin enrichment process is imperfect, meaning that some paired-end fragments not containing junction adaptors are also sequenced. these fragments are impossible to tell apart from fragments that contain the adaptor, but are too long for the adaptor to be sequenced. as well as the complexities associated with presence and positioning of adaptors, for a mate pair library to be useful for scaffolding, it needs to have a reasonably tight distribution of insert sizes and a low number of polymerase chain reaction (pcr) duplicates, chimeric inserts and paired-end contaminants. our own experience, also reported in other work , has established the importance of implementing the right laboratory protocol to produce good quality mate pair libraries. however, quality control of the libraries can require significant bioinformatics analysis. having produced a suitable library, further processing is required to extract true mate pair reads, remove junction adaptors and clip reads. for this reason we developed nextclip, a tool for comprehensive quality analysis of nextera lmp libraries and preparation of reads for scaffolding.  
