nextflu: real-time tracking of seasonal influenza virus evolution in humans seasonal influenza viruses evolve rapidly, allowing them to evade immunity in their human hosts and reinfect previously infected individuals. similarly, vaccines against seasonal influenza need to be updated frequently to protect against an evolving virus population. we have thus developed a processing pipeline and browser-based visualization that allows convenient exploration and analysis of the most recent influenza virus sequence data. this web-application displays a phylogenetic tree that can be decorated with additional information such as the viral genotype at specific sites, sampling location and derived statistics that have been shown to be predictive of future virus dynamics. in addition, mutation, genotype and clade frequency trajectories are calculated and displayed. availability and implementation: python and javascript source code is freely available from https://github.com/blab/nextflu, while the web-application is live at http://nextflu.org.every year, seasonal influenza infects between 10 and 20 of the global population, resulting in substantial human morbidity and mortality . vaccination remains the most effective public health measure to combat seasonal epidemics. however, influenza viruses constantly evolve and thereby undergo antigenic drift, allowing drifted viruses to reinfect individuals with acquired immunity to previously circulating strains. owing to antigenic drift, the seasonal influenza vaccine needs frequent updating to remain effective. in any given year, the particular choice of vaccine strain plays a major role in determining vaccine efficacy and so it is of critical importance to develop tools to analyze the ongoing evolution of the influenza virus population in order to aid vaccine strain selection. the program nextflu presents a near real-time display of genetic relationships among influenza viruses and allows investigation of currently available sequence data. by visualizing many different genetic and epidemiological features, we hope that nextflu will help vaccine strain selection. currently, nextflu tracks all four circulating lineages of seasonal influenza: a/h3n2, a/h1n1pdm, b/victoria and b/ yamagata.in implementation, nextflu consists of a processing pipeline written in python called augur that analyzes virus sequence data and a javascript-based browser visualization called auspice that displays this processed information. as input, augur requires a fasta file of sequences with header labels containing relevant information such as strain name, sampling date and passage history. for this purpose, influenza sequence data for the hemagglutinin (ha) gene is downloaded from the gisaid epiflu database , which contains the most up-to-date collection of seasonal influenza viruses. the first step in the processing pipeline is to automatically select a subset of representative viruses. here, viruses without complete date or geographic information, viruses passaged in eggs and sequences 987 bases are removed. in addition, local outbreaks are filtered by keeping only one instance of identical sequences sampled at the same location on the same day. following filtering, viruses are subsampled to achieve a more equitable temporal and geographic distribution. for our standard display period of 3 years and 32 viruses per month, this typically results in 1200 viruses, for which we align full-length ha sequences where available and partial sequences otherwise, using mafft . once aligned, the set of virus sequences is further cleaned by removing v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.  
