next-generation bioinformatics: using many-core processor architecture to develop a web service for sequence alignment motivation: bioinformatics algorithms and computing power are the main bottlenecks for analyzing huge amount of data generated by the current technologies, such as the next-generation sequencing methodologies. at the same time, most powerful microprocessors are based on many-core chips, yet most applications cannot exploit such power, requiring parallelized algorithms. as an example of next-generation bioinformatics, we have developed from scratch a new parallelization of the needlemanwunsch (nw) sequence alignment algorithm for the 64-core tile64 microprocessor. the unprecedented performance it offers for a standalone personal computer (pc) is discussed, optimally aligning sequences up to 20 times faster than the non-parallelized version, thus saving valuable time. availability: this algorithm is available as a free web service for the scientific community at http://www.sicuma.uma.es/multicore. the open source code is also available on such site.bioinformatics algorithms and computing power are the main bottlenecks for analyzing huge amount of data generated by the current technologies, such as the next-generation sequencing methodologies. whereas multi-core processors with a few cores provide a relative improvement in desktop applications, manycore processors (chips with tens of cores) represent the next big step in affordable high-performance computation. proposals and prototypes include intel terascale processor , sun microsystems ultrasparc t2 pro and plurality hypercore architecture line (hal, announced in grenoble, december 2008). pioneering such developments, tilera has released several tile64 processor-based cards , together with the tileras multicore development environment (mde). from a research group point of view, one of the main advantages of these cards is that they can be inserted into a pci-express slot of a personal computer (pc) and may be used as a standalone implementation. at the same time, the host computer to whom correspondence should be addressed. central processing unit (cpu) may be used for desktop purposes, while the parallel workload is carried out in the background by the tile64 card. also, there is no need to require the services of an expensive remote server to do such work. a tile64 contains 64 cores (tiles), communicating over a 31 tbps bandwidth imesh architecture. yet, most current applications cannot exploit such power, requiring parallelized algorithms. these cards have been deployed so far on high throughput video and networking . as an example of the next-generation of bioinformatics, we have demonstrated multi-core performance by developing from scratch a parallelized fastlsa algorithm [an improvement of the needlemanwunsch (nw) aligner]. the tile64 risc processor lacks floating point instructions, so it is not suitable for all types of supercomputing; yet we have found that it can be exploited for biological information management, where only integer numbers are used. the nw algorithm may be considered the most classical alignment method when the affine gap improvement is applied to the cost function . fastlsa is an intuitive nw implementation when there are multiple cores and lots of main memory available . thus, we have used it as a practical and useful implementation of our development, which has been opened publicly by means of a free web service at http://www.sicuma.uma.es/multicore.  
