next-generation variationhunter: combinatorial algorithms for transposon insertion discovery recent years have witnessed an increase in research activity for the detection of structural variants (svs) and their association to human disease. the advent of next-generation sequencing technologies make it possible to extend the scope of structural variation studies to a point previously unimaginable as exemplified by the 1000 genomes project. although various computational methods have been described for the detection of svs, no such algorithm is yet fully capable of discovering transposon insertions, a very important class of svs to the study of human evolution and disease. in this article, we provide a complete and novel formulation to discover both loci and classes of transposons inserted into genomes sequenced with high-throughput sequencing technologies. in addition, we also present conflict resolution improvements to our earlier combinatorial sv detection algorithm (variationhunter) by taking the diploid nature of the human genome into consideration. we test our algorithms with simulated data from the venter genome (huref) and are able to discover 85 of transposon insertion events with precision of 90. we also demonstrate that our conflict resolution algorithm (denoted as variationhunter-cr) outperforms current state of the art (such as original variationhunter, breakdancer and modil) algorithms when tested on the genome of the yoruba african individual (na18507). availability: the implementation of algorithm is available athuman genetic variation can be defined in various size ranges. the smallest type of variation, termed single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), are those at the single base pair level. the international hapmap project genotyped 270 human individuals for 3.1 million snps, and recently the 1000 genomes project (http://www.1000genomes.org) was initiated to characterize human genetic variation with lower minor allele frequency by sequencing more than 1000 human genomes. more recently, it was shown that structural variation events significantly contribute to human genome diversity . many structural variants (svs) are associated with genetic diseases such as psoriasis and crohns disease , prompting an increased interest in structural variation studies (; chen to whom correspondence should be addressed). recently, it was shown that the sv reconstruction is harder than de novo assembly of small genomes and introduced an extensive framework for optimal genome re-sequencing . recently, we developed a set of combinatorial algorithms to detect structural variation using high-throughput sequencing data with improved sensitivity through interrogating the repeat and duplication rich segments of the human genome. in, the maximum parsimony structural variation (mpsv) discovery problem was introduced. this mpsv problem asks to compute unique mapping for each discordant paired-end read in the reference genome such that total number of implied (svs) is minimized. we also previously presented a computational analysis of read depth to characterize segmental duplications and predict absolute copy number and content of duplicated genes . see the review fromfor the details and strengths of different structural variation discovery methods. one type of structural variation excluded from this analysis is the mobile element transposition. mobile elements, or transposons, are repetitive elements in the genome that occupy 44 of the human genome, including alu, l1 and sva elements . most of the transposons are fixed in the human lineage; however, around 0.05 of the transposons are still active, and the copy number and loci of these active transposons vary in the genomes of different individuals. many studies have demonstrated that the mobile elements contribute to genome evolution and human genetic diversity. an interesting case was shown by: insertions of an alu element were posited to cause pseudogenization of the irgm gene at the split of new world and old world monkey lineages 3540 million years ago (mya) by disrupting the open reading frame (orf). a second transposon integration (erv9) restored the orf 24 mya in the common ancestor of apes and humans, demonstrating the first report on a resurrected gene. the human irgm gene plays an important role in the immune system and is associated with crohns disease . mobile element transpositions are associated with the expansion of interspersed segmental duplications and can promote both the creation of segmental duplication in human genomes and the alteration of gene transcription by gene trapping and exonization. another aspect that most structural variation algorithms ignore is the diploid nature of the human genome) and gasv (. each chromosome has exactly two copies; therefore, all loci in the genome (w.l.o.g., except segmental duplications) are  
