genome analysis ngsutils: a software suite for analyzing and manipulating next-generation sequencing datasets ngsutils is a suite of software tools for manipulating data common to next-generation sequencing experiments, such as fastq, bed and bam format files. these tools provide a stable and modular platform for data management and analysis. availability and implementation: ngsutils is available under a bsd license and works on mac os x and linux systems. python 2.6 and virtualenv are required. more information and source code may be obtained from the website: http://ngsutils.org.with the broad implementation of next-generation sequencing (ngs) technology in biomedical research, genomics sequencing data are generated at an unprecedented rate. such advances bring enormous challenges in data analysis, of which efficient, standardized and consistent analysis are critical. with the deluge of data brought about by these technological advances, the time required to analyze ngs datasets has become the limiting factor in high-throughput experiments . in most cases, ngs data processing involves manipulating, converting and processing large standardized files, such as fastq , bed and bam files. frequently, initial pre-processing is required before using these files as input to mapping for assembly purposes. once reads have been mapped, post-processing of these files is typically applied to filter out noisy mappings or calculate summary information. the analysis of ngs experiments frequently consists of writing custom one-off scripts to manipulate data or calculate final results. this approach is inefficient and can lead to reproducibility errors. there are some existing tools that aid in the analysis of ngs data, such as bedtools , vcftools , samtools and the fastx toolkit (http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/). to help augment the functionality of exiting tools and allow for pipeline assembly, the ngsutils suite was developed, covering different aspects of ngs data analysis, including preprocessing, post-processing, filtering, format conversion and final result calculations.  
