nlr-parser: rapid annotation of plant nlr complements motivation: the repetitive nature of plant disease resistance genes encoding for nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeat (nlr) proteins hampers their prediction with standard gene annotation software. motif alignment and search tool (mast) has previously been reported as a tool to support annotation of nlr-encoding genes. however, the decision if a motif combination represents an nlr protein was entirely manual. results: the nlr-parser pipeline is designed to use the mast output from six-frame translated amino acid sequences and filters for predefined biologically curated motif compositions. input reads can be derived from, for example, raw long-read sequencing data or contigs and scaffolds coming from plant genome projects. the output is a tab-separated file with information on start and frame of the first nlr specific motif, whether the identified sequence is a tnl or cnl, potentially full or fragmented. in addition, the output of the nb-arc domain sequence can directly be used for phylogenetic analyses. in comparison to other prediction software, the highly complex nb-arc domain is described in detail using several individual motifs. availability and implementation: the nlr-parser tool can be downloaded from git-hubplants have evolved a multi-layered innate immune system to protect themselves against pests and pathogens . breeding efforts towards disease resistance in crops rely on the introgression of quantitative trait loci or major dominant disease resistance (r) genes from wild relatives (reviewed in . the largest class of r genes encodes nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich repeat proteins (nlrs or nb-lrrs). these are key receptors that recognize secreted pathogen effector molecules or their effect in the plant. on recognition, these proteins commonly lead to a hypersensitive response in the form of local cell death to prevent further spread of pathogens relying on living tissue . in dicotyledonous plants, nlr proteins come in two flavours that are determined by an n-terminal extension and internal amino acid motif composition. cnl proteins possess in most cases a coiled-coil domain followed by the highly conserved p-loop and rnbs-a motif . tnl proteins possess a toll-interleukin receptor-like (tir) domain followed by the p-loop but lack the rnbs-a motif. the tnl class is absent from monocotyledonous plants, like wheat and barley. a set of 20 nlr descriptive motifs have previously been identified using meme , and were used indue to the biological importance and relevance for breeding, the identification and annotation of nlr-type disease resistance genes has high priority in all plant genome sequencing projects. these annotations, however, rely heavily on gene-prediction software. in the past, we were able to show that up to 50 of the total nlr complement was either wrongly predicted or completely missing. our mast parser tool provides high precision identification of nlr gene sequences from every input format that is available from genome sequencing projects including contigs, scaffolds, pseudomolecules or chromosomes. in two experiments with the model plants a. thaliana and b. distachyon, we were able to show the functionality of the 20 well-characterized meme motifs in monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants. the output of this tool is directly usable for downstream applications including phylogenetic analyses, or visualization on the corresponding reference sequence. the tab delimited output format is publishable as a supplementary table.the mast parser pipeline that we present here will streamline nlr identification efforts within genome sequencing projects in monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants.  
