structural bioinformatics nmrfam-sparky: enhanced software for biomolecular nmr spectroscopy sparky (goddard and kneller, sparky 3) remains the most popular software program for nmr data analysis, despite the fact that development of the package by its originators ceased in 2001. we have taken over the development of this package and describe nmrfam-sparky, which implements new functions reflecting advances in the biomolecular nmr field. nmrfam-sparky has been repackaged with current versions of python and tcl/tk, which support new tools for nmr peak simulation and graphical assignment determination. these tools, along with chemical shift predictions from the pacsy database, greatly accelerate protein side chain assignments. nmrfam-sparky supports automated data format interconversion for interfacing with a variety of web servers including, pecan , pine, talos-n, cs-rosetta, shiftx2 and ponderosa-c/s. availability and implementation: the software package, along with binary and source codes, if desired, can be downloaded freely from http://pine.nmrfam.wisc.edu/download_packages.html. instruction manuals and video tutorials can be found at http://www.nmrfam.wisc.edu/nmrfam-sparky-distribution.htm.sparky (https://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/home/sparky) remains the most popular computer program for nmr operations, such as peakpicking and peak assignment (supplementary), despite that fact that its originators have not released a new version since 2001 (, sparky 3). sparky supports userdefined enhancements, and we have used these to develop new tools in support of our packages for automated protein assignment and structure determination. the added features support (i) interfacing with servers offering new technologies, (ii) tools for data visualization and verification and (iii) new protocols for maximizing the efficiency of nmr data analysis. we have refined these sparky enhancements through their use in our annual workshops by participants with varying experience in protein nmr spectroscopy. we describe here the new package, which we have named nmrfamsparky.  
