systems biology noa: a cytoscape plugin for network ontology analysis the network ontology analysis (noa) plugin for cytoscape implements the noa algorithm for network-based enrichment analysis, which extends gene ontology annotations to network links, or edges. the plugin facilitates the annotation and analysis of one or more networks in cytoscape according to user-defined parameters. in addition to tables, the noa plugin also presents results in the form of heatmaps and overview networks in cytoscape, which can be exported for publication figures. availability: the noa plugin is an open source, java program for cytoscape version 2.8 available via the cytoscape app store (http:// apps.cytoscape.org/apps/noa) and plugin manager. a detailed user manual is available at http://nrnb.org/tools/noa.to make use of the vast wealth of data and knowledge to elucidate the function of biological networks is one of the biggest challenges in bioinformatics. the development of high-throughput technology has given rise to an enormous increase of data on biomolecular expression and interactions, which results in protein interaction networks, gene regulatory networks, signaling networks and metabolic networks. one approach to understanding networks relies on ontologies, such as gene ontology (go), and enrichment analysis. common approaches, such as bingo , regard a network as a list of genes, performing gene-level annotation and enrichment methods. however, it is apparent that the same list of genes with different interactions may perform different functions. thus, the functional analysis of networks should take into consideration network topology. our previous work introduced the network ontology analysis (noa) algorithm to perform gene ontology enrichment analysis on biological networks . first, noa assigns ontology terms to interactions based on the known annotations of connected genes via optimizing two novel indexes coverage and diversity. then, noa generates two alternative reference sets to statistically rank the enriched functional terms for a given biological network. noa was shown to be more efficient not only for dynamic regulatory networks but also for rewired protein interaction networks. however, there are several shortcomings with the initial implementation: no graphical interface or visualization of results; limited support for species, gene names and ontology types; no batch mode for large-scale computation; and no integration or interoperability with other network tools. to overcome these shortcomings, we have reimplemented the noa algorithm as a cytoscape plugin and added interfaces, extensible ontology and identifier support, new visualizations, a batch mode and interoperability with other cytoscape plugins, as demonstrated with cythesaurus (van) and mosaic .the following use cases demonstrate the analysis options available in the noa plugin and the types of the results users should expect.  
