data and text mining noisemaker: simulated screens for statistical assessment high-throughput screening (hts) is a common technique for both drug discovery and basic research, but researchers often struggle with how best to derive hits from hts data. while a wide range of hit identification techniques exist, little information is available about their sensitivity and specificity, especially in comparison to each other. to address this, we have developed the open-source noisemaker software tool for generation of realistically noisy virtual screens. by applying potential hit identification methods to noisemaker-simulated data and determining how many of the pre-defined true hits are recovered (as well as how many known non-hits are misidentified as hits), one can draw conclusions about the likely performance of these techniques on real data containing unknown true hits. such simulations apply to a range of screens, such as those using small molecules, sirnas, shrnas, mirna mimics or inhibitors, or gene over-expression; we demonstrate this utility by using it to explain apparently conflicting reports about the performance of the b score hit identification method. availability and implementation: noisemaker is written in c, an ecma and iso standard language with compilers for multiple operating systems. source code, a windows installer and complete unit tests are available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/noisemaker. full documentation and support are provided via an extensive help file and tool-tips, and the developers welcome user suggestions.data analysis and hit identification are points of confusion for many screeners . those asking questions such as which method identifies the most true hits for my particular screen circumstances? or what will the false positive rate of my chosen method be? are frequently stymied, since answering these requires them to know the identity of the real hits. however, developing a list of the anticipated real biological hits for any given assay is extremely challenging and is likely to be both noisy and incomplete, especially for medium-to weak-strength effects. the difficulty in assessing the performance of hit identification methods can be avoided by moving to in silico-based strategies. in the computational environment, one can generate a virtual screen containing defined true hits at known locations, and then perturb these true values with varying degrees and types of noise (both to whom correspondence should be addressed. systematically biased and random) to simulate the variation inherent in biological screens; statistical techniques can then be evaluated based on their ability to identify known true positives and true negatives. these evaluations will be valid to the extent that the in silico hit distributions and types of noise are congruent with those of the real system. this approach offers both speed and flexibility, providing the opportunity to profile a methods performance in many different realistic screening scenarios as well as the ability to simulate whole screens within minutes. to enable such in silico testing, we have developed the noisemaker tool for generating simulated high-throughput screening datasets. a noisemaker user selects a realistic scenario for his or her simulated screen, including a range of hit properties as well as noise characteristics, derived from previous screens or assay development work (supplementary appendix 1); the software then randomly assigns true hits conforming to this scenario and generates noisy replicates of the screen. the user applies potential analysis approaches to this noisy data, using the known true hits to calculate metrics of interest (such as sensitivity, specificity or positive predictive value), and selects the most effective method.noisemaker is simulation software for creating realistic, virtual high-throughput screens that can be used to evaluate hit identification methods and quality criteria. we establish its power by using it to clarify the utility of the b score under various screening conditions. this tool will be useful for broader comparisons of available hit identification methods, and is freely available for download and use by others interested in modeling screens in silico.  
