'non-destructive' biocomputing security system based on gas-controlled biofuel cell and potentially used for intelligent medical diagnostics motivation: biofuel cells (bfcs) based on enzymes and microbes are the promising future alternative sources of sustainable electrical energy under mild conditions (i.e. ambient temperature and neutral ph). by combining the adaptive behavior of bfcs self-regulating energy release with the versatility of biocomputing, we construct a novel gas-controlled biocomputing security system, which could be used as the potential implantable self-powered and smart medical system with the logic diagnosis aim. results: we have demonstrated a biocomputing security system based on bfcs. due to the unique reset reagent of n 2 applied in this work, the prepared biocomputing security system can be reset and cycled for a large number of times with no reset reagent-based waste. this would be advantageous for the potential practical applications of such keypad lock as well as the development of biocomputing security devices. in order to validate the universality of the system and also to harvest energy directly from biofuels with enhanced power output, we replace the glucose with orange juice as the biofuel to operate bfcs-based biocomputing system, which also possesses the function of keypad lock. in addition, by introducing bfcs into the biocomputing security system, the adaptive behavior of the bfcs self-regulating the power release would be an immense advantage of such security keypad lock devices in potential self-powered implantable medical systems. the designed sequence gives the maximum power output and discriminate itself from the rest of the sequences. from this, we find that maximizing the dimensionless ratio of gap versus sd of the power output spectrum (a funnel in power outputs) gives the quantitative optimal design criterion. therefore, our construction here may also provide a practical example and microscopic structural basis for mimicking the real biological network systems and bridge the gaps between the theoretical concepts and experiments important for biomolecular systems and synthetic biology. contact:biofuel cells (bfcs) based on enzymes and microbes are the promising future alternative sources of sustainable electrical energy under mild conditions (i.e. ambient temperature and neutral ph). the uses of the biomass, such as glucose, endogenously existing in the biological systems suggest the important potential applications of bfcs as one kind of implantable power sources for biomedical devices including micropumps, pacemakers, neuromorphic circuits, etc. . so such adaptive behavior of the implantable bfc self-regulating the power release would be an immense advantage of these bioelectronic devices . logic lies at the heart of modern computers, and the components that carry out its operations are logic gates . in electronic computers, logic gates are sculpted on the surface of silicon wafers. their inputs and outputs are electrical voltages, but these are not the only systems that can form logic circuits. in recent years, much research interest was directed to unconventional chemical computing , performing boolean logic operations without the involvement of electronic computers and responding to a large variety of activating input signals in homogeneous solutions or at interfaces functionalized with molecular/supramolecular moieties. recently, the combination of unconventional chemical logic gates and logic circuits has been used for developing keypad locks based on unconventional chemical system . it is an attractive research goal in the area of unconventional chemical computing and offers a new approach for protecting information. biocomputing, belonging to a subarea of unconventional chemical computing and performed by living organisms (e.g. proteins/enzymes, dna, rna and whole biological cells) , is aiming at the information processing using biochemical means. two different branches of the biocomputing systems are being developed in different directions. one is aiming at competing with traditional electronic computation taking advantages of parallel computing performed by numerous biomolecules (usuallypage: 400 399404in conclusion, we have demonstrated a biocomputing security system based on bfcs. due to the unique reset reagent of n 2 applied in this work, the prepared biocomputing security system can be reset and cycled for a large number of times with no reset reagent-based waste. this would be advantageous for the potential practical applications of such keypad lock as well as the development of biocomputing security devices. in order to validate the universality of the system and also to harvest energy directly from biofuels with enhanced power output, we replace the glucose with orange juice as the biofuel to operate bfcsbased biocomputing system, which also possesses the function of keypad lock. in addition, by introducing bfcs into the biocomputing security system, the adaptive behavior of the bfcs self-regulating the power release would be an immense advantage of such security keypad lock devices in potential self-powered implantable medical systems. and the principle of the influence of gas injection and electrolyte agitation on bfc performance is based on dissolved oxygen and liquid flow, respectively. thus, based on the relationship between the dissolved oxygen concentration in blood with ischemic state/heart attack , as well as the relationship between the blood flow rate in blood vessel with the cardiac output/mean blood pressure , the current biocomputing security system can be used as the potential implant device model for assessing physiological conditions in living organisms and for making autonomous decisions on the use of specific tools/drugs in various implantable medical systems. nearly all living organisms need oxygen to carry on life processes and blood flow to maintain life. thus, on the other hand, on the conceptual level, this work might help us understand how living organisms manage to control extremely complex and coupled biochemical reactions; that is, the hope is to cast biochemical (metabolic) pathways in the language of information theory. for example, the underlying landscapes of some signal transduction and metabolic networks can have global funneled landscapes as a result of sequence of cascade of intricate logic gate like motifs (. this guarantees the unique direction of the information flow and biological functions with robustness and stability. we performed a global study and found that maximizing the dimensionless ratio of gap versus sd of the power output spectrum (a funnel in power outputs) gives the quantitative optimal design criterion. our construction here may provide a practical example and microscopic structural basis for mimicking the real biomolecular and network systems and bridge the gaps between the theoretical concepts and experiments important for biomolecular systems and synthetic biology.  
