no promoter left behind (nplb): learn de novo promoter architectures from genome-wide transcription start sites promoters have diverse regulatory architectures and thus activate genes differently. for example, some have a tata-box, many others do not. even the ones with it can differ in its position relative to the transcription start site (tss). no promoter left behind (nplb) is an efficient, organism independent method for characterizing such diverse architectures directly from experimentally identified genome-wide tsss, without relying on known promoter elements. as a test case, we show its application in identifying novel architectures in the fly genome. availability and implementation: web-server at http://nplb.ncl.res.in. standalone also at https:// github.com/computationalbiology/nplb/ (mac osx/linux).promoters play a key role in transcription initiation by harbouring specific dna elements, which act as transcription factor recognition sites. but how these promoter elements (pes) contribute to the diversity in transcriptional regulation is not yet clear. while highthroughput technologies are increasingly used to produce accurate maps of transcription start sites (tsss) , the subsequent step of characterizing promoters and their functions is still done using two rather dated approaches. the first involves classifying them based on known pes such as the inr motif or tata-box. unfortunately, a majority of promoters and their activities cannot be explained by the presence or absence of these few pes. alternatively, de novo motif discovery methods are used to identify overrepresented elements directly from the sequences. these can miss pes present only in a small fraction of promoters. since promoters have diverse mechanisms of activation, most pes fall in this category . even methods that identify cis-regulatory modules fail here, since although they look for motif-combinations, these are still required to be common across the full set (van). no promoter left behind (nplb) is a new method modelled along the lines of unsupervised learning with feature selection that partitions tss-aligned promoter sequences into distinct promoter architectures (pas), each characterized by its own set of pes, all learned de novo . since it explicitly allows for diversity, nplb can be applied to the full dataset, leaving out no promoter, in contrast to the standard approach of presorting/ preselecting promoters on the basis of criteria such as presence of known pes or tss peak characteristics . in this new parallel software, the number of pas and pes are determined automatically using a mix of bayesian modelling and cross validation.  
