a network-driven approach for genome-wide association mapping motivation: it remains a challenge to detect associations between genotypes and phenotypes because of insufficient sample sizes and complex underlying mechanisms involved in associations. fortunately, it is becoming more feasible to obtain gene expression data in addition to genotypes and phenotypes, giving us new opportunities to detect true genotypephenotype associations while unveiling their association mechanisms. results: in this article, we propose a novel method, netam, that accurately detects associations between snps and phenotypes, as well as gene traits involved in such associations. we take a network-driven approach: netam first constructs an association network, where nodes represent snps, gene traits or phenotypes, and edges represent the strength of association between two nodes. netam assigns a score to each path from an snp to a phenotype, and then identifies significant paths based on the scores. in our simulation study, we show that netam finds significantly more phenotype-associated snps than traditional genotypephenotype association analysis under false positive control, taking advantage of gene expression data. furthermore, we applied netam on late-onset alzheimers disease data and identified 477 significant path associations, among which we analyzed paths related to beta-amyloid, estrogen, and nicotine pathways. we also provide hypothetical biological pathways to explain our findings. availability and implementation: software is available atone of the fundamental problems in genetics is to understand how different genotypes affect phenotypic variations. to find genetic factors of complex diseases such as alzheimers disease (ad) and asthma, researchers have detected single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) associated with phenotypes (e.g. disease status) . however, most snps associated with complex diseases remain elusive, and the molecular mechanisms of genotypephenotype associations are largely unknown . to address the problem, efforts have been made in the past decade to bridge the gap between genotypes and phenotypes by replacing phenotypes with gene expression traits , and then conducting association mapping between genotypes and gene expression traits. for example, hypothesis testing (e.g. t-test) or penalized regression methods have been employed to find genotypegene trait associations . extending the two-way association (i.e. genotypes and gene traits) analysis, three-way association analysis among genotypes, gene traits and phenotypes also has been proposed.proposed an integrative genomics approach consisting of a series of statistical tests to identify causal genes to complex phenotypes. recently,developed a visualization-aided approach to detect genometranscriptomephenome associations. the previous works showed the great promise of three-way association analysis; however, most of them aim to reveal association relationships for an snp, a gene trait, and a phenotype. thus, there is an urgent need to develop an efficient method that can detect threeway associations from a large dataset of genotypes, gene traits, and phenotypes. in this article, we present a novel method, netam (networkdriven association mapping), to detect path associations from snps to phenotypes through gene expression traits. let us first introduce the concept of path associations. consider a network where nodes represent snps, gene traits, or phenotypes and edges represent associations between a pair of nodes, weighted by their strengths. we call it association network. in this network, we define path association by any paths from an snp to a phenotype.illustrates an example of association network, identified by netam in ad dataset . netam starts with constructing an association network using sparse regression methods such as lasso and group lasso under stability selection . arguably, these techniques perform better than single snp analysis because they allow us to find weighted edges, considering all snps or all gene expression traits simultaneously. based on the edge weights, we define scores for all path associations, reflecting their significance. finally, using a k-shortest path algorithm, we identify top k path associations (or all paths with scores greater than a threshold) in the network. to boost the computational efficiency of netam for large-scale analysis, we further employ screening techniques that can discard a large number of irrelevant edges efficiently. the proposed approach has advantages over traditional genotypephenotype association analysis. first, it allows us to better understand the underlying mechanisms of associations (e.g. snps affect gene expression traits, and altered expressions influence phenotypes). furthermore, it can take advantage of gene expression traits to detect phenotype-associated snps. when snps and phenotypes are weakly associated, gene expression traits can bridge the gap between them, allowing us to find path associations. finally, it can integrate rapidly growing heterogeneous datasets such as geo (gene expression omnibus) database and dbgap (database of genotypes and phenotypes) . netam requires the same samples only for a pair of datasets (e.g. genotypes and gene expression traits) to create edges, and thus heterogeneous datasets can be integrated through a network. in our experiments, we first conducted simulation study to verify that netam can take advantage of gene expression data to significantly improve the performance to detect phenotype-associated snps under false positive control. we then applied netam on lateonset ad dataset , and identified 477 path associations. among them, we highlight one path association: rs675804 ! znf720 ! ad status. it turns out that znf720 interacts with only the app gene encoding amyloid beta (a4) precursor protein, a major factor of ad that generates neural waste, called beta-amyloid, in the brain (see section 4 for detailed analysis). we also present biological hypotheses that can explain the path associations identified by netam, related to beta-amyloid, estrogen, and nicotine pathways. notation: we denote matrices by bold-faced uppercase, vectors by bold-faced lowercase, and scalars by lowercase letters. given a genotype matrix x 2 r nj with n samples and j snps, we denote the j-th column by x j , the i-th row by x i , and the (i, j) element by x i j. similarly, we denote the gene expression matrix by y 2 r nk , and phenotype matrix by z 2 r nm , where k and m are the number of gene traits and phenotypes, respectively.  
