systems biology novel human lncrna–disease association inference based on lncrna expression profiles motivation: more and more evidences have indicated that longnon-coding rnas (lncrnas) play critical roles in many important biological processes. therefore, mutations and dysregulations of these lncrnas would contribute to the development of various complex diseases. developing powerful computational models for potential disease-related lncrnas identification would benefit biomarker identification and drug discovery for human disease diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and prevention. results: in this article, we proposed the assumption that similar diseases tend to be associated with functionally similar lncrnas. then, we further developed the method of laplacian regularized least squares for lncrnadisease association (lrlslda) in the semisupervised learning framework. although known disease lncrna associations in the database are rare, lrlslda still obtained an auc of 0.7760 in the leave-one-out cross validation, significantly improving the performance of previous methods. we also illustrated the performance of lrlslda is not sensitive (even robust) to the parameters selection and it can obtain a reliable performance in all the test classes. plenty of potential diseaselncrna associations were publicly released and some of them have been confirmed by recent results in biological experiments. it is anticipated that lrlslda could be an effective and important biological tool for biomedical research. availability: the code of lrlslda is freely available at http://asdcd. amss.ac.cn/software/details/2.it is well known that genetic information is stored in proteincoding genes, which are referred to as the central dogma of molecular biology . therefore, rna is only considered to be an intermediary between a dna sequence and its encoded protein during a considerable long period . recent studies have shown that protein-coding genes account for only a small fraction of the human genome ($1.5). in other words, 498 of the human genome does not encode protein sequences . especially, it has been observed that the proportion of nonprotein-coding sequence increases with the complexity of organisms . these facts challenge forementioned traditional view of rna. furthermore, accumulating evidences have shown that non-coding rnas (ncrnas) normally play a critical role in various biological processes. specially, longnon-coding rnas (lncrnas) are a class of important ncrnas with the length 4200 nt (;). in the past few years, increasing number of lncrnas have been discovered in eukaryotic organisms ranging from nematodes to humans with the rapid development of both experimental technology and computational methods . it has also been shown that the expression levels of lncrnas appear to be lower than proteincoding genes , and some lncrnas have high tissue specificity . accumulating evidences have indicated that plenty of lncrnas play critical roles in many important biological processes, including transcription, translation, splicing, differentiation, epigenetic regulation, immune responses, cell cycle control and so on . therefore, mutations and dysregulations of lncrnas are associated with a broad range of human diseases , such as cancers , cardiovascular diseases and neurodegeneration diseases . for example, lncrna hotair, pca3 and uca1 have been treated as potential biomarker of hepatocellular carcinoma recurrence , prostate cancer aggressiveness (van) and bladder cancer diagnosis, respectively . therefore, identifying potential human disease-related lncrnas can facilitate not only the understanding of molecular mechanisms of human disease at lncrna level, but also biomarker identification for human disease diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and prevention . so far, plenty of studies have generated a large amount of lncrna-related biological data about sequence, expression, function and so on. these datasets to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com have been stored in some publicly available databases, such as nred , lncrnadb , noncode . however, only relatively few lncrnadisease associations have been reported. developing powerful computational models based on these datasets to predict potential diseaselncrna associations on a large scale has been treated as one of the most important topics of lncrnas and diseases. computational model can provide most promising lncrnadisease associations for further experimental validation, hence decrease the time and cost of biological experiments. in the previous work, we have manually collected experimentally reported diseaselncrna associations and constructed the first lncrnadisease association database, lncrnadisease (http://cmbi.bjmu.edu.cn/lncrnadisease) . this database has included 4480 lncrnadisease associations, $208 lncrnas and 166 diseases and laid the solid data fundament for lncrna-related predictive research. furthermore, we obtained an important conclusion that lncrnas tend to be related to the same disease as their genomic neighbor genes and developed a simple lncrnadisease association prediction method based on the genomic context of a given lncrna . the conclusion obtained in this study laid the solid theoretical fundament for diseaselncrna association prediction research. based on this conclusion, various disease-related lncrna prediction methods can be developed. in this article, we logically extended the basic assumption in the previous disease-microrna (mirna) association prediction research and proposed the following assumption for disease-related lncrna prediction: similar diseases tend to be associated with functionally similar lncrnas. based on this assumption and the fact that selecting lncrnas that are not related to the given disease is currently difficult or even impossible, we developed a computational model of laplacian regularized least squares for lncrnadisease association (lrlslda) in the semisupervised learning framework. this method prioritizes the entire lncrnaome for disease of interest by integrating known phenome-lncrnaome network obtained from the database of lncrnadisease, disease similarity network and lncrna similarity network. lrlslda is a global approach that can rank candidate diseaselncrna pairs for all the diseases simultaneously. in the leave-one-out cross validation (loocv), lrlslda obtained the reliable auc of 0.7760, demonstrating superiority performance of lrlslda to previous methods and potential value for disease-related lncrna prediction and biomarker detection in the diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and prevention of human disease. we also classified test samples of lncrnadisease associations into distinct classes, and lrlslda obtained reliable performance in different test classes. plenty of potential diseaselncrna associations were publicly released for experimental verification. some of the associations have been confirmed by recent results in biological experiments.  
