systems biology nozzle: a report generation toolkit for data analysis pipelines we have developed nozzle, an r package that provides an application programming interface to generate html reports with dynamic user interface elements. nozzle was designed to facilitate summarization and rapid browsing of complex results in data analysis pipelines where multiple analyses are performed frequently on big datasets. the package can be applied to any project where user-friendly reports need to be created. availability: the r package is available on cran at http://cran.r-project.org/packagenozzle.r1. examples and additional materials are available at http://gdac.broadinstitute.org/nozzle. the source code is also available atowing to the increasing size and complexity of biological data, a considerable portion of bioinformatics analyses are implemented as (semi-)automated pipelines. the main task of these pipelines is to control the flow of large datasets through a series of analysis modules, which are often independent applications. these analyses typically need to be performed repeatedly over time as data are accumulated gradually. genepattern , galaxy and taverna are popular workflow management systems used to implement such pipelines for high-throughput analysis of genomics data. another common approach is to use shell scripting to tie together different tools into an analysis pipeline. although pipelines greatly reduce the effort required to apply different algorithms to large datasets, they often result in a multitude of figures, lists and tables at varying levels of detail. this presents significant challenges for the biologists who must sift through a large amount of information to identify potentially interesting findings. in the use case we describe, each run of the pipeline results in more than 11 000 figures and tables. in some cases, this problem can be addressed by feeding these results into a database with a dynamic query interface. although databases are capable of supporting powerful exploration tools and interactive visualizations, their development and maintenance require a significant investment of resources and their data model is less flexible than reports. this is particularly problematic when the tools in the pipeline are replaced as requirements change. alternatively, the results can be summarized in reports. several r libraries exist that can be used to generate reports for analysis pipelines. r2html and hwriter (http://cran.r-project. org/packagehwriter) are low-level libraries for writing html files. sweave , knitr and related tools for reproducible research can be used to generate pdf or html documents from within r scripts. however, none of these tools provide support in generating reports with dynamic user interface components for the presentation of extensive and complex analysis results. to address these limitations, we have developed the nozzle r package, which supports pipeline developers in creating comprehensive and user-friendly html reports to describe the results of analysis pipelines. sections containing significant results by highlighting the corresponding section . this is particularly useful in comprehensive reports with many sections or in situations when readers must frequently review large numbers of reports and would like to focus first on significant findings. results can also be linked to supplementary information (and d), which may contain any report elements including sections, figures and tables. these are shown on demand using a split-screen approach, allowing the readers to view main results and supplementary information side by side. this is a powerful tool for creating reports that focus on the key findings while still providing access to more detailed information.  
