structural bioinformatics nrgsuite: a pymol plugin to perform docking simulations in real time using flexaid ligand protein docking simulations play a fundamental role in understanding molecular recognition. herein we introduce the nrgsuite, a pymol plugin that permits the detection of surface cavities in proteins, their refinements, calculation of volume and use, individually or jointly, as target binding-sites for docking simulations with flexaid. the nrgsuite offers the users control over a large number of important parameters in docking simulations including the assignment of flexible side-chains and definition of geometric constraints. furthermore, the nrgsuite permits the visual-ization of the docking simulation in real time. the nrgsuite give access to powerful docking simulations that can be used in structure-guided drug design as well as an educational tool. the nrgsuite is implemented in python and c/c with an easy to use package installer. the nrgsuite is available for windows, linux and macos. availability and implementation: http://bcb.docking simulations can be used to understand the specificity and selectivity of ligands as well as guide in the identification and design of inhibitors. docking simulations seek to address three interdependent but distinct problems: (i) the prediction of the structure of a ligand-protein complex (binding mode), (ii) the discrimination of binders from non-binders (virtual screening) and (iii) the prediction of binding affinities. docking methods are not yet successful in these three tasks simultaneously . flexaid was primarily developed with the task of predicting binding modes. when docking on non-native-complex structure (i.e. the structure of the target was not crystallized in the presence of the ligand of interest), flexaid has been shown to outperform existing methods such as autodock vina and flexx irrespective of target flexibility as well as rdock when sidechain conformational changes are crucial. pymol (delano) is a powerful, open source program for molecular visualization that allows users to extend the capabilities of the program via plugins. the source code of the latest version 1.7.6 of pymol is available in sourceforge. two pymol plugins exist for docking simulations (; seeliger and de), both use autodock vina and require additional software compilation/installation. the latter permits docking with slide but requires an amber license. a number of docking web-servers exist, including swissdock , istar , rosetta and dock blaster primarily focused on virtual screening. in this work we present the nrgsuite, an open-source and self-contained precompiled pymol plugin (for pymol versions 1.2 and above) focused on the prediction of binding-poses with docking simulations. the nrgsuite cohesively combines tools we develop (  
