an event-driven approach for studying gene block evolution in bacteria motivation: gene blocks are genes co-located on the chromosome. in many cases, gene blocks are conserved between bacterial species, sometimes as operons, when genes are co-transcribed. the conservation is rarely absolute: gene loss, gain, duplication, block splitting and block fusion are frequently observed. an open question in bacterial molecular evolution is that of the formation and breakup of gene blocks, for which several models have been proposed. these models, however, are not generally applicable to all types of gene blocks, and consequently cannot be used to broadly compare and study gene block evolution. to address this problem, we introduce an event-based method for tracking gene block evolution in bacteria. results: we show here that the evolution of gene blocks in proteobacteria can be described by a small set of events. those include the insertion of genes into, or the splitting of genes out of a gene block, gene loss, and gene duplication. we show how the event-based method of gene block evolution allows us to determine the evolutionary rateand may be used to trace the ancestral states of their formation. we conclude that the event-based method can be used to help us understand the formation of these important bacterial genomic structures. availability and implementation: the software is available under gplv3 license on http://github. com/reamdc1/gene_block_evolution.git. supplementary online material: http://iddo-friedberg.net/ operon-evolutionin bacterial and archaeal genomes, gene blocks are sequences of genes co-located on the chromosome, whose evolutionary conservation can be conservation of gene blocks can be strikingly apparent and has been used in phylogenetic and functional studies . conservations across numerous taxa indicate that at least some conserved blocks are operons: a special case of gene blocks where the genes are cotranscribed to polycistronic mrna and are often associated with a single function, such as a metabolic pathway or a protein complex. it is estimated that 550 of bacterial genes reside in operons . typically operons are under the control of one or more regulator proteins, which facilitate co-regulated transcription. from an evolutionary point of view, there are several questions that are asked about operons and gene blocks. how did these units evolve? what confers fitness upon genes in an operon or block structure as opposed to not being neighboring? are certain operons more or less evolutionarily conserved in bacteria? what affects the conservation of the operon or gene block structure in different taxa? several models exist to explain gene block evolution (for more extensive reviews see). one of the first models proposed for biopathway evolution v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.the results of this study show an interesting variety in gene block evolution. first, we show the gene block tree diagrams in a phylogenetic tree. these diagrams show the gene blocks as we find them in the different species we examine. the lack of a gene in the gene block phylogenetic tree does not mean the homolog does not exist in that taxon, but rather that it is no longer detectable by blast at the threshold of 10 10. further, if a gene block is missing from the phylogenetic tree, it means that there are no two genes in the gene block that are neighboring in the genome within a distance of 500 bp. to visualize the frequency of events, we generate gene block event frequency matrices or colored phylomatrices as described in section 3. the value of each matrix is a z-score.shows two conserved gene blocks, andshows two non-conserved gene blocks.  
