genome analysis absynte: a web tool to analyze the evolution of orthologous archaeal and bacterial gene clusters absynte (archaeal and bacterial synteny explorer) is a web-based service designed to display local syntenies in completely sequenced prokaryotic chromosomes. the genomic contexts are determined with a multiple center star clustering topology on the basis of a user-provided protein sequence and all (or a set of) chromosomes from the publicly available archaeal and bacterial genomes. the results consist in a dynamic web page where a consistent color-coding permits a rapid visual evaluation of the relative positioning of genes with similar sequences within the synteny. each gene composing the synteny can be further queried interactively using either local or remote databases. absynte results can be exported in .csv or high-resolution, .pdf formats for printing, archival, further editing or publication purposes. performance, real-time computation, user-friendliness and daily database updates constitute the principal advantages of absynte over similar web services. availability:the availability of more than 1400 completely sequenced archaeal and bacterial genomes at the national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) repository provides a wealth of information to researchers involved in prokaryotic genetics. in particular, the comparison of the relative genetic positioning on microbial chromosomes is of special interest not only to measure evolutionary relationships between different species but also to deduce the function of uncharacterized proteins. this conservation of orthologous gene order is commonly referred as synteny even if in its original definition the term had a different meaning . the extraction of syntenic information from sequenced genomes involves the impractical manipulation of large data files and the complexity of the task increases with the number of genomes that need to be compared. the comparative analysis of genome segments from prokaryotic organisms has been addressed by web services such as gecont2 , psat and gcview . unfortunately, these web applications suffer from one or more restrictions as discussed below. in response to these limitations, we have developed absynte (archaeal and bacterial synteny explorer) to whom correspondence should be addressed. a web tool, which only requires a user-provided protein sequence to display the corresponding synteny from a daily updated list of archaeal and bacterial genomes. this interactive web application is executed in real time and is designed to extract, compare and predict orthologous gene clusters originating from any combination of sequenced prokaryotic organisms.  
