gene expression nucleofinder: a statistical approach for the detection of nucleosome positions motivation: the identification of nucleosomes along the chromatin is key to understanding their role in the regulation of gene expression and other dna-related processes. however, current experimental methods (mnase-chip, mnase-seq) sample nucleosome positions from a cell population and contain biases, making thus the precise identification of individual nucleosomes not straightforward. recent works have only focused on the first point, where noise reduction approaches have been developed to identify nucleosome positions. results: in this article, we propose a new approach, termed nucleofinder, that addresses both the positional heterogeneity across cells and experimental biases by seeking nucleosomes consistently positioned in a cell population and showing a significant enrichment relative to a control sample. despite the absence of validated dataset, we show that our approach (i) detects fewer false posi-tives than two other nucleosome calling methods and (ii) identifies two important features of the nucleosome organization (the nucleosome spacing downstream of active promoters and the enrichment/deple-tion of gc/at dinucleotides at the centre of in vitro nucleosomes) with equal or greater ability than the other two methods. availability: the r code of nucleofinder, an example datafile and instructions are available for download from https://sites.google. comeukaryotic genomes exist in highly packaged structures called chromatin. dna wraps around globular protein cores and appears as beads on a string by electron microscopy. the bead, or nucleosome, is the fundamental structural unit of the chromatin and consists of $150 base pairs coiled 1.65 times around a histone octamer core comprising two h2a/h2b and two h3/h4 heterodimers . the string, also called the linker, is a dna stretch ranging from 10 to 80 bp, depending on species, cell type and chromatin region. nucleosomes can further be folded into higher order organizations to eventually form a chromosome . the need for these high level structures arises from a packaging problem: the dna molecule is long (chromosomes range from 1.7 to 8.5 cm in human) and negatively charged, resulting in electrostatic repulsions that stiffen the polymer and prevent it from fitting inside the nucleus. owing to the highly basic charge of histone proteins, dna charges are neutralized, allowing a compaction up to a factor of 10 000 . this compaction is not homogeneous throughout the genome and restricts both the binding of transcription factors and the recruitment of effector protein complexes (such as chromatin remodelling complexes) to certain regions . chromatin has commonly been viewed as being in either an active form (euchromatin) or a repressed form (heterochromatin). the former, characteristic of active transcribed regions, is lightly packed (up to the 30 nm fiber compaction) and allows regulatory proteins and transcription complexes to bind to the dna. the latter, tightly packed, is associated with gene silencing and the protection of chromosome structures such as centromeres and telomeres . because of its influence on the binding of transcription factors, the packaging of dna into nucleosomes provides important regulatory functions . in yeast for instance,demonstrated that gene activation and repression are associated with changes (eviction, appearance or repositioning) of one or two nucleosomes in promoter regions. the development of high-throughput assays has allowed the mapping of nucleosomes across the genomes of various model organisms . these recent studies have revealed common features across species : at expressed genes (i) the sim150 base pairs region upstream of the transcription start site (tss) is depleted of nucleosomes, (ii) nucleosomes show a regular spacing at the 5 0 end of genes and (iii) this regular nucleosome spacing, also called phasing, gradually decreases from the 5 0 to the 3 0 end of the coding region . even if our understanding of the nucleosome organization has considerably improved, the questions of the relative influence of cis and trans factors in the nucleosome organization as well as the role of nucleosome positioning in gene to whom correspondence should be addressed.the recent development of high-throughput sequencing methods has provided a global insight into how the combination of nucleosome positions and their post-transcriptional modifications are key to gene regulation. the precise identification of nucleosomes is therefore crucial to understanding what determines the nucleosome architecture and how changes in this organization induce variation in gene expression. this task is made non-trivial by the fact that nucleosomes are assayed across cell populations and consequently result in complex patterns of reads. another difficulty also arises from the known bias of mnase toward at/ta motifs, which potentially can limit the accuracy of nucleosome detection. from our knowledge, no existing mnase-seq methods have addressed this issue. to fill this gap,  
