genome analysis nucler: a package for non-parametric nucleosome positioning nucler is an r/bioconductor package for a flexible and fast recognition of nucleosome positioning from next generation sequencing and tiling arrays experiments. the software is integrated with standard high-throughput genomics r packages and allows for in situ visualization as well as to export results to common genome browser formats. availability: additional information and methodological details can be found ateukaryotic chromatin is organized in nucleosomes, a structure with approximately 147 basepairs (bp) of dna wrapped around an octamer of histones . nucleosomes affect the packaging and accessibility of dna, thus playing a crucial role in defining its functionality . the development of high-throughput techniques, such as tiling arrays (ta) and next generation sequencing (ngs), coupled to micrococal nuclease (mnase) digestions has enabled the study of nucleosome positioning at the entire genome level for several organisms including humans . some clear features emerged from these studies, such as the presence of wellpositioned nucleosomes and their depletion in regions surrounding transcription start sites (tss;). however, well-positioned (phased across different cells) nucleosomes coexist with fuzzy (not-phased) ones outside the tss. this variability makes nucleosome-positioning complex, requiring therefore the development of algorithms to find the most-probable nucleosomal configuration. these approaches include, among others, hidden markov models (hmm) , higher order bayesian networks or mixed methods .these methods are very powerful, but the intrinsic assumptions and the level of expertise of the modeler can significantly affect the results. here we present a new tool, nucler, integrated in the open source, multiplatform r/bioconductor framework. the approach is based on a fast, nonparametric detection of all nucleosome dyads and scoring of the calls. a good performance is achieved by filtering the noise using fast fourier transform (fft). the user has full freedom tofrom nislows group and an ngs experiment performed in our group . a comparative analysis has been performed using hmm results provided byand the package chipseqr, available from r/bioconductor repository. we selected the first method as it is widely used in the literature and the second one for being the only package that enables a nucleosome positioning analysis in r/bioconductor. the main difference between lees hmm and our approach is that the method presented here is able to detect multiple shifted nucleosomes in a given single position, and not just providing the most probable state for each position. this has a large impact on the final map, where we are able to identify a richer landscape of nucleosome calls in ta experiments. additionally, the hmmbased approach is difficult to apply to 1-bp resolution experiments, such as nsg, due to the large amount of memory required for backtracking. apart from this scalability problem, the modeling of background transition probabilities, a key element in hmm, requires a very fine and subjective tuning. this can overconstrain the results, forcing, for example, preferred length linker dna, strict periodic positioning or inability to detect coverage peaks due to strange chromatin structures, like centromers or tetrasomes. in the previous work of873 nucleosomes (40 096 well positioned and 30 777 fuzzy) were detected. nucler applied to the same dataset is able to detect a total of 151 882 individual scored nucleosome calls. furthermore, our method displayed a larger ability to detect nucleosome positions in synthetic data (77 hits for nucler versus 67 for hmm) and also a higher correlation when rebuilding the original read maps obtained from the ta experiment (p = 0.63 for nucler versus p = 0.38 for hmm) (see supplementary material). chipseqr (www.bioconductor.org) provides a similar approach as the one presented here, but lacks support for ta data and a method for noise removal. this generates problems in peak detection since only global maxima above a settled threshold are detected efficiently, missing many relevant sub-peaks (local maximums) and leading to an underestimation of nucleosome density. in our ngs data nucler detects 100 335 nucleosome calls (repeated genomic regions were not considered for this analysis), comprising all of the local maximums above the default threshold on the smoothed signal. with the same detection threshold, chipseqr detects by default 57 725 nucleosome binding sites and 2 206 180 if asking for sub-peak detection, very far from the expected magnitude of 10 4 10 5 calls, according to yeast genome size and putative nucleosome length. a visual comparison of the mentioned methods is available as supplementary material (see supplementary). again, a benchmark analysis showed that nucler was able to recover more nucleosome positions in synthetic data (95 for nucler versus 81 for chipseqr) and to reproduce with higher definition the experimental coverage map (p = 0.29 for nucler versus p = 0.03 for chipseqr) (see supplementary material for details). nucler has a computational complexity between o(n) and o(n log n). the package is accessible free of cost under lgpl-3 license scheme from our website (http://mmb.pcb.ub.es/nucler) and the instituto nacional de bioinformtica site (http://www.inab.org) it should also be available on bioconductor upon publication.  
