gene expression nvt: a fast and simple tool for the assessment of rna-seq normalization strategies motivation: measuring differential gene expression is a common task in the analysis of rna-seq data. to identify differentially expressed genes between two samples, it is crucial to normalize the datasets. while multiple normalization methods are available, all of them are based on certain assumptions that may or may not be suitable for the type of data they are applied on. researchers therefore need to select an adequate normalization strategy for each rna-seq experiment. this selection includes exploration of different normalization methods as well as their comparison. methods that agree with each other most likely represent realistic assumptions under the particular experimental conditions. results: we developed the nvt package, which provides a fast and simple way to analyze and evaluate multiple normalization methods via visualization and representation of correlation values, based on a user-defined set of uniformly expressed genes.high throughput sequencing of rna or cdna (rna-seq) had an enormous impact on basic and clinical research since its introduction in the 2000s . independently of the used sequencing technology, the vast majority of research projects attempting to measure global expression levels of features (genes, exons, small rnas or non-coding rnas) compare expression values of multiple samples that represent different biological states. importantly, any such differential expression (de) analysis requires normalized data. this means that all nonbiological influence, such as potential effects of sample preparation or sequencing efficiency, has to be removed to make the data comparable in between different experiments. to balance sequencing depths several methods use scaling factors (supplementary): total count (tc), median (me), upper quartile (uq), trimmed mean of m-values (tmm) and the relative log expression method implemented in deseq. both tmm and deseq operate under the assumption that most of the genes are not differentially expressed. normalization methods without scaling factors are (supplementary): quantile (q), reads per kilobase per million mapped reads (rpkm) and normalization by a defined gene set (g). thus, two main concepts for data normalization in rna-seq applications exist. while tmm and deseq mainly consider differential library size, other normalization methods account for the distribution adjustment of read counts (tc, uq, me, q, rpkm). normalization based on rna spike-ins makes other methods obsolete but this requires the rna spike-in which had to be planned and applied previous to the sequencing. all the previously described methods are based on specific assumptions. thus, identifying the method(s) for which these assumptions agree with the specific experimental setting represents a significant challenge, an exception is quantro (v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com) which gives recommendations on when to use q normalization or not. for example: if an experiment compares gene expression levels of healthy versus rapidly growing tumor cells, the assumptions of non-differentially expressed genes or equal amounts of mrna might not apply. the decision to utilize a certain normalization method can therefore have an enormous impact on the entire downstream analysis. also, conclusions drawn from the enrichment of differentially expressed genes with respect to functional categories might be severely affected. as rna-seq experiments have become popular and powerful research tools in many areas of biology and medicine, also non-specialists need to be able to explore and compare different normalization methods to select the most appropriate one. to assist researchers in these tasks we present the normalization visualization tool (nvt). nvt is a fast and simple way to visually and quantitatively assess the normalization strategy including a set of user-defined genes. this set should consist of genes that do not change their relative expression levels in the particular study, this requires preliminary knowledge or experimental data (e.g. from quantitative pcr measurements).  
