nxtrim: optimized trimming of illumina mate pair reads motivation: mate pair protocols add to the utility of paired-end sequencing by boosting the gen-omic distance spanned by each pair of reads, potentially allowing larger repeats to be bridged and resolved. the illumina nextera mate pair (nmp) protocol uses a circularization-based strategy that leaves behind 38-bp adapter sequences, which must be computationally removed from the data. while adapter trimming is a well-studied area of bioinformatics, existing tools do not fully exploit the particular properties of nmp data and discard more data than is necessary. results: we present nxtrim, a tool that strives to discard as little sequence as possible from nmp reads. nxtrim makes full use of the sequence on both sides of the adapter site to build virtual libraries of mate pairs, paired-end reads and single-ended reads. for bacterial data, we show that aggregating these datasets allows a single nmp library to yield an assembly whose quality compares favourably to that obtained from regular paired-end reads. availability and implementation: the source code is available at https://github.com/sequencing/ nxtrima common design for dna sequencing experiments is to sequence from both the 5 0 and 3 0 ends of the templates in a library to obtain paired-end reads for which the genomic distance between the two halves of each pair is approximately known, information which is useful for de novo assembly, alignment and variant calling. mate pair libraries add further value by increasing the effective genomic distance (egd) between the two reads. the nextera mate pair (nmp) protocol is typical: a library of longer dna molecules is circularized and then fragmented to a size suitable for sequencing, the ends of each circle being joined by an adapter sequence tag that is biotinylated to allow enrichment for only those templates that span the join. read pairs from these templates have an egd that is determined by the length of the molecule that was circularised, thus yielding longer-range scaffolding information than can be deduced from a standard paired-end read library. before further processing, the known adapter sequence must be removed in silico to leave only genomic sequence behind. adapter trimming is a generic task in bioinformatics for which a plethora of tools exist (comprehensively surveyed by), including some, which are specialized to the particular needs of mate pairs . however, to our knowledge, all of them work by trimming the adapter and everything to the right of it (i.e. the 3 0 side), retaining only the portion of the read that lies to the left of the adapter (its 5 0 side). here we present a tool nxtrim which demonstrates that the 3 0-ward portion of the read constitutes valuable real estate that can be retained to improve coverage and de novo assembly quality.more specifically, the sequence to the 3 0 side of the adapter, together with the other half of the read pair, can be reinterpreted as a standard paired-end read. depending on where the adapter lies in the read, we reinterpret the whole read pair as a single read plus either a mate pair or a paired-end read, choosing between the latter two options so as to maximize the number of bases that are paired. nxtrim converts raw nmp reads into four virtual libraries: @bullet mp: a set of known mate pairs having an outward-facing relative orientation and an egd whose distribution mirrors the size distribution of the circularised dna. @bullet unknown: a set of read pairs for which the adapter could not be found within either read. most likely the adapter will lie in the unsequenced portion of the template, although we note (supplementary) some contamination with paired-end reads. @bullet pe: a set of paired-end reads, having an inward-facing relative orientation and an egd whose distribution mirrors the size distribution of the sequenced templates. @bullet se: a set of single reads. trimming tools following a 5 0-only strategy would produce output similar to the mp and unknown libraries combined. however, the versatile velvet de novo assembler can accept all four of these libraries as input to a single assembly and is able to treat the mp and unknown libraries differently in anticipation of a proportion of non-mate paired reads in the latter.  
