sequence analysis oases: robust de novo rna-seq assembly across the dynamic range of expression levels motivation: high-throughput sequencing has made the analysis of new model organisms more affordable. although assembling a new genome can still be costly and difficult, it is possible to use rna-seq to sequence mrna. in the absence of a known genome, it is necessary to assemble these sequences de novo, taking into account possible alternative isoforms and the dynamic range of expression values. results: we present a software package named oases designed to heuristically assemble rna-seq reads in the absence of a reference genome, across a broad spectrum of expression values and in presence of alternative isoforms. it achieves this by using an array of hash lengths, a dynamic filtering of noise, a robust resolution of alternative splicing events and the efficient merging of multiple assemblies. it was tested on human and mouse rna-seq data and is shown to improve significantly on the transabyss and trinity de novo transcriptome assemblers.next-generation sequencing of expressed mrnas (rna-seq) is gradually transforming the field of transcriptomics . the first attempts to discover expressed gene isoforms relied on mapping the rna-seq reads onto the exons and exonexon junctions of a known annotation . consequently, reference-based ab initio methods have been developed to assemble a transcriptome from rna-seq data using read alignments alone, inferring the underlying annotation . unfortunately, the use of a reference genome is not always possible. despite the drop in the cost of sequencing reagents, the complete study of a genome, from sampling to finishing the assembly is still costly and difficult. sometimes, the model being studied is sufficiently different from the reference because it comes from a different strain or line such that the mappings are not altogether reliable. for these cases, de novo genome assemblers have been employed to create transcript assemblies, or transfrags, from the rna-seq reads in the absence of a reference genome . however, these short read genomic assemblers, based mainly on de bruijn graph genomic assemblers , make implicit assumptions regarding the evenness of the coverage and the colinearity of the sequence. indeed, the coverage depth fluctuates significantly between transcripts, isoforms and regions of the transcript, therefore it cannot be used to determine the uniqueness of regions or to isolate erroneous sequence. in addition, these tools are geared to produce long linear contigs from the given sequence, not to detect the overlapping sequences presented by isoforms of a single gene. this affects a number of steps, including error correction, repeat detection and read pair usage. these methods are therefore not necessarily suited to process transcriptome data which does not conform to either of these assumptions. more recently, transcriptome assembly pipelines were developed to post-process the output of de novo genome assemblers: velvet and abyss . the common idea shared by these pipelines is to run an assembler at different k-mer lengths and to merge these assemblies into one. the rationale behind this approach is to merge more sensitive (lower values of k) and more specific assemblies (higher values of k). the pipeline presented by, transabyss, also handles alternative splicing variants. it detects them by searching for connected groups of contigs such that they are connected in a characteristic bubble and one of the contigs has a length of exactly (2k2). these bubbles are first removed, then added to the final assemblies, to reconstruct alternate variants. a variety of algorithmic researchers have used splicing graphs to represent alternative splicing which have a direct relationship to de bruijn graphs, as pointed out bywe have shown that merging different single k assemblies is beneficial, in concordance with previous work (surget). oases employs dynamic cutoffs, where possible, to allow for a robust reconstruction with different k-values. however, detailed parameter optimization for oases and trans-abyss may lead to further improvements. overall, the de novo methods produced large numbers of misassemblies. given the dynamic ranges involved, the exact parameter settings of these programs define a trade-off between sensitivity and accuracy. in these experiments, oases tends to be more sensitive, trinity more accurate. the correlation of small k-mer assemblies and misassembly rates suggests that homologies between genes are the main source of errors. as reads get longer, and coverage depths greater, sensitivity will only increase and users will probably avoid the shorter k-mer lengths for greater accuracy. short k-mers will only be necessary to retrieve the very rare transcripts. an independent but significant factor to these assemblies is read preprocessing, as read error removal has already been shown to have a significant impact in the context of de novo genome assembly . interestingly, the comparison of reconstructed transcripts for the three de novo methods inreveals that each method outperforms the others on a separate set of transcripts. these differences in performance are probably due to the different strategies employed to remove errors. a more aggressive method, which discards more data, would presumably end up with many gaps on low expression data, whereas a more lenient algorithm would leave too many ambiguities at high coverage. in particular, it appears that the performance of all the assemblers sometimes drops at very high coverage depths. this is probably linked to increased noise. indeed, this drop is especially marked for transabyss, which, to our knowledge, is the only of the three de novo assemblers not to integrate dynamic filters which adapt with coverage depth. intriguingly, transabyss outperformed trinity in our experiments, contrary to the observation of. this could not be due to the parameterization of trinity, which cannot be parameterized apart from the insert length. instead, the larger k range used for transabyss and the lower sequencing depth in our analyzed data sets may explain this discrepancy, as transabyss was shown to perform especially well for low to medium expressed genes. similarly, our experiments on mouse data show a bigger gap between cufflinks and the de novo assemblers than observed by. in their work, the comparison was focused on the set of oracle transcripts, which show sufficient coverage of exact k-mers in the reads. however, no such restriction was applied here and cufflinks surpasses the de novo methods for low to medium expression ranges, where coverage is sparse. in this study, we did not analyze strand-specific rna-seq datasets. however, as these datasets become more available oases already supports this data. during the hashing phase, reverse complement sequences can be stored separately instead of being joined as the two strands of the same sequence.oases provides users with a robust pipeline to assemble unmapped rna-seq reads into full length transcripts. oases was designed to deal with the conditions of rna-seq, namely uneven coverage and alternative splicing events. our results show how crucial it is to explore and understand the relevant conditions. alternative splicing can significantly confound  
