sequence analysis odoractor: a web server for deciphering olfactory coding odoractor is an open access web server aimed at providing a platform for identifying odorant receptors (ors) for small molecules and for browsing existing or-ligand pairs. it enables the prediction of ors from the molecular structures of arbitrary chemicals by integrating two individual functionalities: odorant verification and or recognition. the prediction of the ors for several odorants was experimentally validated in the study. in addition, odoractor features a comprehensive repertoire of olfactory information that has been manually curated from literature. therefore, odoractor may provide an effective way to decipher olfactory coding and could be a useful server tool for both basic olfaction research in academia and for odorant discovery in industry. availability: freely available atthe detection of volatile odorants is mediated by odorant receptors (ors) in the olfactory sensory neurons of the nose . mammalian ors comprise the largest subfamily of g protein-coupled receptors on the cell-surface membranes of these neurons. to understand how the plethora of ligands in the environment are detected and discriminated at the molecular level, it is essential to match ors with their cognant odorant molecules. previous studies attempted to compile pertinent information of ors into a database format. the most comprehensive or database to date is the olfactory receptor database (ordb), which includes sequence, expression and orthology information for ors in 50 species . the human olfactory data explorer (horde), which is also accessible through ordb, is specially formulated for human ors to include practical genomic information . in addition to the sequence and expression information, many studies have provided functional profiles of ors using a diverse array of techniques. recently, large-scale matching of ors to ligands was made possible though the establishment of to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors and the eleventh author should be regarded as joint first authors. a number of heterologous expression systems. with an increasing number of deorphaned mammalian ors, it became imperative to integrate these data into an all-inclusive database. however, to our knowledge, there is yet no such chemical biology database detailing or-ligand pairs in mammals. while extracting or-ligand pairs from literature to a database may provide accessibility, the power to infer novel candidate receptors for a given ligand would ultimately fuel further research in the field. several studies used computational models to predict olfactory responses based on existing ones. for example, khan et al. employed principle component analysis (pca) for the reduction of the dimensionality of percept and of physicochemical descriptors to explain the pleasantness of novel molecules by their properties . the same group also demonstrated that a multidimensional metric may be a better predictor of differences in olfactory neuronal activities . recently, using an or heterologous expression system that supports efficient or functional activation upon ligand stimulation, we robustly deorphaned 62 human and mouse ors and used the data to develop a model for predicting odorant-receptor activation . in this study, we present for the first time a web server for predicting the ors for small-molecule compounds, made possible by the permutation of two individual models aimed at defining an odorant and then predicting its candidate ors. in benchmark studies, the model for odorant determination shows a high accuracy of 95 on the test data and the model for receptor recognition has improved performance by 20 in comparison with the previous method . more importantly, the prediction of the ors for several odorants using odoractor was experimentally validated in the study. thus, the dual prediction capability and the user-friendly interface of this web server can be readily applied to experiments involving mammalian ors to serve as a starting point for identifying the respective receptors for chemicals of interest by allowing a more informed approach in selecting odorants and receptors.we have developed the odoractor web server that functions as a platform for the advanced identification of chemical odorants and their cognate receptors in combination with an olfactory repository covering annotated odorants, receptors and their interactions. to the best of our knowledge, this web server is the first of its kind and will be of considerable value to scientists interested in olfaction. we have demonstrated that odoractor is capable of identifying novel odorants and their receptors. for example, we predicted and subsequently validated additional ligands for mor271-1 and mor272-1, which were previously matched to ligands of diverse structures. the potencies of these newly identified ligands, as assessed by their respective ec 50 values, fall within the same previously described range for each of the receptors. in addition, using odoractor, we were able to successfully deorphan two mouse ors, mor244-3 and olfr42, matching them to 3 and 1 ligands, respectively. finally, a prominent strength of this web service is its ongoing integration of up-to-date information of both odorant and its receptors from literature for improving its prediction power. the odoractor server is available at http://mdl.shsmu.edu.cn/odoractor.  
