oefinder: a user interface to identify and visualize ordering effects in single-cell rna-seq data a recent article identified an artifact in multiple single-cell rna-seq (scrna-seq) data-sets generated by the fluidigm c1 platform. specifically, leng et al. showed significantly increased gene expression in cells captured from sites with small or large plate output ids. we refer to this artifact as an ordering effect (oe). including oe genes in downstream analyses could lead to biased results. to address this problem, we developed a statistical method and software called oefinder to identify a sorted list of oe genes. oefinder is available as an r package along with user-friendly graphical interface implementations which allows users to check for potential artifacts in scrna-seq data generated by the fluidigm c1 platform. availability and implementation: oefinder is freely available at https://github.com/lengning/ oefindersingle-cell rna-seq (scrna-seq) has led to important findings in many fields and is becoming increasingly popular in studies of transcriptome-wide expression . to facilitate scrna-seq, the majority of studies utilize the fluidigm c1 platform for cell capture, reverse transcription and cdna amplification, as this platform allows for rapid and reliable isolation and processing of individual cells. in spite of the advantages,identified an artifact in multiple datasets generated by c1 and confirmed that the artifact was present in the cdna processed by the c1 machine. in particular, in these datasets, there are genes showing higher expression in cells captured in specific capture sites. these capture sites are the ones with small or large plate output ids. we refer to this artifact as an ordering effect (oe), which has been shown to be independent of organism and laboratory . as detailed in, accurate identification of oe genes is important to ensure unbiased downstream analyses.used an anova-based approach to detect oe genes. the anova-based approach performs well in many cases, but has reduced power when few cells are available. (note that in empirical data, the cells can be missed owing to the random effects of capture failurean empty capture site, or doubletscapturing more than one cells in one capture site.) to improve power for identifying oe genes, we developed an approach, oefinder, based on orthogonal polynomial regression. results show that oefinder is less sensitive to sample size and outperforms the anova-based approach when few cells are available. oefinder is implemented in r, a free and open source language, with a vignette that provides working examples. the graphical user interface (gui) implementations of oefinder allow users with little v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.we developed an r package oefinder which can robustly detect oe genes in scrna data generated by the fluidigm c1 platform. oefinder provides user-friendly graphical interface implementations that facilitate use by investigators.  
