offtargetfinder: a web tool for species-specific rnai design motivation: rna interference (rnai) technology is being developed as a weapon for pest insect control. to maximize the specificity that such an approach affords we have developed a bioinfor-matic web tool that searches the ever-growing arthropod transcriptome databases so that pest-specific rnai sequences can be identified. this will help technology developers finesse the design of rnai sequences and suggests which non-target species should be assessed in the risk assessment process. availability and implementation: http://rnai.specifly.org.rna interference (rnai) is a powerful reverse-genetics tool routinely used to reduce or eliminate gene activity within an organism. rnai is most commonly applied in functional genomics screens of laboratory model organisms and cell lines . rnai technology is also being developed for so called environmental rnai where it can be applied to free-living organisms such as pest insects . the key attribute of rnai for all these applications is its specificity, which is determined by sequence identity between the rnai molecule and the target gene. however the nature of specificity-requirements differs between applications. in reverse genetic screens of model organisms a premium is placed on targeting the specified target gene and no other offtarget genes. there are many web-based tools to help with the design of such rnai molecules (; http://www.flyrnai.org/snap dragon). however for environmental applications species-specificity is just as important as gene-specificity. the application of rnai to pest control is an attractive alternative to traditional control chemicals because it has the potential to only target pest species. among the pests for which this technology is being developed are beetles, moths, locusts and various phloem feeders including aphids . a challenge of such an approach is in the delivery of rnai-inducing molecules to pest organisms. this might be achieved by expressing dsrna in transgenic crop plants that are hosts for the pests being targeted , or by using sprays containing either naked dsrna molecules or dsrna molecules packaged within microorganisms . the former approach has been taken by monsanto, which has developed transgenic crop plants that produce dsrna against the western corn rootworm (diabrotica virgifera virgifera).showed that ingestion of a 240 nucleotide rnai sequence directed to the rootworm snf7 gene is lethal. experiments surveying ten insect families found that only closely related beetles, those sharing at least three 21-mers with the dsrna sequence, were affected by consuming the snf7 dsrna molecule . this not only demonstrates the potential specificity of the technology but also illustrates the fact that only a small number of 21mers (sirnas) may elicit a response.given the likelihood that rnai-based technologies may be entering our agricultural landscapes in the near future it is critically important to establish the species-specificity of such rnai-inducing molecules. we have developed a bioinformatic tool that searches transcriptomic databases that will (i) assist rnai-technology developers in maximizing the pest specificity of rnai molecules and (ii) provide information for regulatory authorities and the public on the relative environmental risks that these molecules have on non-target organisms. this web-based tool is called offtargetfinder and the various outputs it provides, enables users to refine the regions within gene of interest, so as to eliminate potential off-target effects in other arthropod species. it can also be used to identify which species should be tested experimentally in the ecological risk assessment process .  
