sequence analysis a new approach for detecting riboswitches in dna sequences motivation: riboswitches are short sequences of messenger rna that can change their structural conformation to regulate the expression of adjacent genes. computational prediction of putative ribos-witches can provide direction to molecular biologists studying riboswitch-mediated gene expression. results: the denison riboswitch detector (drd) is a new computational tool with a web interface that can quickly identify putative ribos-witches in dna sequences on the scale of bacterial genomes. riboswitch descriptions are easily modifiable and new ones are easily created. the underlying algorithm converts the problem to a heaviest path problem on a multipartite graph, which is then solved using efficient dynamic programming. we show that drd can achieve $8899 sensitivity and 499.99 specificity on 13 riboswitch families.the regulation of gene expression is a critical process that dictates the ability of cells to function properly, to establish cellular identity, and to respond to changes in environmental conditions. gene regulation is manifested in a variety of ways, ranging from the action of transcriptional activators and repressors through cis-acting regulatory binding sites, dna accessibility via chromatin structure, and localization of dna within the cellular/ nuclear confines. in addition to these mechanisms, rna has surfaced as a player in gene regulation . specific forms of rna, such as micrornas, small interfering rnas and many others, have been identified and characterized as important components of gene regulation. one specific manner by which rna molecules serve as regulators of gene expression is in the form of riboswitches. riboswitches are short sequences ($50250 nt in length) located in the non-coding portions of specific messenger rnas (mrnas) that regulate the expression of the coding sequences contained within the mrna . they function via their ability to fold into distinct secondary structures that influence the ability of the mrna to be transcribed, processed or translated. riboswitches consist of two specific components: an aptamer region that binds to a specific organic molecule, often some type of metabolite; and an expression platform that produces a change in structural conformation as a result of binding to the aptamer . the aptamer region is generally a highly conserved sequence, capable of binding to a number of organic molecules with high specificity . binding to the aptamer triggers changes in the intramolecular base pairing within the expression platform, leading to changes in secondary and tertiary structure of the rna. the change in conformation in turn influences the ability of the mrna to be expressed in a variety of different ways, depending on the specific riboswitch. the activation of some riboswitches results in premature termination of transcription, ending synthesis of the mrna before the coding region. others act by directly blocking translation of the mrna by restricting access to the ribosomal binding site . in eukaryotes, riboswitch folding may also influence expression via regulation of mrna splicing. there are currently about 20 known families of riboswitches that bind to a variety of nucleobases, amino acids, metal ions and other organic compounds . many of the more extensively studied riboswitches serve as part of a feedback regulatory system for genes that participate in cellular metabolism . the metabolites that bind to the aptamer serve as indicators of the relative activity of specific metabolic pathways, and upon binding, influence expression of genes that participate in the pathway. for example, certain genes involved in the synthesis of vitamin b 1 (thiamin) are regulated by a riboswitch that binds thiamin pyrophosphate (tpp), the biologically active form of thiamin. tpp binds to a conserved rna sequence known as a thi-box, which represses transcription of genes possessing this sequence in the 5 0 untranslated region. the thi-box is a particularly intriguing example of a riboswitch, as it is found in a wide range of bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes and functions in a variety of contexts. the tpp riboswitch is the only known eukaryotic riboswitch identified to date . given the importance of riboswitches in gene regulation in the context of whole-genome regulation, methods to identify such sequences are needed. a variety of efforts have been previously to whom correspondence should be addressed. undertaken to develop bioinformatics tools to predict the presence of riboswitches in rna sequences . most programs that have been developed operate on the principle of sequence alignment to identify conserved sequences in previously identified riboswitches, coupled with rna structural folding algorithms. programs that are currently available are generally limited to the identification of a specific subset of known riboswitch types, and are only able to search modest sized sequence inputs. to date, few programs have been developed to take advantage of the abundance of completed full genome sequences. to address the need for riboswitch prediction on the wholegenome scale, we have developed a new computational tool with a web interface that can identify putative riboswitches in dna sequences, called the denison riboswitch detector (drd). drd can quickly (typically 51 min) process complete bacterial genomes and achieve $90 sensitivity and almost 100 specificity. drds description of a riboswitch is simple and easily modifiable, based on the highly conserved motifs found in all known riboswitches. to identify an optimal sequence of short motifs, drd transforms the search into a path-finding problem on a directed multipartite graph, which is then solved by an efficient dynamic programming algorithm. drd can be accessed at http://drd.denison.edu. researchers interested in using the program as a stand-alone tool may also contact the first author.we tested drd on 13 riboswitch families, using definition files derived from multiple sequence alignments of the families rfamdesignated seed sequences. these definition files may be viewed in supplementary table s1 or in the web interface by clicking on the riboswitch name. for each riboswitch, we performed two types of tests. first, to obtain robust sensitivity results for each riboswitch family, we tested drd on all known riboswitchsequences predicted for each family in the rfam database at http://rfam.xfam.org. the sensitivity, or true-positive rate (tpr), is tp/(tp+fn), where tp is the number of true-positive findings, and fn is the number of false-negative findings. second, to measure the corresponding false-positive rate (fpr) for each family in genome-scale sequences, we randomly selected a small number of rfam-predicted riboswitch sequences and tested drd on the set of genbank sequence records in which they are contained. the false-positive rate is 1-specificity; specificity is defined to be tn/(tn + fp), where tn is the number of true-negative findings, and fp is the number of false-positive findings. we discuss each of these tests in detail below.  
