genetics and population analysis omegaplus: a scalable tool for rapid detection of selective sweeps in whole-genome datasets recent advances in sequencing technologies have led to the rapid accumulation of molecular sequence data. analyzing whole-genome data (as obtained from next-generation sequencers) from intra-species samples allows to detect signatures of positive selection along the genome and therefore identify potentially advantageous genes in the course of the evolution of a population. we introduce omegaplus, an open-source tool for rapid detection of selective sweeps in whole-genome data based on linkage disequilibrium. the tool is up to two orders of magnitude faster than existing programs for this purpose and also exhibits up to two orders of magnitude smaller memory requirements. availability: omegaplus is available under gnu gpl at http://www. exelixis-lab.org/software.html.statistical tests that rely on selective sweep theory (maynard) can localize targets of recent and strong positive selection by analyzing single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) patterns in intra-species multiple sequence alignments. nextgeneration sequencing technologies allow for the rapid and cheap extraction of data to assess whole-genome variation in single-species populations. however, applying such statistical tests to wholegenome data is challenging because of increased execution times and memory requirements. several studies in the last decade have focused on detecting positive selection in genomes from natural populations of individuals. kim anddeveloped a composite maximum likelihood (ml) framework to detect selective sweeps using the empirical mutation frequencies of polymorphic sites (site frequency spectrum). this approach was later adapted byfor populations that have experienced past demographic changes. kim andproposed the statistic to accurately localize selective sweeps and developed a ml framework that uses linkage-disequilibrium (ld) information. in this work, we introduce omegaplus, a high-performance implementation of the statistic. to the best of our knowledge, to whom correspondence should be addressed.omegaplus represents the first scalable statistic implementation that can be applied to whole-genome data. previous implementations were not suitable for whole-genome analyses: the implementation byis only suitable for analyses of sub-genomic regions, whereas the implementation byhas excessive memory requirements even for moderate datasets.we presented omegaplus to accurately identify selective sweeps in whole-genome data using the statistic. we intend to further improve the memory requirements as well as to support additional file formats and methods to calculate ld. we also plan to set up a web-server. user support is provided via the omegaplus google group http://groups.google.com/group/omegaplus.  
