genome analysis oncodriveclust: exploiting the positional clustering of somatic mutations to identify cancer genes motivation: gain-of-function mutations often cluster in specific protein regions, a signal that those mutations provide an adaptive advantage to cancer cells and consequently are positively selected during clonal evolution of tumours. we sought to determine the overall extent of this feature in cancer and the possibility to use this feature to identify drivers. results: we have developed oncodriveclust, a method to identify genes with a significant bias towards mutation clustering within the protein sequence. this method constructs the background model by assessing coding-silent mutations, which are assumed not to be under positive selection and thus may reflect the baseline tendency of som-atic mutations to be clustered. oncodriveclust analysis of the catalogue of somatic mutations in cancer retrieved a list of genes enriched by the cancer gene census, prioritizing those with dominant phenotypes but also highlighting some recessive cancer genes, which showed wider but still delimited mutation clusters. assessment of datasets from the cancer genome atlas demonstrated that oncodriveclust selected cancer genes that were nevertheless missed by methods based on frequency and functional impact criteria. this stressed the benefit of combining approaches based on complementary principles to identify driver mutations. we propose oncodriveclust as an effective tool for that purpose.one of the current challenges of oncogenomics is to distinguish the genomic alterations that are involved in tumourigenesis (i.e. drivers), from those that give no advantage to cancer cells, but occur stochastically as a by-product of cancer development, (i.e. passengers). in line with this distinction, driver genes (i.e. those bearing driver alterations) confer selective advantage to tumour development and can be identified by detecting signals of positive selection across a cohort of tumours . one of the most intuitive approachesand the most profusely used at presentto detect positive selection is based on frequency. briefly, it consists in identifying genes more frequently mutated than the background mutation rate . we recently described a second complementary approach, oncodrivefm (gonzalez), to identify genes under positive selection in tumour development by assessing their bias towards the accumulation of mutations with high functional impact (fmbias) across a cohort of tumour samples. here we propose a third alternative and complementary approach aimed at detecting genes that bear mutations significantly clustered in specific regions of the amino acid sequence. gainof-function mutations in cancer genes predominantly occur at specific protein residues or active domains; for example, most kras mutations are found in residues 12 and 13 of the protein , and mutations in pik3ca are predominantly found in the kinase and helical domains of the pik3ca subunit . however, the extent of this phenomenon in cancer genes and how it can be used to nominate drivers, not just gain-of-function cancer genes, remains to be clarified. the clustering of mutations in the amino acid sequence of proteinsmutations clustering, for clarityhas already been suggested as a marker of positive selection , and some approaches have been described to measure it in cancer . however, the methods described in previous reports assume that mutation probability is homogeneous across the gene sequence, which is likely an oversimplification that introduces a bias in the detection of meaningful events. to solve this problem, we have developed oncodriveclust, a novel method that measures the bias of genes towards large mutation clustering with respect to a background model composed of coding-silent mutations, which are in principle under no selective pressure and thus may reflect the baseline clustering of somatic mutations. we have applied oncodriveclust to the set of mutations reported in the catalogue of somatic mutations in cancer (cosmic) , with the objective of assessing its performance to select known cancer drivers, i.e. those found in the cancer gene census (cgc) , and to determine the extent of the mutations clustering phenomenon among known driver genes, both those described as oncogenes and to whom correspondence should be addressed. tumour suppressors. we have also applied oncodriveclust to several available large datasets of cancer somatic mutations from the cancer genome atlas (tcga) initiative , and compared these results with other methods to identify driver candidates, namely oncodrivefm (gonzalez-perez and) and mutsig . because all three approaches measure complementary and independent criteria aimed to discover positive selection (i.e. mutation clustering, fmbias and mutation frequency), and each of them likely detects important events, we conclude that the optimal solution is to combine them to retrieve the most reliable and comprehensive list of cancer drivers from datasets of somatic mutations of diverse tumour types.the elucidation of cancer drivers relies on identifying the marks of positive selection that occur during the clonal evolution of tumours. the trend shown by protein-affecting mutations to accumulate predominantly in certain gene regions is a fingerprint that may denote events targeted by the tumourigenesis. however, it is now apparent that the probability of occurrence of somatic mutations is affected by several factors and varies across the genomic sequence . this should be taken into account when identifying mutation clusters because the assumption of a uniform mutation distribution as the null model may overestimate the significance of observed clusters. however, the factors determining the occurrence of mutational hotspots are not fully understood, and their inference is not straightforward by mining the data under analysis to obtain a background model per gene and sample. instead, we propose to construct the background model using the degree of clustering of synonymous mutations, which are assumed not to be under positive selection and may thus reflect the baseline mutationclustering of the tumour. this assumption also probably comprises a simplification because some coding-silent mutations could in principle alter processes such as chromatin remodeling or mrna processing. nevertheless, apart from this, they are not in general functionally involved in tumourigenesis. moreover, and owing to the low-recurrence of synonymous mutations, the background model cannot establish constraints for particular genomic regions. therefore, the method presents several caveats, which have to be taken into account. however, although limited, this null model shall in principle specifically support the identification of genes whose mutations are grouped above the background. as a matter of fact, this approach was proven successful in prioritizing genes involved in the disease because oncodriveclust retrieved a reduced list of genes enriched for cancer drivers in all the datasets analysed. in general, the clustering analysis better detected drivers known to exhibit a dominant phenotype because mutations in these genes occur at particular sites that lead to the favoured gain-of-function. however, recessive genes were also highlighted over the background model because their mutations occur in larger but still delimited regions leading to loss-of-function. the identification of drivers can profit from the combination of methods based on different theoretical principles, in particular if they use complementary criteria. in this regard, oncodriveclust complements oncodrivefm because it better captures the behaviour of gain-of-function cancer genes, whereas oncodrivefm is better at identifying tumour suppressor genes, which bear loss-of-function mutations that usually receive higher functional impact scores. by comparison, mutations conferring gainof-function are more prone to produce lower scores of functional impact. for instance, mutations that change residue 1047 of pik3ca are known to be oncogenic but are underestimated by functional impact metrics because they rely largely on conservation criteria and this particular residue is highly variable across species. therefore, oncodrivefm overlooks this gene in the brca dataset because most pik3ca mutations occur in that specific position. nevertheless, this scenario in which gene mutations predominantly occur at certain protein positions is well highlighted by the oncodriveclust analysis, illustrating how the bias of a method is captured by using complementary criteria. at present, the most widely used approach to identify driver genes consists in detecting those that are mutated more frequently than expected by chance. therefore, we compared the oncodriveclust results obtained in the tgca datasets with those obtained by mutsig , a well-established method to detect significantly mutated genes across cohorts of tumour samples. to avoid further interpretation, we limited the comparison with already well described drivers, i.e. genes contained in the cgc. as a result, we demonstrated that oncodriveclust selected several cancer drivers that were missed not only by oncodrivefm but also by the recurrence analysis. of note, this suggests that oncodriveclust could identify novel driver candidates (i.e. not included in the cgc) that are nevertheless overlooked by other methods and emphasizes the benefit of using a combination of methods to elucidate driver genes that balances the strengths and weaknesses of each approach. this would allow the retrieval of a more comprehensive list of putative drivers because each may exhibit different signals of positive selection. in addition, it could also help to estimate the reliability of the results because the false positives of a method are unlikely to be picked up by another one based on complementary criteria and therefore with its own sources of bias. one important advantage of oncodriveclust, and of oncodrivefm as well, is that the required input consists only on the list of tumour somatic mutations in the cohort. raw data, such as bam files are not required, which reduces the burden of download, storage and computational processing. this is a major issue because the amount of data generated by tumour genome re-sequencing studies continues to increase and the technical requirements of some methods could limit the analysis of large datasets. this is specially true for initiatives aimed at integrating data from different projects [e.g. intogen (. in summary, the elucidation of genes involved in cancer is a challenging task that requires the combined use of approaches based on different criteria. in this regard, we show that oncodrive clust complements well other existing methods and should be taken into account for the identification of cancer drivers.  
