databases and ontologies oncomirdb: a database for the experimentally verified oncogenic and tumor-suppressive micrornas micrornas (mirnas), a class of small regulatory rnas, play important roles in cancer initiation, progression and therapy. mirnas are found to regulate diverse cancer-related processes by targeting a large set of oncogenic and tumor-suppressive genes. to establish a high-confidence reference resource for studying the mirna-regulated target genes and cellular processes in cancer, we manually curated 2259 entries of cancer-related mirna regulations with direct experimental evidence from 9000 abstracts, covering more than 300 mirnas and 829 target genes across 25 cancer tissues. a web-based portal named oncomirdb, which provides both graphical and text-based interfaces, was developed for easily browsing and searching all the annotations. it should be a useful resource for both the computational analysis and experimental study on mirna regulatory networks and functions in cancer.micrornas (mirnas) are a class of 22-nt endogenous small regulatory rnas, which can repress the expressions and/or translations of hundreds of target genes by binding to the 3 0-utrs of target gene mrna transcripts .till now, there are more than 2500 human mirnas collected in the latest mirbase database release . more than half of the protein-coding genes are potentially regulated by one or multiple mirnas according to the genome-wide computational predictions and high-throughput experimental screens . extensive evidence shows that mirnas play important roles in nearly all essential cellular processes, such as cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, apoptosis and senescence. cancer, which is one of the leading causes of death worldwide, involves significant changes of chromatin structures and molecular regulatory networks. as their impacts on mrna stability and translation efficiency are extensive, mirnas are found to regulate different hallmarks of cancer by targeting a large set of oncogenic and tumor-suppressive genes. these mirnas are usually called onco-mirnas (oncomirs) (esquela-kerscher and slack, 2006;). to facilitate the study on mirna functions and regulatory networks in cancer, there is a great need to establish a reference database for annotating the oncomirs regulating different cellular processes and target genes in different types of cancers. there are a few existing databases aiming at annotating the cancerrelated mirnas, such as mircancer , phenomir , mir2disease , hmdd and somamir , but they mainly collect the differentially expressed mirnas or the mirna-associated genetic mutations in cancer without direct functional evidence (mir2disease and hmdd include some experimentally verified entries, but the number of entries is relatively small). according to the pubmed records as of march 2013, there are 9000 publications studying the cancer-related mirnas. this literature provides extensive information for the oncomir functions and target genes. we manually reviewed the abstracts and curated 2259 entries of experimentally verified oncomirs, which either regulate one or more cancer-related cellular processes or directly target at least one gene in cancer-related processes. the mirna expression patterns, their upstream regulators and the corresponding experimental conditions are also collected from the abstracts. then, we developed a web-based portal oncomirdb for storing and displaying all the curated data entries. with the graphical and text-based interfaces, users can easily browse and search all the entries for the oncomirs related to different cancer types, different regulated cellular processes or different target genes. oncomirdb should be a valuable resource for both the computational analysis and the experimental study of mirna functions and regulatory networks in cancer.  
