genome analysis oncosnp-seq: a statistical approach for the identification of somatic copy number alterations from next-generation sequencing of cancer genomes recent major cancer genome sequencing studies have used whole-genome sequencing to detect various types of genomic variation. however, a number of these studies have continued to rely on snp array information to provide additional results for copy number and loss-of-heterozygosity estimation and assessing tumour purity. oncosnp-seq is a statistical model-based approach for inferring copy number profiles directly from high-coverage whole genome sequencing data that is able to account for unknown tumour purity and ploidy.many cancers are characterized by complex structural rearrangements involving copy number alterations (cnas) and/or losses of heterozygosity (loh) events . genetic abnormalities in specific regions may be related to the aggressiveness of a cancer and be associated with clinical outcomes . oncosnp-seq is a statistical model-based approach for identifying cnas and loh events directly from next-generation sequencing data that builds on the oncosnp tool for snp array analysis . the statistical model used differs from previous methods such as bic-seq , control-freec and apolloh/hmmcopy by addressing three major issues in the analysis of cancer samples: (i) normal cell contamination, (ii) intra-tumour heterogeniety and (iii) polyploidy, within a fully integrated statistical framework for using both read depth and allele-specific information in highcoverage experiments. in the following, we describe the statistical model and its application to a publicly available normal-cancer cell line dataset, simulated mixtures and a heterogeneous cancer.oncosnp-seq is a tool for automatic detection of cnas and loh regions using high-coverage (60 and above) wholegenome sequencing data. high-coverage data allows allele-specific information to be utilized, and, in the case of tumour samples, oncosnp-seq uses this information to evaluate the level of contamination by normal cells as well as allowing for degrees of intra-tumour heterogeneity. the formal assessment of the accuracy of this latter capability will need to be ascertained using independent assays, e.g. fish, in future studies. for polyploid tumours, oncosnp-seq provides a probabilistic means of evaluating different ploidy configurations. the software is written in matlab, and the source codes are freely available for modification, re-engineering or incorporation into genomic analysis pipelines.. tumour purity estimation and copy number/loh discordance for simulated normal-cancer mixtures  
