systems biology ondex web: web-based visualization and exploration of heterogeneous biological networks ondex web is a new web-based implementation of the network visualization and exploration tools from the ondex data integration platform. new features such as context-sensitive menus and annotation tools provide users with intuitive ways to explore and manipulate the appearance of heterogeneous biological networks. ondex web is open source, written in java and can be easily embedded into web sites as an applet. ondex web supports loading data from a variety of network formats, such as xgmml, nwb, pajek and oxl. availability and implementation:the integrative approach to systems biology studies the interactions between molecular or cellular components to understand how a behavior or phenotype might emerge from the properties or structure of the interactions. this approach generally requires data from diverse sources to be integrated and analyzed together. it is common in systems biology to adopt network formalisms to represent, visualize and explore interaction information, and a number of web-based applications are available for the visualization of biological networks . a wellknown example is cytoscape web ; version 1 of which is implemented using flex/actionscript and a javascript api. cytoscape web can visualize small-to medium-sized networks, (i.e. a few hundred nodes and edges). the visual styles (e.g. color, size and opacity) of nodes and edges can be dynamically changed by the client. however, loading of data and customization of its appearance in cytoscape web require extensive javascript programming skills. we have previously developed the ondex software suite (www.ondex.org) to provide a general framework for the integration of heterogeneous biological data. we describe here a new implementation of the visualization software from the ondex suite that enables integrated networks and associated quantitative data to be presented in a web browser. this enables delivery of results from pre-integrated datasets to end-users, as featured in the qtlnetminer system (http:// ondex.rothamsted.ac.uk/qtlnetminer/), and overcomes the significant obstacle encountered by many biologists of installing and learning complex data integration software system. ondex web has been built as a java applet, reusing proven functions and plugins from the ondex desktop application. this results in a richer repertoire of functions for exploring and manipulating heterogeneous information networks than currently available in cytoscape web. ondex web provides new features not described before, including easy-to-use search functions for loaded data and across web services (e.g. chembl, uniprotkb). the network appearance can be changed using dedicated plugins, and another new feature is the extensive context-sensitive menus on nodes and edges . ondex web has direct support for loading data in common network formats such as cytoscapes xgmml , nwb (nwb, 2006), pajek . the ondex desktop application can be used to prepare datasets integrated from a large range of input formats (see http://ondex.org/formats.html) and exported in oxl format for use in ondex web. example data sets are available for download (http://ondex.org/doc.html).heterogeneous biological networks require good exploration and visualization tools. ondex web is free, open-source and can easily be embedded on web sites to visualize networks. it comes with a rich and intuitive set of functions to explore and manipulate biological networks. for an example application of ondex web, visit qtlnetminer (http://ondex.rothamsted.ac. uk/qtlnetminer/), where it is used to visualize evidence networks supporting candidate gene selections. funding: rothamsted research receives grant in aid from the biotechnology and biological sciences research council (bbsrc). bbsrc sabr award (bb/f006039/1) and tsb project (tp 5082-33372). conflict of interest: none declared.  
