data and text mining on safari to random jungle: a fast implementation of random forests for high-dimensional data motivation: genome-wide association (gwa) studies have proven to be a successful approach for helping unravel the genetic basis of complex genetic diseases. however, the identified associations are not well suited for disease prediction, and only a modest portion of the heritability can be explained for most diseases, such as type 2 diabetes or crohns disease. this may partly be due to the low power of standard statistical approaches to detect genegene and gene environment interactions when small marginal effects are present. a promising alternative is random forests, which have already been successfully applied in candidate gene analyses. important single nucleotide polymorphisms are detected by permutation importance measures. to this day, the application to gwa data was highly cumbersome with existing implementations because of the high computational burden. results: here, we present the new freely available software package random jungle (rj), which facilitates the rapid analysis of gwa data. the program yields valid results and computes up to 159 times faster than the fastest alternative implementation, while still maintaining all options of other programs. specifically, it offers the different permutation importance measures available. it includes new options such as the backward elimination method. we illustrate the application of rj to a gwa of crohns disease. the most important single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) validate recent findings in the literature and reveal potential interactions. availability: the rj software package is freely available atgenome-wide association (gwa) studies have become a standard approach for helping unravel the genetic basis of complex genetic diseases. the recent successes are tremendous, and a series of new loci have been identified using single marker analyses . unfortunately, only a small portion of the to whom correspondence should be addressed. heritability was explained by corresponding single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) for most diseases such as type 2 diabetes (6) or crohns disease (20) . furthermore, snps identified by gwa studies for various diseases make poor classifiers . for overcoming such drawbacks and recognizing the complexity of the underlying biology, further mechanisms such as genegene interaction need to be taken into account . however, the discovery of genegene interactions using gwa studies remains challenging with traditional statistical approaches . given genotype data at different loci, an exhaustive search of interactions between all loci is the obvious way of testing interactions. testing all two-locus interactions is computationally feasible although time demanding . however, an exhaustive search of higher order interactions is computationally impractical because the number of tests increases exponentially with the order of interaction . one approach to deal with such large numbers of snps is to first perform univariate tests on each snp, discard snps with high p-values and apply interaction methods, e.g. within logistic regressions, to snp subsets afterwards . unfortunately, such approaches may result in low power for snpsnp interactions with very small marginal effects. another concern is genetic heterogeneity, i.e. different subsets of genes affect the same disease, and traditional statistical methods show limitations when genetic heterogeneity is present . a promising alternative is random forests . rf was applied successfully to genetic data in various studies , and it is anticipated that rf will help to detect genegene interactions in genome-wide data . it has been shown that rf can substantially be more efficient than standard statistical methods in ranking the true disease-associated snps in order to detect snpsnp interaction . the method is able to detect snps with small effects and to deal with genetic heterogeneity because separate models are automatically fit to subsets of data defined by early splits in the tree . in addition, rf is able to handle snps that are associated in a non-linear fashion. the rf method is a specific data mining method. in data mining, in general, algorithms attempt to identify an unknown concept based on randomly chosen examples of the collected data. the aim is to find a prediction rule that correctly classifies new instances of thethe rf method was applied to genome-wide data using rj and assigned a score of importance to each snp. the resulting list of snps was investigated for potential interactions. the results of the real data analysis validate the findings of gwa studies such as nod2 and il23r. results give also evidence of new potential interactions between genes that are associated with crohns disease. specifically, the tnfsf10 was not found to be strongly associated with crohns disease by traditional statistical tests. in contrast, rj analysis detected that tnfsf10 potentially interacts with nod2, prgk1 and il23r. stat3 is considered to be a link between tnfsf10 and il23r, which was shown to be moderately associated with crohns disease. the tnfsf10 is involved in apoptosis of human colon cancer cells. tnfsf10 might possibly explain a part of the high risk of colorectal cancers in crohns disease patients. however, interpreting results and assessing biological plausibility is challenging. results may show false positives. thus, further investigation is needed to validate this specific causal relationship. furthermore, although rf has the ability to detect very small main effects, its power to identify interactions depends on the presence of main effects. thus, genegene interaction with no marginal effects might be left unrevealed when rf is applied. nevertheless, an impressive computational efficiency and memory management of rj allow for analyzing high-dimensional data in an acceptable amount of time. analyzing gwa data comprising thousands of observations and a million snps seem to be feasible with respect to time and memory consumption. the software computes up to 159 times faster than the fastest alternative implementation, and the program shows the same importance ranking with respect to the reference program. rj presents various features such as rf growing, prediction, parameter tuning or imputation. in summary, rj is a promising software package for applying rf method to high-dimensional data such as gwa data. the application of rf to gwa data may help to identify potential interacting snps that were not found by traditional statistical approaches.  
