on the calculation of signal transduction ability of signaling transduction pathways in intracellular communication: systematic approach motivation: the major function of signal transduction pathways in cells is to sense signals from the environment and process the information through signaling molecules in order to regulate the activity of transcription factors. on the molecular level, the information transmitted by a small number of signal molecules is amplified in the internal signaling pathway through enzyme catalysis, molecular modification and via the activation or inhibition of interactions. however, the dynamic system behavior of a signaling pathway can be complex and, despite knowledge of the pathway components and interactions, it is still a challenge to interpret the pathways behavior. therefore, a systematic method is proposed in this study to quantify the signal transduction ability. results: based on the non-linear signal transduction system, signal transduction ability can be investigated by solving a hamilton jacobi inequality (hji)-constrained optimization problem. to avoid difficulties associated with solving a complex hji-constrained optimization problem for signal transduction ability, the takagi sugeno fuzzy model is introduced to approximate the non-linear signal transduction system by interpolating several local linear systems so that the hji-constrained optimization problem can be replaced by a linear matrix inequality (lmi)-constrained optimization problem. the lmi problem can then be efficiently solved for measuring signal transduction ability. finally, the signal transduction ability of two important signal transduction pathways was measured by the proposed method and confirmed using experimental data, which is useful for biotechnological and therapeutic application and drug design. contact:signal transduction pathways are one of the fastest information processing networks. they enable cells to sense and transduce extracellular signals through inter-and intra-cellular communication. signal transduction pathways consist of interactions between signaling proteins, where different external changes to whom correspondence should be addressed. or events stimulate specific signaling pathways. typical external signal stimuli are hormones, pheromones, heat, cold, light, osmotic pressure and concentration change of substances such as, k + , ca 2+ or camp . metabolic processes, such as homeostasis , the growth and differentiation of tissues through endocrine signaling , the synthesis and secretion of proteins, such as in blood clotting and immune-responses and the composition of intracellular and extracellular fluids, such as in the processes of photoreception and olfaction, are all closely regulated by specific signaling pathways . hence the proper function of cellular signaling pathways is essential for life. on the molecular level, signal transduction involves the production or degradation of substances, molecular modification and the activation or inhibition of chemical reactions. many previous studies have focused on signaling molecules, cell-surface receptors and the second messengers of the signaling pathway. aside from molecular transfer, signaling pathways can also be viewed as the information processing and transferring systems of cells . many studies have investigated the properties of signaling pathways, such as amplification , specificity , adaption, ultrasensitivity , oscillation and synchronization. however, due to the complex behavior of signaling pathways, knowledge of the components of a pathway and their interactions is often not enough to interpret the dynamic system behavior of the pathway. to the best of our knowledge, the intension to express the signal transduction ability into mathematical formula appeared in 1982 . it focused on the sensitivity amplification, which is defined as the ratio of the percent change in the output response to the percent change in the input stimulus, i.e. the relative change of the system output respect to a specific input. then the mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk) signaling pathway in linear form is studied and signal amplitude is defined as the ratio of the total response to the signal duration, which depends on the input . next, a stochastic differential model of mapk signaling pathway is considered and the signal amplification is defined as signal gain, which exists at least one maximum with respect to the ratio of inputs to outputs (compared the signaling pathways in biological systems with the cascade mechanisms in electrical engineering systems and then also defined the maximal amplificationto demonstrate the procedure of our proposed measurement of the signal transduction ability, two signaling pathway examples are described using the simulation method.in order to measure the signal transduction ability in biological experiments, it is necessary to test a multitude of input signals and then compute the ratio of the output to the input signals. this process requires numerous experiments and is not a realistic method of obtaining data. therefore, a method that is independent of the measurement of output and input signals, which can be used to quantify the signal transduction ability based on the system dynamic model, is required. according to the concept of a system gain, we proposed a new method to measure the signal transduction ability of a signaling pathway, which is dependent only on the structure of the signaling pathway and the kinetic parameters of the components involved. thus, the signal transduction ability can be viewed as a quantity to characterize a signaling pathway. considering the important role of the mapk and the nf-b signaling pathways in a cell, an immediate and strong enough response to environmental changes or stresses is necessary. the simulation results describing a large system gain in concentration are unsurprising. here, we extend the concept of signal amplitude to the non-linear signaling pathway through a fuzzy modeling method, compared with the linear case . moreover, the most of previous studies considered the relationship between the output and the inputs on case-by-case basis . but from the system point of view, the transduction ability is a systematic characteristic of a signaling pathway, which should be invariant unless the system has been changed. the value can be referred to as the best ability of the signaling pathway to transduce input signals, that is, to amplify input signals. however, the simulated signal transduction ability might be not achieved easily without testing all possible inputs for the least upper bound ratio a in (4) (see supplementary). that is, infinite l 2-bounded inputsignals are required to measure the transduction ability of a signaling pathway, which could be an open question. the simulation results also show that the proposed measurement method can be applied in two different ways. a signaling pathway can be viewed as a composition of several sub-signaling pathways. the total signal transduction ability of a signaling pathway is equal to the product of the signal transduction abilities of each of the sub-signaling pathways. each sub-signaling pathway can be referred to as a basic element of the general signaling pathway. hence, if the signal transduction abilities of sub-signaling pathway are known, we can design a signaling pathway with the desired signal transduction ability. a similar concept is utilized in synthetic biology , which designate dna sequences as the bricks to construct an artificial function in a cell. it is possible, through the analysis of signal transduction ability, to analyze and calculate each subsignaling pathway so that a synthetic signal pathway can be engineered with the desired signal transduction ability. in this situation, greater biological transduction insights can be obtained from the linear system viewpoint. in the future, characterization of signal transduction systems by the proposed transduction ability measurement may be useful for biotechnological and therapeutic applications as well as the development of drug design.  
