databases and ontologies ontocat: an r package for ontology traversal and search motivation: there exist few simple and easily accessible methods to integrate ontologies programmatically in the r environment. we present ontocatan r package to access ontologies in widely used standard formats, stored locally in the filesystem or available online. the ontocat package supports a number of traversal and search functions on a single ontology, as well as searching for ontology terms across multiple ontologies and in major ontology repositories. availability: the package and sources are freely available in bioconductor starting from version 2.8:the r package ontocat was created to support basic operations on ontologies: traversal and search, uniform access to ontologies in owl and obo formats and to provide r access to major ontology repositories ols and bioportal. several hundreds of public ontologies and numerous private ontologies for describing biological data exist today. using ontologies in r is difficult due to the lack of uniform package support. at the same time numerous java-based ontology projects are available. ontocat takes advantage of a standard java library with the same name ontocat to implement its functionality. the ontocat package: @bullet gives unified, format-independent access to ontology terms and the ontology hierarchy represented in owl and obo formats;@bullet provides basic methods for ontology traversal, such as searching for terms, listing a specific terms relations, showing paths to the term from the root element of the ontology, showing flattened-tree representations of the ontology hierarchy; and @bullet supports working with groups of ontologies and with major public ontology repositories: searching for terms across to whom correspondence should be addressed. ontologies, listing available ontologies and loading ontologies for further analysis as necessary.no other package with similar functionality exists at the moment in the r environment. the integration of the above functionality into r allows combining and automating ontology-related tasks. different examples of ontology-related tasks that can be accomplished with the help of the ontocat package are given in the package documentation (http://www.ontocat.org/wiki/ontocatguide): gene enrichment test and grouping of results, search and re-annotation of free-text to ontology and operations with relationships. ontocat has been included into bioconductor, the main r open source project in bioinformatics. ontocat has been downloaded 347 times since its first release in december 2010. there is a large research community already using r to work with gene ontology (go). working with other ontologies is not as welldeveloped and ontocat helps to fill the gap.the ontocat r package consists of convenient methods for working with ontologies in the r environment. the package has been successfully used in a number of  
