genome analysis ontogenomic study of the relationship between number of gene splice variants and go categorization motivation: splice variation plays important roles in evolution and cancer. different splice variants of a gene may be characteristic of particular cellular processes, subcellular locations or organs. although several genomic projects have identified splice variants, there have been no large-scale computational studies of the relationship between number of splice variants and biological function. the gene ontology (go) and tools for leveraging go, such as gominer, now make such a study feasible. results: we partitioned genes into two groups: those with numbers of splice variants b and b (b = 1,...,10). then we used gominer to determine whether any go categories are enriched in genes with particular numbers of splice variants. since there was no a priori appropriate partition boundary, we studied those robust categories whose enrichment did not depend on the selection of a particular partition boundary. furthermore, because the distribution of splice variant number was a snapshot taken at a particular point in time, we confirmed that those observations were stable across successive builds of genbank. a small number of categories were found for genes in the lower partitions. a larger number of categories were found for genes in the higher partitions. those categories were largely associated with cell death and signal transduction. apoptotic genes tended to have a large repertoire of splice variants, and genes with splice variants exhibited a distinctive apoptotic island in clustered image maps (cims). availability: supplementary tables and figures are available at url http://discover.nci.nih.gov/og/supplementarymaterials.html. the safari browser appears to perform better than firefox for these particular items. contact: barry@discover.nci.nih.govalternative splicing generates enhanced diversity in the transcriptome relative to the genome, and various reports have suggested that the percentage of genes exhibiting alternative to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. splicing may be as high as 94 . in the present study, we found alternative splicing for 84 of those human genes that had hgnc symbols . numerous reviews describe alternative splicing in general , mechanisms of alternative splicing , and the roles played by alternative splicing in particular biological processes and diseases (;;). splice isoforms can have different degrees of activity or can perform radically different functions . splice variation plays important roles in cancer and in evolution . although several genomic studies have attempted to identify splice variants , we are not aware of any computational studies in which the global relationship between the number of splice variants and biological function of a gene has been analyzed. the gene ontology (go;) and tools like gominer and high-throughput gominer (htgm;) now make such studies feasible. using those resources, we attempted to determine whether any go categories were enriched in classes of genes with particular ranges of splice variant number. that is, we tested the null hypothesis that there is no correlation between the number of characterized splice variants and the go classification, starting with no a priori expectation that there would be even one such category. neither did we have any expectation as to whether any enriched categories would be related to one another nor whether they would reflect any particular biological process(es). in fact, enriched categories did appear. many of those categories were closely related to one another, and categories relevant to cancer were particularly prominent among them. specifically, we found a particularly strong global relationship for genes involved in apoptosis, in that genes related to apoptosis and signaling tended to have large repertoires of splice variants. a specialized form of clustered image map (cim) highlighted go categories withrelatively high numbers of splice variants in the form of distinctive apoptotic islands.  
