data and text mining ontology-and graph-based similarity assessment in biological networks a standard systems-based approach to biomarker and drug target discovery consists of placing putative biomarkers in the context of a network of biological interactions, followed by different guilt-by-association analyses. the latter is typically done based on network structural features. here, an alternative analysis approach in which the networks are analyzed on a semantic similarity space is reported. such information is extracted from ontology-based functional annotations. we present simtrek, a cytoscape plugin for ontology-based similarity assessment in biological networks.a standard systems-based approach to biomarker and drug target discovery consists of placing putative or known biomarkers in the context of a network of biological interactions, followed by different guilt-by-association analyses . putative biomarkers may be derived, for example, from standard differential expression analysis, including those from large-scale gene expression and proteomics experiments. networks may encode genegene, geneprotein or proteinprotein interactions. they are typically inferred from published interactions or from computational prediction models. guilt-by-association approaches include graph theoretic techniques, such as network clustering algorithms. thus, standard network-driven approaches tend to be based on the analysis of biological network structures. here, we report an alternative analysis approach in which the user-defined networks are mapped onto a semantic similarity space. in such a space, between-protein relationships are represented by estimates of ontology-based functional similarity. semantic similarity is computed by using statistical information encoded in functional databases annotated to the gene ontology (go). we and others have previously investigated semantic similarity assessment in the context of functional genomics and network-based biology . to whom correspondence should be addressed.page: 2644 26432644  
