openbis eln-lims: an open-source database for academic laboratories the open-source platform openbis (open biology information system) offers an electronic laboratory notebook and a laboratory information management system (eln-lims) solution suitable for the academic life science laboratories. openbis eln-lims allows researchers to efficiently document their work, to describe materials and methods and to collect raw and analyzed data. the system comes with a user-friendly web interface where data can be added, edited, browsed and searched. availability and implementation: the openbis software, a user guide and a demo instance are available at https://openbis-eln-lims.ethz.ch. the demo instance contains some data from our laboratory as an example to demonstrate the possibilities of the eln-lims (ottoz et al., 2014). for rapid local testing, a virtualbox image of the eln-lims is also available.scientific recording is an essential part of research, as progress in science depends among other factors on existing knowledge and reproducibility. recording is the process by which the scientific question, the choice of an experimental procedure, materials and methods, data analysis and interpretation of the results are gathered. traditionally, all these details were kept in paper notebooks. in todays academic life science laboratories, most raw data, analyzed data and scripts are stored electronically, while the experimental details are often recorded in paper notebooks. this makes linking and retrieving experimental details and results problematic. moreover, the large amount of data produced by todays readout machines adds a level of complexity as the devices the data are stored on might soon be outdated. databases represent a solution to store all the necessary information together because (i) they ensure long-lasting data storage by being independent of the operating environment; (ii) they are installed on a dedicated server, enabling long-term data storage and regular backups; (iii) they allow storage of large amounts of data; (iv) they are easily accessible via a local area network or the internet; (v) custom applications can be easily added. several commercial database solutions for elns are available, but they are not commonly adopted by academia. an internal evaluation among the research groups of the departments of biosystems science and engineering and biology of eth zurich found that the options affordable to academic labs had either unsuitable user interfaces (ui) or lack of features. the combination of an easy-to-use ui, flexible adaptation to a labs needs, support of an audit trail, physical support of the data server, support for managing large amounts of data and for integrating new measurement devices was only available at very high costs. on the other hand, the available open-source platforms lack many of the above features and, as they often originate from a v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.  
