systems biology opm: an r package for analysing omnilog Õ phenotype microarray data opm is an r package designed to analyse multidimensional omnilog phenotype microarray (pm) data. opm provides management , visualization and statistical analysis of pm data, including curve-parameter estimation and discretization, dedicated and customizable plots, metadata management, automated generation of textual and tabular reports, mapping of substrates to databases, batch conversion of files and export to phylogenetic software in the yaml markup language. availability: opm is distributed under the gpl through the comprehensive r archive network (http://cran.r-project.org/pack ageopm) along with a comprehensive manual and a user-friendly tutorial. further information may be found at http://www.dsmz.de/re search/microorganisms/projects/.high-throughput phenotypic testing is increasingly important for exploring the biology of bacteria, fungi, yeasts and animal cell lines, e.g. human cancer cells , and offers a great potential for testing gene function and improving genome annotation . the omnilog pm system monitors simultaneously, on a longitudinal time scale, the phenotypic reaction to up to 2000 environmental challenges spotted on sets of 96-well microtiter plates as respiration kinetics with an often sigmoidal shape. as we discussed previously, by using a combination of existing r packages, ad hoc code and even manual manipulations , there is an increasing demand to explore omnilog pm data not only qualitatively but also quantitatively, taking into account associated metadata on the organisms and experimental settings. as a result, we present here the broad and flexible design of the r (r development core) package opm, which allows users to analyse omnilog pm data within a wide frame of research tasks such as-omics approaches, systems biology, ecology and taxonomy.the unique strength of opm is the qualitative and quantitative analysis of raw kinetic omnilog pm data via direct visualization and the robust estimation of curve parameters and their confidence intervals. thereby, the user retains full control on the directions of data analyses according to his research interests. flexible ways to add and query metainformation enable the user to efficiently explore these data statistically, also across multiple groups. export to matrices and data frames allows for the exploitation of all functionality available in the r environment, whereas standardized and easily readable output formats ease the interaction with external software.. general workflow of opm and its interplay with r and third-party software  
