structural bioinformatics a new framework for computational protein design through cost function network optimization motivation: the main challenge for structure-based computational protein design (cpd) remains the combinatorial nature of the search space. even in its simplest fixed-backbone formulation, cpd encompasses a computationally difficult np-hard problem that prevents the exact exploration of complex systems defining large sequence-con-formation spaces. results: we present here a cpd framework, based on cost function network (cfn) solving, a recent exact combinatorial optimization technique , to efficiently handle highly complex combinatorial spaces encountered in various protein design problems. we show that the cfn-based approach is able to solve optimality a variety of complex designs that could often not be solved using a usual cpd-dedicated tool or state-of-the-art exact operations research tools. beyond the identification of the optimal solution, the global minimum-energy con-formation, the cfn-based method is also able to quickly enumerate large ensembles of suboptimal solutions of interest to rationally build experimental enzyme mutant libraries. availability: the combined pipeline used to generate energetic models (based on a patched version of the open source solver osprey 2.0), the conversion to cfn models (based on perl scripts) and cfn solving (based on the open source solver toulbar2) are all available atthe engineering of tailored proteins with desired properties holds great interest for applications ranging from medicine, biotechnology and synthetic biology to nanotechnologies . although, directed evolution techniques coupled with high-throughput automated procedures have met with some success, they do not provide structural design principles to guide the rational design of novel proteins.the development of generic and effective protein engineering methodologies, both experimental and computational, is thus of utmost interest to speedup the design of tailored proteins having the desired properties. structure-based computational protein design (cpd) approaches have demonstrated their potential to adequately capture fundamental aspects of molecular recognition and interactions, which have already enabled the successful (re)design of several enzymes for various purposes . despite these outstanding results, the efficiency, predictability and reliability of cpd methods have shown that they still need to mature. cpd is faced with several challenges. the first lies in the exponential size of the conformational and protein sequence space that has to be explored, which rapidly grows out of reach of computational approaches. another obstacle to overcome is the unsolved issue of accurate structure prediction for a given sequence. therefore, the design problem is usually approached as an inverse folding problem , to reduce the problem to the identification of an amino acid sequence that can fold into a target protein 3d-scaffold that matches the design objective. this paradigm typically assumes a fixed protein backbone and, for each type of amino acid considered at a given position, allows the side chains to move only among a set of discrete and lowenergy conformations, called rotamers . cpd is thus formulated as an optimization problem, which consists in choosing combinations of rotamers at designable specified positions such that the fold is stabilized and the desired property is achieved. to solve this problem, we need a computationally tractable energetic model to evaluate the energy of any combination of rotamers. we also require computational optimization techniques that can efficiently explore the sequence-conformation space to find the sequence-conformation model of global minimum energy (gmec: global minimum-energy conformation) or an ensemble of low-energy sequence-conformation models. indeed, several reasons can motivate the generation of multiple near-optimal solutions. first, the sequence-conformation model with the lowest predicted energy may not fold into the targeted protein scaffold owing to inaccuracies in the modeling of protein energetics. secondly, the gmec solution may be so stabilized that it can lack the flexibility required to operate the protein biological function . such suboptimal ensembles can then be analyzed to rationally guide the to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
