optimization method for obtaining nearest-neighbour dna entropies and enthalpies directly from melting temperatures motivation: free energy nearest-neighbour (nn) thermodynamics is widely used in dna biochemistry , ranging from the calculation of melting temperatures to the prediction of secondary structures. methods to calculate nn parameters require the knowledge of total sequence entropies and enthalpies, which are not always available. results: here, we implement and test a new melting temperature optimization method where we obtain the nn parameters directly from the temperatures. in this way, we bypass the constraints imposed by total sequence entropies and enthalpies. this enabled us to calculate the missing nn entropies and enthalpies for some published datasets, including salt-dependent parameters. also this allowed us to combine 281 sequences from different types of melting temperature data for which we derived a new set of nn parameters, which have a smaller uncertainty and an improved predictive power. availability and implementation: c source code and compiled binaries for several linux distributions are available from https://sites.google.com/site/geraldweberufmg/vargibbs and from opensuse build service at https://build.opensuse.org/package/show/home:drgweber/vargibbs. the software package contains scripts and data files to reproduce all results presented here. contact:the concept of dividing a dna or rna sequence into pieces of nearest-neighbour (nn) pairs for predicting melting temperatures (t m ) was pioneered 40 years ago byintroduced much of the concepts and terminologies that are in use today. a more detailed analysis of the nn representation was given by) and later by. its simplicity of use and effectiveness has made it into a nearly universal method for applications in oligonucleotide chemistry and molecular biology. with this technique, predictions of thermodynamic properties for any unknown sequence can be made by summing over nn entropies and enthalpies (dp nn with p h; s). the method which is currently in use for extracting dp nn is essentially based on writing a set of linear equations where each equation represents the total entropy or the total enthalpy variations (dp i tot ) of a given sequence i. for the remainder of this article, we call this the total entropy and enthalpy variation (teev) method. therefore, it is necessary to first obtain the total dp i tot. this can be done either by curve fitting the melting curve or from a linear regression of t 1 m versus log c t in which case one needs a number of measurements at different species concentrations c t. unfortunately, both curve-fitting or t 1 m log c t methods introduce a certain amount of uncertainty into the resulting parameters dp nn. furthermore, the total dp i tot may, for various reasons, not be available at all. here, we propose a new melting temperature optimization (mto) method, which does not require the total parameters dp i tot. instead, we simply fit the dp nn , which best describe the meltingthis direct approach has two advantages over the teev method. one is that we fit the much more accurate melting temperatures t m. the other is that this method can be applied to situations where the total parameters dp i tot are unavailable. for example, one can work out the nn parameters from the melting temperatures, which were measured only for a single species concentration for each dna sequence.summarizes the differences between the methods. another interesting feature of the model is that the initialization parameters can be obtained in the framework of the mto. numerically, the mto minimizes the difference between measured and predicted melting temperatures by varying the dp nn parameters freely. here, we applied the mto method successfully to the dataset by santalucia (1998) and showed that the resulting predictive uncertainty is significantly reduced. we used a similar method for the non-linear peyrard-bishop model . the good results obtained for the non-linear model were one of our main motivations to investigate the applications of the mto method to the linear nn model. one key aspect of obtaining the free energy parameters dp nn is the experimental set of melting temperatures. unsurprisingly, different sets are bound to result in different parameters. here, we analysed the two sets by). however, as total sequence entropies and enthalpies are not required, we could also analyse the datasets by(d-ow04). we discuss the significant differences resulting from those datasets, especially regarding initiation parameters. finally, we combined the datasets dsl98 and d-ow04 into a new set for which we obtain the best overall melting temperature prediction.we presented a new method for the calculation of nn parameters from experimental melting temperatures. because this method sidesteps the calculation of total entropies and enthalpies, it enables us to calculate the nn parameters under conditions, which cannot be handled by the traditional methods. it also allows us to combine datasets obtained under very dissimilar experimental conditions. the results of temperature predictions show a marked improvement, especially when larger datasets are used to calculate the parameters. the software that implements this method is made freely available. a comprehensive user manual is part of the package and included as supplementary material. therefore, the interested reader is provided with ability to calculate the thermodynamic parameters for any desired dataset. also the availability of the source code allows for modifications for particular variants of the nn model, for instance to include nucleation terms (oliveira guerra, 2013).  
