structural bioinformatics optimized atomic statistical potentials: assessment of protein interfaces and loops motivation: statistical potentials have been widely used for modeling whole proteins and their parts (e.g. sidechains and loops) as well as interactions between proteins, nucleic acids and small molecules. here, we formulate the statistical potentials entirely within a statistical framework, avoiding questionable statistical mechanical assumptions and approximations, including a definition of the reference state. results: we derive a general bayesian framework for inferring statistically optimized atomic potentials (soap) in which the reference state is replaced with data-driven recovery functions. moreover, we restrain the relative orientation between two covalent bonds instead of a simple distance between two atoms, in an effort to capture orientation dependent interactions such as hydrogen bonds. to demonstrate this general approach, we computed statistical potentials for proteinprotein docking (soap-pp) and loop modeling (soap-loop). for docking, a near-native model is within the top 10 scoring models in 40 of the patchdock benchmark cases, compared with 23 and 27 for the state-of-the-art zdock and firedock scoring functions, respectively. similarly, for modeling 12-residue loops in the plop benchmark, the average main-chain root mean square deviation of the best scored conformations by soap-loop is 1.5 a , close to the average root mean square deviation of the best sampled conform-ations (1.2 a ) and significantly better than that selected by rosetta (2.1 a ), dfire (2.3 a ), dope (2.5 a ) and plop scoring functions (3.0 a ). our bayesian framework may also result in more accurate statistical potentials for additional modeling applications, thus affording better leverage of the experimentally determined protein structures. availability and implementation: soap-pp and soap-loop are available as part of modellerwe developed a bayesian approach to optimizing statistical potentials based on probability theory and without recourse to questionable statistical mechanical assumptions and approximations. we also applied this approach to calculate optimized statistical potentials for assessing protein interactions (soappp) and loops (soap-loop). these two statistical potentials perform better than others in their class. for patchdock and zdock decoys, the top10 success rate of soap-pp is 410 higher than that of firedock and zrank . for 12-residue loops in the plop benchmark, the average main-chain rmsd of the best scored conformations by soap-loop is 1.5 a , close to the average rmsd of the best sampled conformations (1.2 a ) and significantly better than that from dope (2.5 a ), dfire (2.3 a ), rosetta (2.1 a ) and plop scoring functions (3.0 a ) . the relative accuracy of soap-pp and soap-loop results primarily from normalizing the raw distributions by the recovery functions instead of a reference state, restraining of orientation instead of only distance and thoroughly optimizing parameter values while avoiding overfitting. next, we discuss three points in turn. first, we describe our recovery functions and compare them with the reference states used for other statistical potentials. second, we discuss the importance of restraining orientation and using covalent separation as an independent variable. finally, we conclude by commenting on future improvements of our bayesian approach and its applications.  
