a new method for designing degenerate primers and its use in the identification of sequences in brachiaria showing similarity to apomixis-associated genes motivation: we developed a technique and a tool for degenerate primer design based on multiple local alignments employing the meme algorithm supported with electronic pcr. the objective is to find adequate primers starting from sequences with poor global similarity. we show an example of its application in our laboratory to find sequences in brachiaria with similarity to ests related to apomixis.classical methods for degenerate primer design include software applications such as codehop or primaclade . these methods usually rely on the identification of clear blocks of conserved regions in multiple global alignments. therefore, alignment quality should be very high. however, in many cases, primer design using multiple global alignments is unsuccessful due to poor conservation among the sequences under study. to overcome this problem, we propose a new method to design primers, which could be used for sequences with poor global similarity or without well-conserved blocks in multiple global alignments. instead, the technique is based on multiple local alignments, using the multiple expectation maximization for motif elicitation (meme) algorithm , in order to search for conserved regions long enough to serve as primers. the results of meme are then verified by electronic pcr (e-pcr) and standard primer design programs. we employed this technique to design degenerate primers for sequences related to apomixis in the tropical forage grass brachiaria. we demonstrate that the amplification of sequences with similarity to genes reported in other species (possibly homologues) is possible, even when the species in question is poorly characterized at the molecular level. to whom correspondence should be addressed.in conclusion, we were able to develop a new bioinformatics method and a corresponding tool to amplify genes associated with a very poorly characterized phenomenon at the molecular level such as apomixis. this method could help to obtain amplifications in other poorly understood biological events, in which there are few related sequences. in general terms, the technique can be used for sequences that have very few known homologues, or to confirm them, and to design degenerate primers when the classical methods do not work. the method, however, needs to be improved, for instance trying to automatize the time-consuming steps and avoiding sequences with low similarity patterns. our results will allow the analysis of all those proposed candidate genes for apomixis in a unique plant species.  
