systems biology orca: a cobra toolbox extension for model-driven discovery and analysis over past decades, constraint-based modelling has emerged as an important approach to obtain referential information about mechanisms behind biological phenotypes and identify physiological and perturbed metabolic states at genome-scale. however, application of this novel approach to systems biology in biotechnology is still hindered by the functionalities of the existing modelling software. to augment the usability of the constraint-based approach for various use scenarios, we present orca, a matlab package, which extends the scope of established constraint-based reconstruction and analysis metabolic modelling and includes three unique functionalities: (i) a framework method integrating three analyses of multi-objective optimization, robustness analysis and fractional benefit analysis, (ii) metabolic pathways identification with futile loop elimination and (iii) a dynamic flux balance analysis framework incorporating kinetic constraints. availability and implementation: orca is freely available to academic users and is downloadable from https://sourceforge.net/ projects/exorca/; a mini-tutorial is supplied in the package for training purposes as well as a software manual.the recent advance in high-throughput technology has vastly increased the availability of the biological information, for reconstruction of genome-scale metabolic networks (gsms). these can serve as a detailed representation of biological reaction networks and their functional states. for investigating gsms in both academic and industrial settings, the constraint-based reconstruction and analysis (cobra) software has been established as a popular tool since 2007. nevertheless, the systematic application of gsms for modeldriven discovery has much scope to be further developed. for example, although the original cobra toolbox does include a variety of methods for modelling gsms, it still lacks ready-made functions for users to model the competition between multiobjectives, commonly encountered in bioengineering. this indicates that there is an urgent need to develop novel simulation methodologies and tools, to interrogate and interpret the information in the gsms in integrative, systemic and meaningful ways. to facilitate this emerging direction in research, we have developed a number of matlab functions, collectively packaged and named as orca (model-driven discovery and analysis) toolbox, supplementary to the existing cobra functions. these orca functions are intended to take advantage of existing cobra models, for us to (i) obtain information on the capability of an interesting microorganism for desired metabolite production, (ii) understand the correlation between the perturbation of the surrounding metabolism, and the preferable metabolite synthesis, and (iii) investigate how dynamic changes of external metabolite concentrations in the environment affect the yield of desirable metabolites in a reactor. the tool has been used to elucidate the inherent potential of several promising biocatalysts for microbial fuel cell electricity production and some of the base mathematics of orca have been discussed in the literature (, b, c).  
