orfanfinder: automated identification of taxonomically restricted orphan genes motivation: orphan genes, also known as orfans, are newly evolved genes in a genome that enable the organism to adapt to specific living environment. the gene content of every sequenced genome can be classified into different age groups, based on how widely/narrowly a genes homo-logs are distributed in the context of species taxonomy. those having homologs restricted to organisms of particular taxonomic ranks are classified as taxonomically restricted orfans. results: implementing this idea, we have developed an open source program named orfanfinder and a free web server to allow automated classification of a genomes gene content and identification of orfans at different taxonomic ranks. orfanfinder and its web server will contribute to the comparative genomics field by facilitating the study of the origin of new genes and the emergence of lineage-specific traits in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. availability and implementation: http://cys.orfans stand for orphan open reading frames . in addition to orfans, in literature orphan genes are also known as new genes, lineage-specific genes (lsgs) and taxonomically restricted genes (trgs) , although some terms are used in very specific contexts, e.g. de novo originated new genes. orphan genes (hereafter orfans) are new inventions of a genome that enable the organism to adapt to its specific living environment. they are fundamentally important for the origin of new species and the emergence of lineage-specific traits, e.g. morphological diversity, metabolic innovation and pathogenicity . orfans are usually identified by using sequence similarity search tools such as blast . the simple blast method tends to identify very narrowly distributed orfans and cannot classify orfans into groups of different ages. therefore the phylogeny-based approach was developed to map blast hits onto a species phylogeny, which allows identifying orfans of different ages. one method using this approach required a wellaccepted species phylogeny, often not available for non-model organisms. another method termed phylostratigraphy approach also required a phylogeny, which however is derived from the query species taxonomic lineage. although the phylostratigraphy approach was recently shown to have some limitations , it has been widely used to study orfans in various organisms (e.g.). however, the phylogeny-based methods are more difficult to automate and often need human intervention. here, we present a new tool orfanfinder and its web server. orfanfinder is fully automated and the results are completely reproducible. while the algorithm behind orfanfinder is essentially based on the phylostratigraphy approach , it is more strictly formulated for the purpose of complete automation. to our knowledge orfanfinder is the only open source computer software and the first online server for orfan identification and classification.  
