data and text mining organismtagger: detection, normalization and grounding of organism entities in biomedical documents motivation: semantic tagging of organism mentions in full-text articles is an important part of literature mining and semantic enrichment solutions. tagged organism mentions also play a pivotal role in disambiguating other entities in a text, such as proteins. a high-precision organism tagging system must be able to detect the numerous forms of organism mentions, including common names as well as the traditional taxonomic groups: genus, species and strains. in addition, such a system must resolve abbreviations and acronyms, assign the scientific name and if possible link the detected mention to the ncbi taxonomy database for further semantic queries and literature navigation. results: we present the organismtagger, a hybrid rule-based/machine learning system to extract organism mentions from the literature. it includes tools for automatically generating lexical and ontological resources from a copy of the ncbi taxonomy database, thereby facilitating system updates by end users. its novel ontology-based resources can also be reused in other semantic mining and linked data tasks. each detected organism mention is normalized to a canonical name through the resolution of acronyms and abbreviations and subsequently grounded with an ncbi taxonomy database id. in particular, our system combines a novel machine-learning approach with rule-based and lexical methods for detecting strain mentions in documents. on our manually annotated ot corpus, the organismtagger achieves a precision of 95, a recall of 94 and a grounding accuracy of 97.5. on the manually annotated corpus of linnaeus-100, the results show a precision of 99, recall of 97 and grounding accuracy of 97.4. availability: the organismtagger, including supporting tools, resources, training data and manual annotations, as well as end user and developer documentation, is freely available under an open-source license at http://www.semanticsoftware.info/ organism-tagger.text mining solutions have become an integral part of biomedical research. an important class of entities to detect through natural language processing (nlp) techniques are organisms. their detection facilitates taxonomy-aware text mining systems and provides users with the ability to find relevant subsets of papers based on species-specific queries. when textual mentions are further annotated with an external database identifier, they can provide additional benefits for disambiguation in the recognition of other named entities such as mutations, proteins or genes . primarily, organism mentions are based on established hierarchical nomenclature conventions defined in the 18th century . however, the recognition of taxonomic groups in texts presents a number of ongoing challenges. specifically, there is considerable ambiguity in the way taxonomic information is formulated in scientific documents. abbreviations of species names are widespread and the use of common english names instead of latin names further obscures the taxonomic identity of the organisms described in a text. the use of acronyms, which can be both species specific and species independent, also poses challenges for recognition tasks. lastly, incorrect spellings have created yet more ambiguity. finding organism mentions is the task of named entity (ne) detection. simply tagging an entity as an organism is, however, not sufficient for more advanced text mining tasks. to account for variability within the same document, e.g. the use of both abbreviated and full forms, each mention of an organism must be additionally tagged with a canonical name through normalization. these unique names can then be used for downstream analysis tasks like co-reference resolution. to facilitate the disambiguation of other entities in a text, additional analysis, so-called grounding, is required in order to create a link between a textual reference and its entry in an external database. combined with semantic technologies, such as ontologies and reasoners, further knowledge discovery approaches are made possible . given the labile nature of scientific knowledge in the era of high-throughput biology, online resources are frequently updated and custom applications dependent on such resources must also be readily updated to avoid latency of processed content. consequently, the ability to easily update the organism tagging system with respect to external taxonomic resources becomes an additional requirement. further technical requirements include configurability for different classes of organisms, the free availability of the system for its incorporation into custom analysis pipelines, multicore/multiprocessor scalability, embedded or web service execution and integration into common desktop clients to facilitate literature mining. to address these challenges, a number of species name recognition systems have been developed. in line with the goals of the organismtagger, a recent work resolves the ambiguity of genes and gene products with respect to model organisms ; in addition, a corpus annotated with protein/gene mentions associated with species ids is provided. in this system, detection of species words is simply done by list matching. this list includes the organism names from two dictionariesncbi taxonomy and the uniprot controlled vocabulary of taxa. gene mentions are then tagged with species ids with different methods, like heuristic rules, supervised classification with a maximum entropy model and parsers. taxongrab uses a lexicon of english words (combination of wordnet and specialist excluding the terms from ncbi taxonomy, the integrated taxonomic information system and the german collection of microorganisms and cell cultures) to compare against a text. detected sets of two or three consecutive words that do not exist in the lexicon are further validated with regular expressions. the performance of their system is tested on volume 1 of the birds of the belgian congo by james paul chapin with a precision of 96 and recall of 94. findit , a web service, tries to index the taxonomic names using pattern-matching expressions and a lexicon of english words, providing a confidence score for resultant names. rule-based, word frequency and regular expression-based approaches manage to capture genusspecies combinations with high levels of precision and recall. in some implementations, this is achieved without further grounding to database identifiers . in some cases, grounding to database identifiers or nodes in a taxonomic tree is made; examples are taxonfinder (http://code.google.com/p/taxon-finder) and ubiorss . for such systems, common names still pose problems, whereas gazetteer-based approaches are able to handle common name issues. a number of gazetteer-based web services are available for entity recognition and normalization, such as whatizit . most recently, the linnaeus system has illustrated good performance tagging species names in biomedical texts using a gazetteer (species dictionary) combined with post-processing techniques for disambiguation, acronym resolution and filtering. however, all these existing approaches have difficulties recognizing and disambiguating strain level information. our organismtagger addresses the above challenges with a number of novel contributions: (i) provision of semantic data models for organisms that can be re-used in other applications; (ii) tools for automatically generating organism-specific resources derived from the ncbi taxonomy database; (iii) a text mining pipeline for organism detection, normalization and grounding; (iv) a machine learning-based classifier for strain detection; (v) flexible system architecture for running the system embedded, stand-alone, published as a web service or integrated into a number of desktop clients. we first present an overview of the organismtagger in section 2. section 3 describes existing taxonomy resources and section 4their integration into our system. the text mining pipeline is then described in section 5, followed by its evaluation in section 6 and conclusions in section 7.the performance of the organismtagger (v.1.1) is evaluated in three different steps : first, the mentions of the organisms are evaluated against the gold standard without taking the ncbi ids into consideration (detected entities in). in this step, the focus is on the entity recognition performance of the organismtagger. the performance is further evaluated based on the normalized mentions of the organisms, normalized. if the organism is not successfully normalized, it is removed from the list of retrieved organisms. and finally, the computed ncbi ids are compared against the manual annotations, specified as grounded. linnaeus , a species name identification system, uses deterministic finite-state automatons (dfa) to capture species mentions and then assign them their ncbi taxonomy ids. however, when the full form appears but no ncbi ids exist for the species, all the abbreviated forms of this species are associated with other possible ncbi ids. to compare our results with the results of the linnaeus system (v.1.5), we applied it in the same way as the organismtagger on the manually annotated corpora. the results for the linnaeus system are also shown in.false negatives of the organismtagger in the linnaeus-100 corpora are mainly due to misspellings. some acronyms resembling gene and protein names are filtered for minimizing error propagation. these acronym mentions are ignored by the organismtagger. also, we do not cover the occurrence of species ranked as no rank in the taxonomy database, e.g. salmonella typhimurium. the linnaeus system uses additional synonyms to capture terms like patient and children. this is reflected by the recall section of the l-100-a corpus. for better comparison of the linnaeus performance with that of our system, these additional synonyms of the linnaeus system are ignored in the l-100-b, l-100-c and l-100-d corpora. false positive mentions in the linnaeus-100 corpora arise from common names like small white for pieris rapae, ncbi id: 64459 and white underwing for catocala relicta, ncbi id: 423327. some acronyms, namely par and atv, captured by the organismtagger refer to non-organism mentions. we expect that in some cases, problematic acronyms can be filtered out by more accurate protein and gene name lists. however, the elimination of all false positives will negatively impact on recall. false negatives of the linnaeus system are due to its inability to handle ligatures and the limited strain recognition, which is analyzed in more detail below. moreover, some organisms are renamed and the old names usually appear following the new names in parentheses, like in emericella (aspergillus) nidulans; these cases are also ignored by the linnaeus system. while many abbreviated organisms can be resolved to their nonabbreviated form after locating the full form in the document, a few still remain ambiguous. using our additional heuristic, some of these ambiguous organisms can be resolved to their non-abbreviated format. in particular, l-100-d contains 69 abbreviated organism mentions without the corresponding full form and ot-b contains 27 mentions. after applying the second normalization heuristic, the organismtagger successfully resolved 50 and 21 in l-100-d and ot-b, respectively. we also performed comparisons with other systems, but do not report them in detail here as their performance is generally below that of the linnaeus system. using a combination of a lexicon with non-taxonomic words and rules, taxongrab finds the longest match without grounding the entity. nactem species word detector and nactem species disambiguator mostly annotate the species level. for example, pseudomonas fluorescens subsp. cellulosa is grounded with the ncbi taxonomy id 294 and bacillus sp. strain c-125 is grounded with the ncbi taxonomy id 1409. the strain level of the organism mentions is usually ignored by the aforementioned taggers.  
