data and text mining orthogonal matrix factorization enables integrative analysis of multiple rna binding proteins downloaded from motivation: rna binding proteins (rbps) play important roles in post-transcriptional control of gene expression, including splicing, transport, polyadenylation and rna stability. to model proteinrna interactions by considering all available sources of information, it is necessary to integrate the rapidly growing rbp experimental data with the latest genome annotation, gene function, rna sequence and structure. such integration is possible by matrix factorization, where current approaches have an undesired tendency to identify only a small number of the strongest patterns with overlapping features. because proteinrna interactions are orchestrated by multiple factors, methods that identify discriminative patterns of varying strengths are needed. results: we have developed an integrative orthogonality-regularized nonnegative matrix factoriza-tion (ionmf) to integrate multiple data sources and discover non-overlapping, class-specific rna binding patterns of varying strengths. the orthogonality constraint halves the effective size of the factor model and outperforms other nmf models in predicting rbp interaction sites on rna. we have integrated the largest data compendium to date, which includes 31 clip experiments on 19 rbps involved in splicing (such as hnrnps, u2af2, elavl1, tdp-43 and fus) and processing of 3utr (ago, igf2bp). we show that the integration of multiple data sources improves the pre-dictive accuracy of retrieval of rna binding sites. in our study the key predictive factors of protein rna interactions were the position of rna structure and sequence motifs, rbp co-binding and gene region type. we report on a number of protein-specific patterns, many of which are consistent with experimentally determined properties of rbps. availability and implementation: the ionmf implementation and example datasets are available at https://github.com/mstrazar/ionmf.rna-binding proteins (rbps) play a major role in the control of gene expression. misregulation of rbps is associated with diseases such as fragile x syndrome, neurologic disorders and cancer . our understanding of proteinrna interaction has been greatly improved by the use of genomic methods such as individual-nucleotide resolution uv crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (iclip), which identifies rbp crosslinking sites on a genome-wide scale. past iclip studies have shown that rbps bind and regulate a large number of transcripts. computational analysis and prediction of these interactions is therefore critical to gain a comprehensive understanding of rbp functions . current approaches to model proteinrna interactions focus on individual data sources and require precise structural knowledge of the involved proteins . they rarely exploit other available omics data. general approaches such as bayesian networks , hidden markov models , or svms , have been applied to model proteinrna interactions using multiple data sources. however, their application was limited to individual rbps and the importance of only a limited number of features governing proteinrna interaction were highlighted, such as single degenerate motifs. the lack of presented features is partly due to the difficulties associated with interpretation of inferred models. we have developed a modeling technique based on multiple matrix factorization that is capable of integrating data sources for multiple rbps. the generated models are both accurate and interpretable. new biological knowledge can be gained by exploring the identified combinatorial effects among various features of data sources that define patterns of proteinrna binding sites on rna. nonnegative matrix factorization (nmf) methods have been extensively applied in machine learning for clustering, community detection, classification, etc. . the classic nmf algorithm finds an approximation of a data matrix that is described as a product of two or more matrices with lower ranks a factor model. an advantage of nmf is the interpretable, parts-based representation of patterns present in the data. this is due to the latent factors being constrained to non-negative values, which can then be combined in an additive way to approximate the original data. integrative nmf approaches provide biologically meaningful results in various bioinformatics applications. for example, nmf was used to integrate multiple matrices with a common dimension and to discover mirna and gene regulatory modules , or to discover modules of genes, mirna targets and dna methylation markers in cancer patients . various improvements of the nmf algorithm have been suggested to obtain more comprehensive models. the sparsity of factor models improves the interpretability and modularity of projections. sparsity is achieved by including l 1 norm constraints on the model coefficients. alternatively, the l 1 =l 2 norm ratio of the resulting projection can be explicitly tuned , which produces sparser solutions, but does not guarantee modularity. other methods constrain the basis vectors to convex sets . the mentioned methods, however, do not focus on modular decompositions where samples and features do not overlap within clusters. this is a substantial drawback when classes are discriminated by multiple patterns of varying strengths. this phenomenon is common in the domain of proteinrna interactions, as strong patterns, e.g. u-rich tracts present in binding sites of many proteins, may occlude weaker signals that discriminate between proteins. a possible solution is to require the basis vectors found by nmf to be orthogonal. one such example is the orthogonality-constrained nmf that assumes an initial orthogonal model, e.g. obtained by k-means clustering, which may bias the final model. we have developed an integrative, orthogonality-regularized nonnegative matrix factorization method (ionmf). the method finds modular projections of data matrices, where data instances are assigned to modules described by non-overlapping features. in a supervised setting, orthogonality regularization prevents multicollinearity , where a feature vector can be expressed as a linear combination of a subset of remaining feature vectors. this is important, as rbps differ in specificity and their binding target patterns differ in number and strength. we applied ionmf on the largest integrative analysis in the number of rbps and different data sources used. the analysis included a compendium of 31 published clip experiments on 19 rbps and other genomic data sources to predict rbp crosslinking sites at a nucleotide-resolution. we discovered discriminative patterns across different data sources and learned a comprehensive model of proteinrna interaction for each of the 19 rbps. we visualized the discovered patterns and used them to cluster rbps into functionally related groups. our results demonstrate the applicability of ionmf for fast and accurate prediction of rbp target sites on a genome-wide scale.computational approaches already play a crucial role in protein rna interaction prediction by aiding experiment planning and interpretation of results. genome-wide assays of proteinrna interaction mapping has identified close to a thousand human rna-binding proteins. data on rna binding proteins is growing rapidly, emphasizing the need for integrative methods which jointly consider all available data sources. an interesting finding of our study is that in addition to rna structure and sequence, the position relative to genomic features (exons, etc.) and clip data of other rbps is informative for predicting binding sites of a specific rbp. genomic regions are informative as many proteins bind at specific positions relative to these features, e.g. u2af2 generally binds upstream of exons . we show that clip data are predictive, as subsets of examined rbps exhibit similar binding patterns (, supplementary figs s6s13 and supplementary section s8.4). importantly, overlap is only seen between a subset of rbps, but we find no evidence that some sites or features are generally shared across all rbps. while contribution of non-specific background should be considered, we find it most likely that co-binding profiles result from biologically relevant features. for example, many rbps bind to similar rna sequences or structures (supplementary figs s6s9, s13). several of the examined rbps are known to bind similar motifs, such as the u-rich motifs bound by elavl, tia, hnrnpc and u2af2, which are also detected in our analyses . moreover, rbps may interact at the protein level, either directly or indirectly via co-factors, which could stabilize their binding to proximal rna sites. few experimental studies have explored the impact of protein protein interactions on coordinated rna binding, but our analyses could be used to explore such potential interactions in the future. data integration in ionmf yields improvements in accuracy when compared to state-of-the-art approaches. orthogonality regularization favors non-overlapping and sparse solutions, which are desired by domain experts, providing class-specific descriptions and model interpretation. the resulting predictions are in strong accordance with a published in vitro study and identified a number of promising candidates for further investigation. together, our experimental findings establish ionmf as the data integration technique of choice where sparse, modular models are desired.  
