otubase: an r infrastructure package for operational taxonomic unit data otubase is an r package designed to facilitate the analysis of operational taxonomic unit (otu) data and sequence classification (taxonomic) data. currently there are programs that will cluster sequence data into otus and/or classify sequence data into known taxonomies. however, there is a need for software that can take the summarized output of these programs and organize it into easily accessed and manipulated formats. otubase provides this structure and organization within r, to allow researchers to easily manipulate the data with the rich library of r packages currently available for additional analysis. availability: otubase is an r package available through bioconductor. it can be found atnew sequencing technologies, such as roches 454 pyrosequencing, have made it possible to sequence large amounts of dna quickly. these new capabilities are being used to sequence portions of marker genes that allow investigators to determine which organisms are present within a sample. this is especially useful for the study of microbes. microbes are often difficult to culture. therefore, cultureindependent methods are used to determine the composition of microbial communities. the 454 16s amplicon sequencing is one such culture-independent method . there are currently two primary approaches used to analyze environmental community amplicon data. the first approach uses a database of identified sequences to train an algorithm to classify a set of unknown sequences, such as 454 sequence reads. a widely used example of this is the rdp classifier . this type of analysis labels each sequence with a taxonomic classification. a classification approach has the advantage of producing taxonomic names for each amplicon. however, it is dependent on the accuracy of the algorithm and the quality of the database used to train the algorithm. a second approach to the analysis of amplicon data is to cluster the sequences based on overall sequence similarity . these clusters represent operational taxonomic units, (otus). the otu approach potentially decreases the biases of using an incomplete database to classify the sequences. however, to whom correspondence should be addressed. the number of otus may be inflated by sequencing error and the taxonomic identity of the microbes in the sample remains unresolved . programs are available to perform both of these types of data analysis. in particular, some programs or pipelines are able to both cluster and classify sequences. these include mothur , the rdp pipeline , qiime , and pangea . these programs are also able to perform some limited downstream analysis of the data. otubase is an r infrastructure package that imports otu or classification files produced by these programs along with the experiment metadata and sequence data. the imported data is stored in a structure that is easy to access and manipulate. the researcher is able to quickly summarize and visualize the data. more importantly, the data is abstracted from the raw data. this abstraction allows for the development of novel analysis techniques using the power of the r statistical programming environment. the structure of otubase is general enough to be applicable to all amplicon types, including 16s, 18s and igs regions, or other targeted genes. additionally, otubase is not restricted to any specific sequencing technique. any data that can be clustered or classified into otus may be explored using otubase. this may include data from older sanger sequencing and newer aproaches such as illumina sequencing.otubase organizes and structures data associated with community amplicon experiments into r classes, which allows the researcher to easily visualize and manipulate the experimental data. otubase has a number of functions that allow otubase to import data from the commonly used mothur package and the rdp classifier. it also includes functions that enable the user to easily use existing r packages to perform complex analyses and visualizations.  
