outlier detection at the transcriptome-proteome interface background: in high-throughput experimental biology, it is widely acknowledged that while expression levels measured at the levels of transcriptome and the corresponding proteome do not, in general, correlate well, messenger rna levels are used as convenient proxies for protein levels. our interest is in developing data-driven computational models that can bridge the gap between these two levels of measurement at which different mechanisms of regulation may act on different molecular species causing any observed lack of correlations. to this end, we build data-driven pre-dictors of protein levels using mrna levels and known proxies of translation efficiencies as covari-ates. previous work showed that in such a setting, outliers with respect to the model are reliable candidates for post-translational regulation. results: here, we present and compare two novel formulations of deriving a protein concentration predictor from which outliers may be extracted in a systematic manner. the first approach, outlier rejecting regression, allows explicit specification of a certain fraction of the data as outliers. in a regression setting, this is a non-convex optimization problem which we solve by deriving a difference of convex functions algorithm (dca). with post-translationally regulated proteins, one expects their concentrations to be affected primarily by disruption of protein stability. our second algorithm exploits this observation by minimizing an asymmetric loss using quantile regression and extracts outlier proteins whose measured concentrations are lower than what a genome-wide regression would predict. we validate the two approaches on a dataset of yeast transcriptome and proteome. functional annotation check on detected outliers demonstrate that the methods are able to identify post-translationally regulated genes with high statistical confidence.the mapping between high-throughput measurements at the level of transcriptome and at the corresponding proteome is a complex one. although a large body of computational biology literature using advanced machine learning algorithms to transcriptomic data exist, it is acknowledged that the underlying biological function of interest happens more at the protein level and mrna concentrations are seen as proxies for the corresponding protein concentrations. several authors have measured mrna and protein concentrations in the same biological samples and have attempted to showcorrelations between these two . except under specific functional categories, correlation between the two is difficult to demonstrate. the reason for this is that different species of mrna/proteins are regulated by different mechanisms at the post-transcriptional and posttranslational levels. the approach pursued in this work, starting from tuller et al.(2007) and gunawardana and niranjan (2013), is to formulate a regression problem in which the response variable is the protein concentration and the covariates are the mrna levels and other proxies for the stability and translation efficiency of the transcripts.used a linear regression model with a sparsity inducing regularizer (lasso) and showed that of about 37 features taken as inputs, a combination of five features including mrna levels and translation efficiencies yield good prediction of protein levels. in fact, these best five features are mrna abundance , trna adaption index (tai), codon bias , ribosome density and occupancy . the outliers with respect to this linear regression were shown to carry significant over-representation of post-translationally regulated proteins, which is to be expected since the input covariates do not have any information about post-translational modifications (ptms). in this article, we introduce two novel computational methods that detect outliers in a regression setting and demonstrate their usefulness in the analysis of transcriptomic and proteomic datasets. our focus is specific in that we attempt to detect from the data those proteins that are likely candidates for post-translational regulation. the relevant biological insight, introduced in gunawardana and niranjan (2013), is that if the concentration of a protein is regulated post-translationally, the measured abundance (p) of it is likely to be lower than what a global data-driven model trained on a genomic-wide scale might predict ( p). this is because the primary mechanism by which post-translational regulation might be implemented is the disruption of protein stability. however, other modifications which occur post-translationally, such as hydrophobicity, localization and enzymatic activities will not be detected by this approach. the first novel model, we introduce in this article is outlier rejecting regression (orr) model which formulates a regression problem that requires a user-specified fraction of the data to be returned as outliers with respect to the regression model. this is achieved via specifying a particular loss function, the clipped (truncated) loss which is shown to be equivalent to defining a certain fraction of the data as outliers . we show how this objective function may be optimized via a difference of convex functions algorithm (dca). for this formulation, we also present an alternative ad-hoc variant of optimization strategy (methods). our second method is the use of quantile regression (qr) with omic measurements, a technique which is effectively used in a range of areas including economics , medicine and survival analysis . qr enables the specification of an asymmetric loss function, where the user can define the outliers to be selected either with positive or negative losses. thus, this approach is more suitable with our initial hypothesis because our main focus lies on the negative losses of a global predictor (measured abundance lower than the predictedp p) to detect post-translationally regulated proteins. we believe that these are much neater ways of approaching the problem, than to simply implement a regression and hope the outliers to contain those posttranslationally regulated genes.tests against functional annotation of yeast gene products show that all three methods can detect outlier proteins that are likely candidates for post-translational regulation with high statistical confidence. however, main biological insight that we start from is that post-translational regulation should primarily act by disrupting the stability of proteins whereby the measured concentrations should be lower than what might be predicted from a genome-wide regression with mrna level properties of individual species as input variables. two of the models we considered (simple linear regression and orr) do not model this asymmetric explicitly and hence find outliers on either side (i.e. p p and p p). in linear regression, the vast majority of outliers found had p p, in line with our insight, and only two proteins were found as outliers on the p p side. this has to be regulated as a prediction result obtained by fitting a datadriven model through noisy data. when we force the model to label a fraction of the data as outliers in orr model, the minimization of the loss function picks up outliers on either side (i.e. p p and p p). however, majority of the outliers and the post-translatonally regulated proteins were detected from the upper region (p p) of the regression. when we compared the outliers detected on either side of orr model, we found 7 of the 15 outliers detected at the lower region (p p) did not have post-translational regulation, and correspondingly the confidence levels with which orr model identify post-translationally regulated proteins was lower. the qr model, which allows as to explicitly impose our asymmetric loss function turns out to be the best match to exploit the biological insight we purse here, and the proteins picked up by this model yield the highest statistical confidence in annotation checks. pathway analysis further supports the hypothesis due to the over-representation observation of p53 related pathways.in this work, we presented two novel approaches to detect posttranslationally regulated proteins as outliers in a regression problem. the novelty of the computational formulations we explore in this work lies in (i) the explicit formulation that a certain fraction of data should be detected as outliers, and (ii) the error to be minimized being one sided because the measured concentration of post-translationally regulated proteins are expected to be lower than what a global regression would predict. both these are ways of capturing our prior knowledge of the problem domain in the computational formulation. the methods we propose are shown to have the power to identify proteins whose stability is disturbed by post-translationally acting processes to a statistical significance, thus these data-driven techniques help to uncover functional aspects of molecular biology. conflict of interest: none declared.  
