data and text mining overlap and diversity in antimicrobial peptide databases: compiling a non-redundant set of sequences downloaded from motivation: the large variety of antimicrobial peptide (amp) databases developed to date are characterized by a substantial overlap of data and similarity of sequences. our goals are to analyze the levels of redundancy for all available amp databases and use this information to build a new non-redundant sequence database. for this purpose, a new software tool is introduced. results: a comparative study of 25 amp databases reveals the overlap and diversity among them and the internal diversity within each database. the overlap analysis shows that only one database (peptaibol) contains exclusive data, not present in any other, whereas all sequences in the lamp_patent database are included in camp_patent. however, the majority of databases have their own set of unique sequences, as well as some overlap with other databases. the complete set of non-duplicate sequences comprises 16 990 cases, which is almost half of the total number of reported peptides. on the other hand, the diversity analysis identifies the most and least diverse databases and proves that all databases exhibit some level of redundancy. finally, we present a new parallel-free software, named dover analyzer, developed to compute the overlap and diversity between any number of databases and compile a set of non-redundant sequences. these results are useful for selecting or building a suitable representative set of amps, according to specific needs. availability and implementation: the regularly updated non-redundant sequence databases and the dover analyzer software to perform custom analysis are available at http://mobiosd-hub.com/ doveranalyzer/.antimicrobial peptides (amps) have emerged as an alternative solution against multi-drug-resistance infections . these compounds are part of the innate host defense system in vertebrate and invertebrate organisms and exhibit a broad-spectrum activity against a variety of pathogens, including bacteria and fungi. additionally, antitumor , antiviral and antiparasitic activities have been described for some of these peptides. this provides a valuable ground for the discovery of new drugs that mimic the antimicrobial activity or that possess in some cases anticancer, antiviral or antiparasitic functions . a growing number of naturally occurring amps are being discovered thanks to huge research efforts. additionally, synthetic new peptides are being designed to understand, imitate or improve the natural ones. for example, although one of the first published amp databases comprised 523 peptides, mainly from natural sources, a recent one holds 3904 natural and 1643 synthetic cases. today there are many amp databases available, which depending on the origin of peptides can be classified as general or specific . the general databases comprise entries from a large variety of sources, whereas the specific ones are dedicated to store amps that come from a particular type of organism, like bacteria, fungi or plants, or belong to a particular family, like defensins or penaeidin. it is clear that the general databases must share some identical sequences, at least with the specialized ones. similarly, there can be overlap between databases designed for different purposes due to the multiple functions of amps. non-identical but similar sequences may likewise be found in biological databases. tolerating some redundancy of content can be useful to derive a set of sequence-based physicochemical properties, which would be essential for molecular functions . however, duplication and redundancy in a large collection of biological data can also introduce distortions in the analysis of sequencestructure or sequenceproperty relationships or affect the efficiency in a similarity search. to avoid these problems, the duplicate entries can be merged and closely similar sequences can be clustered, thus yielding a representative set that covers the sequence space. in this article, we aim to analyze the levels of overlap and diversity for the case of well-known amp databases and to compile a new non-redundant sequence database. to fulfill this purpose, we have developed a software tool, which is also presented here.  
