gene expression a new statistical approach to detecting differentially methylated loci for case control illumina array methylation data motivation: as an epigenetic alteration, dna methylation plays an important role in epigenetic controls of gene transcription. recent advances in genome-wide scan of dna methylation provide great opportunities in studying the impact of dna methylation on many human diseases including various types of cancer. due to the unique feature of this type of data, applicable statistical methods are limited and new sophisticated approaches are desirable. results: in this article, we propose a new statistical test to detect differentially methylated loci for case control methylation data generated by illumina arrays. this new method utilizes the important finding that dna methylation is highly correlated with age. the proposed method estimates the overall p-value by combining the p-values from independent individual tests each for one age group. through real data application and simulation study, we show that the proposed test is robust and usually more powerful than other methods.dna methylation, as an alteration of epigenetic control, plays a critical role in transcriptional regulation, chromosomal stability, genomic imprinting and x-inactivation . it has been shown to be linked to many human diseases, including various types of cancer . with the beadarray technology, illumina goldengate and infinium methylation assays can generate genome-wide highthroughput methylation data which are widely used in research. after background correction and normalization for the raw fluorescent intensities, for each locus, a summarized value (called -value) is generated based on 30 replicates in the same array: max(m,0)/(max(m,0)+max(u,0)+100) , where m is the average signal from a methylated allele and u is from unmethylated allele. the range of the -value is therefore, between 0 and 1, with 0 representing totally unmethylated and 1 representing completely methylated. to whom correspondence should be addressed.to detect differentially methylated loci between two groups of case and control, the commonly used statistical tests, such as t-test and linear regression-based methods may not be appropriate as the assumptions of those methods may not meet for this kind of data. for example, in a linear regression model, we usually assume the error terms are normally distributed with common variance. however, it has been shown that the -value is highly associated with age; its mean and sd vary across subjects age . simply treating age as a covariate in the linear regression model does not guarantee that the model assumptions are met. recently, wang has proposed a model-based likelihood ratio test to detect differentially methylated loci for case and control data under the assumption that the -value follows a three-component normal-uniform distribution . through simulation, wang showed that under some situations, their proposed test outperforms the simple t-test. however, the commonly used t-test cannot be the best test if data are from mixture distributions. in this article, we propose a new statistical testing approach to detect differentially methylated loci for case control illumina array methylation data. in the proposed test, we incorporate the important recent finding that the -value is correlated with age. more specifically, we first group subjects into several age groups based on their age; then for each age group, a statistical test such as t-test will be conducted for the given locus and the two p-values each from one-sided test (one from left-side and the other from right-side) are recorded. an overall p-value for that locus will be estimated through combining the two sets of p-values. using a real methylation data with two treatments and a simulation study, we show that the proposed test is robust and usually more powerful than other methods. in this article, all the t-tests used are based on the unequal variance assumption.the assumption that the -value is normally distributed with constant variance across age may not be always appropriate; if this assumption is violated, the commonly used t-test and the regression method will lose power and alternative methods are desirable. it has been shown that the -value is an age related measurement, both its mean and standard deviation may vary across age; we would expect that it is more homogeneous for subjects with similar age.based on this idea, we propose a new statistical approach which separates subjects based on their age, conducts one-sided statisticaltest for each individual age group, and then combines p-values to obtain an overall p-value. the proposed method uses the onesided, instead of two-sided tests for each age group because most of the time, the direction of the effects are expected to be the same (negative or positive). if the direction of the effects is the same and known for all age groups, we can even improve the power by only using test t 1 or t 2. however, in practice, the directions may be unknown even if they are the same; the proposed method is still powerful for this situation. from the results of our simulation study and the real data application, we can see that the proposed test is robust in the sense that it has reasonable power when the effects have different directions. in contrast, the single t-test will lose power dramatically when it is applied to the pooled data where the effects have different sizes and/or their directions are different. the proposed method is based on the effect modifier: age, which is by far the strongest demographic risk factor for cancer . however, there is no difficulty to extend the proposed method to other factors which are associated with methylation. in this article, we use the commonly used t-test to compare the case and control groups for each age group; however, it can be replaced by any other appropriate test. except for the fishers test, there are many different ways to combine p-values from independent tests ; however, there is no uniformly most powerful approach. it remains an open topic to find the most appropriate approach for this kind of data. we recommend using fishers test since it is robust and is very powerful under many situations. in summary, we have proposed a new approach to detect differentially methylated loci for case control illumina array methylation data. through simulation study and a real data application, we have shown that the proposed method is more powerful than the commonly used t-test and regression-based method.  
