databases and ontologies owl2perl: creating perl modules from owl class definitions support for utilizing owl ontologies in perl is extremely limited, despite the growing importance of the semantic web in healthcare and life sciences. here, we present a perl framework that generates perl modules based on owl class definitions. these modules can then be used by other software applications to create resource description framework (rdf) data compliant with these owl models. availability: owl2perl is available for download from cpan, under the module name owl2perl. it is released under the new bsdthe semantic web can be envisioned as two layerslinked data and explicit knowledgeencoded in two technologies, resource description framework (rdf; http://www.w3c.org/rdf) and web ontology language (owl; http://www.w3.org/tr/owl-features/) respectively. in rdf, data points or data entities are named by universal resource indicators (uris), and pairs of uris are linked together with meaningful predicates that describe the relationship between the two uris. the resulting network or graph is then interpreted by knowledge encoded in owl ontologies; the uris become explicitly typed as instances of ontologically defined classes based on the network of predicates and values surrounding them. thus, a uri with the predicates color, texture, taste, weight with values red, crunchy, sweet, 300 g might be classified as type apple by a fruit ontology, or as basketable-item by a gift-basket ontology. though the above is a scenario in which ontologies are used to interpret and classify existing data, ontologies can also be used to guide the creation of structured data, in a manner akin to how an xml schema is used to constrain the structure of a valid xml document. this is useful as it allows one to generate and publish data compliant with some defined knowledge structure in order to facilitate others integration and interpretation of that data. the bioinformatics community is rapidly adopting semantic web technologies, though there is a wide variation in the extent to which formal logics have been adopted by the various projects. at one end of the spectrum, perhaps the most recognized community is to whom correspondence should be addressed. the open biological ontologies project (obo;). obo ontologies are primarily declarative class hierarchies, where the conditions for class membership are not part of the computable definition of the class. at the other end of the spectrum, are ontologies such as phosphabase and the lipid ontology where each class is axiomatically defined by the properties and property values that are required by members of that class. it is these logically rich ontologies that we aim to support with owl2perl. support for both rdf and owl is strong in the java programming language. in the perl programming language, there are several projects that provide support for rdf, including rdf::core (http://search.cpan.org/dpokorny/rdf-core/); however perl support for owl is extremely limited. onto-perl and go-perl (http://search.cpan.org/cmungall/go-perl/) both handle obo-style ontologies, but cannot consume the full breadth of owl logical constructs. moreover, these two projects are primarily aimed at manipulating the ontology itself, rather than creating instance data. class-owl (http://search.cpan.org/dist/class-owl/) intends to create perl classes from owl ontologies; however, the code appears to be non-functional, is not documented, and has not been updated for more than a year, so we assume the project has been abandoned. here, we present owl2perla perl application that consumes owl-dl ontologies and creates perl packages representing each class in that ontology, in a manner similar to jastor in java . each perl object includes stub methods allowing you to get and set the properties that define that class. importantly, instances of that perl object can serialize themselves as ontologically valid instance data in rdf format.owl2perl was developed specifically to enhance perl code support for the sadi (semantic automated discovery and integration) semantic web service project; however, any project that must programmatically generate rdf data compliant with owl-dl definitions could benefit from owl2perl. we believe the audience for owl2perl will expand as richer description logic owl ontologies become increasingly pervasive in bioinformatics.  
