gene expression pagefinder: quantitative identification of spatiotemporal pattern genes pattern gene finder (pagefinder) is a web-based server for on-line detection of gene expression patterns from serial transcriptomic data generated by high-throughput technologies like microarray or next-generation sequencing. three particular parameters, the specificity measure, the dispersion measure and the contribution measure, were introduced and implemented in pagefinder to help quantitative and interactive identification of pattern genes like housekeeping genes, specific (selective) genes and repressed genes. besides the on-line computation service, the pagefinder also provides downloadable java programs for local detection of gene expression patterns.spatiotemporal variation of gene expression can happen extensively among tissues, developmental stages, physiological conditions and individuals . the variation is believed to link with gene function and pathology. benefiting from current applications of high-throughput technologies, e.g. microarray and next-generation sequencing (ngs), simultaneously monitoring gene differential expressions in large scale becomes easier. when digging into these large volume of data, patterns can be detected. currently, three kinds of pattern genes, housekeeping genes, specific/selective genes and repressed genes, have received general attentions. housekeeping genes are generally defined as genes that express ubiquitously in all conditions, which have been adopted as molecular markers in qualitatively or semi-quantitatively measuring gene expression level for a long time . the specific (selective) genes are a group of genes whose expressions are enriched in one or several conditions, e.g. tissues, or developmental stages . opposite to the specific gene expression, some genes are expressed in almost all conditions except in one or several conditions. these genes are acknowledged as repressed genes or disallowed genes . they are exceptions of housekeeping genes. the spatiotemporal preference of these pattern genes carries crucial information of what the genes to whom correspondence should be addressed. do and how they work together to execute certain physiological functions. traditionally, these pattern genes were detected by molecular technologies like rt-pcr, in situ hybridization etc. however, due to the limitation of technologies, many pattern genes identified by these methods were later found to be inappropriate when including more samples. this problem was significantly reduced with availability of large scale datasets generated by microarray, sage or ngs. upon these high-throughput data, various methods were adopted previously on detecting such pattern genes, including cutoff, relative fraction and learning algorithms like naive bayes classifier (de) and svm . some of them are simple but qualitative (e.g. cutoff); some are quantitative but insensitive (e.g. relative fraction); some are powerful but instable and hard to be implemented (e.g. learning algorithms). therefore in this study, we introduced three novel parameters as quantitative indicators to describe and automatically identify pattern genes from serial transcriptomic data. an on-line server was constructed as well to provide dynamic analysis service.  
