pager: constructing pags and new pag–pag relationships for network biology in this article, we described a new database framework to perform integrative gene-set, network , and pathway analysis (gnpa). in this framework, we integrated heterogeneous data on pathways, annotated list, and gene-sets (pags) into a pag electronic repository (pager). pags in the pager database are organized into p-type, a-type and g-type pags with a three-letter-code standard naming convention. the pager database currently compiles 44 313 genes from 5 species including human, 38 663 pags, 324 830 genegene relationships and two types of 3 174 323 pagpag regulatory relationshipsco-membership based and regulatory relationship based. to help users assess each pags biological relevance, we developed a cohesion measure called cohesion coefficient (coco), which is capable of disambiguating between biologically significant pags and random pags with an area-under-curve performance of 0.98. pager database was set up to help users to search and retrieve pags from its online web interface. pager enable advanced users to build pagpag regulatory networks that provide complementary biological insights not found in gene set analysis or individual gene network analysis. we provide a case study using cancer functional genomics data sets to demonstrate how integrative gnpa help improve network biology data coverage and therefore biological in-terpretability. the pager database can be accessible openly at http://discovery.informatics. iupui.edu/pager/.to characterize complex patterns of genetic variations or rna/ protein expressions in surging omics data sets, bioinformatics researchers have developed new data analysis approachesgene-set analysis and network/ pathway analysis . when compared with individual gene-based analysis approaches, gene-set, network, and pathway analysis (gnpa) have the potential advantage of increasing results reproducibility, model robustness, and data interpretability, while reducing biases in noisy omics experimental data . gnpa is essentially an integrative analysis strategy that takes advantage of a priori data structures acquired from many sources in: e.g. gene ontology (go) , pathways , gene/protein mutation or expression signatures , chemical perturbations , metabolomics signatures , curated literature , computational predictions or public databases for gene-sets, molecular signatures and pathway/network modules . depending on the pathway details, these analyses can take as minimal information as possible, e.g. using gene list alone as in gene-set analysis , incorporating gene-set databases with expression rank information as in gene set enrichment analysis , or take as much pathway/network interaction detail as possible, e.g. using pathway reaction/regulation details as in enrichnet . for biomedical researchers, gnpa can v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.in this work, we presented a new conceptual framework that unifies pathways, annotated gene lists, and gene-sets into a standardized representation called pags. we constructed a comprehensive data repository called pager for pag data from heterogeneous sources including ontology, pathway, omics, and public databases. the new pager database collects 80 more pag data than that of the popular msigdb database. we showed that a significant benefit for using pager data is the benchmarking of each pag with cohesion measuresscores that can help evaluate the biological relevance of all genes/proteins in a given pag in high confidence. to address the practical challenges of performing gnpa, we define new pagpag relationships as m-type for those with shared members between pags and t-type for those with strong supporting gene regulatory relationships pointing from one pag to the next. we demonstrated through an integrative cancer genomics study how integrative multiscale gnpa could help gain significant biological insights of the omics data. we expect future researchers in the field to focus on addressing several key questions related to pag data management and integrative gnpa. first, there should be sufficient focus on curating pags with rich meta-data, e.g. information on individual genetic background, life-style, and electronic medical records. second, there should be comprehensive linking of genomics and functional genomics data from public databases into pag data structure. therefore, researchers may further investigate the biological relevance of enriched pags and regulatory pag relationships derived from gnpa. last, we expect to develop novel literature mining and crowd sourcing within the biomedical research community to continue rapid extension of data for the pager database.  
