systems biology paintomics: a web based tool for the joint visualization of transcriptomics and metabolomics data motivation: the development of the omics technologies such as transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics has made possible the realization of systems biology studies where biological systems are interrogated at different levels of biochemical activity (gene expression, protein activity and/or metabolite concentration). an effective approach to the analysis of these complex datasets is the joined visualization of the disparate biomolecular data on the framework of known biological pathways. results: we have developed the paintomics web server as an easy-to-use bioinformatics resource that facilitates the integrated visual analysis of experiments where transcriptomics and metabolomics data have been measured on different conditions for the same samples. basically, paintomics takes complete transcriptomics and metabolomics datasets, together with lists of significant gene or metabolite changes, and paints this information on kegg pathway maps. availability: paintomics is freely available atbiological research in the post-genomics era has been characterized by the extensive use of omics technologies. the general availability of transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics platforms, together with the development of user-friendly data analysis solutions (da wei) has boosted the adoption of high-throughput approaches towards the understanding of the relationships between the genome and the phenotype. integrated approaches that combine transcriptome, proteome and metabolome profiling have gained popularity and have proven to provide novel insights in the understanding of the biological systems . a first approach to the interpretation of complex omics experiments is the joined visualization of the data on templates that collect previous knowledge. graphical display is an effective tool to assist human reasoning and when different layers of biomolecular activity are presented in the context of the biological pathways they operate, much can be gained at the interpret ability of these large datasets. to whom correspondence should be addressed.to date, the number of bioinformatics tools that offer integrated visualization of omics datasets is limited. kappa-view and mapman are plant-specific tools that display metabolite and transcript levels on predefined pathway blocks. the masstrix software translates nmr spectra into metabolic compounds and maps them into kegg pathways together with genome information. the tool is specially suited for exploring the metabolic repertoire of sequenced genomes but does not incorporates gene expression measurements. a recent development is prometra that accepts pre-computed and custommade pathway maps in scalable vector graphics (svg) format and is able to display dynamics data. the application is restricted microbial genomes and offers direct access to different omics experimental databases. although these tools make an interesting use of visualization strategies, we found that available resources are either restricted to specific biological domains and/or have limitations for representing omics measurements. we have developed paintomics to provide a simple but effective resource for integrated visualization in genomics studies where transcriptomics and metabolomics data are generated on the same set of samples. basically, the application accepts gene expression and metabolite quantifications and displays data on kegg maps. the main distinctive features of paintomics are: painted kegg maps supported for a large range of organisms; joint visualization of different types of omics data, displaying both significant and non-significant changes; computation of pathway enrichment based on both transcriptomics and metabolomics data; interactive images with link-outs to kegg info and experimental values; and easy to download mapped data for further analysis. paintomics is available at http://www.paintomics.org.  
