genome analysis pangp: a tool for quickly analyzing bacterial pan-genome profile pan-genome analyses have shed light on the dynamics and evolution of bacterial genome from the point of population. the explosive growth of bacterial genome sequence also brought an extremely big challenge to pan-genome profile analysis. we developed a tool, named pangp, to complete pan-genome profile analysis for large-scale strains efficiently. pangp has integrated two sampling algorithms, totally random (tr) and distance guide (dg). the dg algorithm drew sample strain combinations on the basis of genome diversity of bacterial population. the performance of these two algorithms have been evaluated on four bacteria populations with strain numbers varying from 30 to 200, and the dg algorithm exhibited overwhelming advantage on accuracy and stability than the tr algorithm. availability: pangp was developed with a user-friendly graphic interface and it was available at http://pangp.since the conception pan-genome was introduced in 2005 , pan-genome had shed light on the genomic diversity and evolution of bacterial genome. to make pangenome analyses more expediently, several software tools were designed. panseq could identify single nucleotide polymorphism on core genome and strains specific region , and pgap was designed to perform five analytic functions with only one command . at the same time, a series of mathematic models had been proposed to characterize pangenome profile of bacteria, such as the streptococcus agalactiae pan-genome model , the haemophilus influenzae pan-genome model , heaps law model and infinitely many genes model . all current models could well depict the pan-genome profile of a launch of bacteria with their time complexity o(n2 n ), where n is the strain number. in this article, we developed two sampling algorithms to efficiently perform pan-genome profile analysis for larger scale genomes. these two algorithms were integrated in the software with a graphic interface, pangp.  
