genetics and population analysis papa: a flexible tool for identifying pleiotropic pathways using genome-wide association study summaries pleiotropy is common in the genetic architectures of complex diseases. to the best of our knowledge, no analysis tool has been developed for identifying pleiotropic pathways using multiple genome-wide association study (gwas) summaries by now. here, we present papa, a flexible tool for pleiotropic pathway analysis utilizing gwas summary results. the performance of papa was validated using publicly available gwas summaries of body mass index and waist-hip ratio of the giant datasets. papa identified a set of pleiotropic pathways, which have been demonstrated to be involved in the development of obesity. availability and implementation: papa program, document and illustrative example are available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/papav1/files/.pleiotropy describes the genetic phenomenon of a single gene affecting multiple phenotypes. it can be explained by single gene product having various biological functions, or acting as a signal factor implicated in the development of different phenotypes. pleiotropy is common in the genetic architectures of complex diseases . a total of 16.9 of genes recorded in the nhgri catalog of published genome-wide association studies (gwas) have pleiotropic effects . clarifying the molecular mechanism of pleiotropy is helpful for pathogenetic studies and drug development of human complex diseases. recent achievements in gwas provide a good opportunity for systematical pleiotropy studies of complex diseases. a simple approach is to analyse disease phenotypes separately using univariate approaches. the study results of different disease phenotypes are compared, which may result in low statistical power. to address this issue, multiple pleiotropy analysis approaches and tools have been proposed . a group of genes with pleiotropic effects were identified for complex diseases . however, current pleiotropic mechanism studies of complex diseases mostly focus on individual pleiotropic genes, which are sometimes functionally independent. some individual pleiotropic genes participate in multiple cellular processes. the biological functions of a part of genes remain elusive now. therefore, identifying individual pleiotropic genes often provides limited information for genetic studies of complex diseases. inspired by the gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) of microarray data , pathway-based gwas were proposed and successfully applied in the genetic studies of complex diseases . however, to the best of our knowledge, no analysis tool has been developed for identifying pleiotropic pathways using gwas summary results by now. in this study, we extended the pathway analysis algorithm proposed by, and developed a pleiotropic pathway analysis tool papa. we applied papa to public available gwas summaries of v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com body mass index (bmi) and waist-hip ratio (whr) of the genetic investigation of anthropometric traits datasets .  
