data and text mining papermaker: validation of biomedical scientific publications motivation: the automatic analysis of scientific literature can support authors in writing their manuscripts. implementation: papermaker is a novel it solution that receives a scientific manuscript via a web interface, automatically analyses the publication, evaluates consistency parameters and interactively delivers feedback to the author. it analyses the proper use of acronyms and their definitions, and the use of specialized terminology. it provides gene ontology (go) and medline subject headings (mesh) categorization of text passages, the retrieval of relevant publications from public scientific literature repositories, and the identification of missing or unused references. result: the author receives a summary of findings, the manuscript in its corrected form and a digital abstract containing the go and mesh annotations in the nlm/pubmed format. availability: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/rebholz-srv/papermakerthe primary purpose of scientific publications is to report on new scientific findings and to embed them in prior research work. the author receives best acceptance if a large audience accurately perceives what he had in mind, and manuscripts of good quality have a higher likelihood to pass the review process. scientists write their manuscripts in loosely structured natural language but have to comply with standards concerning the document format, the use of language and the citation of prior work. the availability of electronic data resources such as ontologies, reference databases and electronic literature in the biomedical scientific community exposes the scientists to new requirements: the use of domain-specific terminology has to follow standards from scientific databases and the author has to support submission of data to the reference database as part of the manuscript submission process . furthermore, the author has to avoid duplication of the existing work. reliable automatic feedback on any of these parameters will improve the speed and efficiency of the manuscript preparation phase and the review phase for authors, publisher and reviewers. existing solutions for the analysis of the scientific literature focus on improving the search of relevant to whom correspondence should be addressed. information but cannot be applied during the manuscript preparation phase.  
