gene expression a new statistic for identifying batch effects in high-throughput genomic data that uses guided principal component analysis motivation: batch effects are due to probe-specific systematic variation between groups of samples (batches) resulting from experimental features that are not of biological interest. principal component analysis (pca) is commonly used as a visual tool to determine whether batch effects exist after applying a global normalization method. however, pca yields linear combinations of the variables that contribute maximum variance and thus will not necessarily detect batch effects if they are not the largest source of variability in the data. results: we present an extension of pca to quantify the existence of batch effects, called guided pca (gpca). we describe a test statistic that uses gpca to test whether a batch effect exists. we apply our proposed test statistic derived using gpca to simulated data and to two copy number variation case studies: the first study consisted of 614 samples from a breast cancer family study using illumina human 660 bead-chip arrays, whereas the second case study consisted of 703 samples from a family blood pressure study that used affymetrix snp array 6.0. we demonstrate that our statistic has good statistical properties and is able to identify significant batch effects in two copy number variation case studies. conclusion: we developed a new statistic that uses gpca to identify whether batch effects exist in high-throughput genomic data.gpca can be used to identify batch effects in large and messy data, such as expression, cnv, and methylation data, by computing the svd while taking batch into account. principal component plots are a standard method of looking for batch effects in high-throughput data. here, we show how gpca can be used both to visualize batch effects and to formally test whether batch effects are present in the data. from our simulation studies, the type i error of our statistic is close to nominal 0.05 level and power is reasonably good when an adequate proportion of the features are affected by batch. additionally, when the proportion of features affected by batch is high (between 50 and 90), the estimated power is 100 (supplementary). the y matrix in the gpca analysis can be formed by considering any combination of variables. we note that with the y matrix coding multiple variables, the variance ascribed to the first principal component of the gpca may incorporate multiple sources, which would be difficult to disentangle. to estimate the variance attributed to multiple sources, gpca could be used to examine each one by defining y in separate analyses. note that gpca is dependent on knowing how to define potential batch effects. if this is not known, this statistic should not be used. if batch is misspecified by the investigator, provided the misspecified batch effect indicator matrix has no relationship to the experimental design, then the test will likely not reject the null hypothesis because type i error was close to the nominal 0.05 level. in the case of microarray data, scaling of the batch identifier matrix y is not in general useful for balanced experiments. however, when some batches have far more samples than others, scaling of y is a useful tool to correct for the imbalance. in the case of the genemam data, while plates 5 and 8 had half as many or fewer samples than the rest of the plates, the effect of scaling y was minimal, although it did have an effect. for microarray data, we do not want to scale the data matrix x, as all the variables, probes in our case, are already on the same scale and scaling x would only serve to adjust the variance. if the variances are smoothed, then we may miss an important difference between variables or batches. gpca can be used on other problems and types of data as well, including b-allele frequency data and expression data. because pre-processing of microarrays is time-consuming, expensive and with abundant systematic errors, the ability to discover and adjust for these errors is important. our test statistic that uses gpca allows one to find the sources of systematic errors, or batch effects, in all types of microarray data and adjust for it during analysis. in summary, herein we present a novel statistic to test for the presence of batch effects. the test is particularly useful to test whether batch effects exist after applying a global normalization procedure such as quantile or loess normalization. although these global normalization procedures correct for batch effects that affect all probes similarly, they do not correct for probespecific batch effects. furthermore, our test statistic is useful for determining whether a batch-correction method has adequately removed observed batch effects.note: batch mean-centering was used for batch effect correction.  
