bioimage informatics parallel content-based sub-image retrieval using hierarchical searching motivation: the capacity to systematically search through large image collections and ensembles and detect regions exhibiting similar morphological characteristics is central to pathology diagnosis. unfortunately, the primary methods used to search digitized, whole-slide histopathology specimens are slow and prone to inter-and intra-observer variability. the central objective of this research was to design, develop, and evaluate a content-based image retrieval system to assist doctors for quick and reliable content-based comparative search of similar prostate image patches. method: given a representative image patch (sub-image), the algorithm will return a ranked ensemble of image patches throughout the entire whole-slide histology section which exhibits the most similar mor-phologic characteristics. this is accomplished by first performing hierarchical searching based on a newly developed hierarchical annular histogram (hah). the set of candidates is then further refined in the second stage of processing by computing a color histogram from eight equally divided segments within each square annular bin defined in the original hah. a demand-driven master-worker parallelization approach is employed to speed up the searching procedure. using this strategy, the query patch is broadcasted to all worker processes. each worker process is dynamically assigned an image by the master process to search for and return a ranked list of similar patches in the image. results: the algorithm was tested using digitized hematoxylin and eosin (h&e) stained prostate cancer specimens. we have achieved an excellent image retrieval performance. the recall rate within the first 40 rank retrieved image patches is $90. availability and implementation: both the testing data and source code can be downloaded from http://pleiad.umdnj.edu/cbii/ bioinformatics/.the exponential growth of imaging in biomedical research in the past decade has resulted in an increasing demand for efficient content-based image retrieval (cbir) systems, which can detect and locate similar images in large-scale collections given a representative input query. several state-of-the-art cbir systems have been designed to facilitate the execution of queries across separate images in support of diagnostic decisions. however, with the advent of whole-slide digital microscopy, which can generate high-resolution images rapidly, users of cbir systems are often more interested in performing subregion searching and navigation (usually searching for an image patch exhibiting specific patterns or structures, containing an object). when provided with a region of interest (i.e. a query patch), a cbir system should be able to return patches in a set of images that contain localized subregions exhibiting features similar to the query patch. this process is called content-based sub-image retrieval (cbsir). an advantage of cbsir is that the relevance of images is not limited by changes in specific viewpoint of the image or any background clutter that might be present . in practice, this approach makes it possible for pathologists and other investigators to select an area or object of interest within a digitized specimen. recently, researchers have proposed methods for performing cbsir on both natural and medical images. luo andhave introduced relevance feedback by applying a tile reweighting approach to assign penalties to tiles that compose database images and update the penalties for all retrieved images within each iteration. to perform region-of-interest (roi) queries,have presented a sammatch framework-based similarity model. a hash table-based method for image object retrieval is presented inis used to address the sub-image retrieval problem using a local sensitive hashing searching algorithm. however, this strategy is time-consuming because of the large amount of features that need to be computed. to perform large-scale subregion retrieval, the method reported inuses approximate k-means and hierarchical k-means to build large vocabularies followed by a randomized tree-based quantization algorithm.have incorporated a contextual synonym dictionary to the bag of visual words framework for large-scale visual object searches, where synonym words are used to describe visual objects with the same semantic meaning. a fast and efficient subwindow search (ess) algorithm is presented into localize regions of interest using a branch-and-bound scheme, which enables efficient maximization of a large class of classification functions over all possible sub-images. building on the ess algorithm, lampert (2009) has introduced a new box set parameterization that is suitable for subregion retrieval and a two layer branch-and-bound scheme to localize objects in large image collections. another subregion-driven image retrieval method can be found in sivic and zisserman (2009), which represents objects with a set of viewpoint invariant region descriptors and uses a spatial layout to rank the retrieved regions. in an attempt to address the challenges of subregion retrieval in medical image datasets, simonyan et al. (2011) have developed a structured visual search method.have proposed a method for executing roi queries in ct scans. this method first executes instance-based regression in combination with interpolation techniques to map scanned slides to the height of a human body model. next, it finds a stable mapping while deriving a minimal amount of matching points. in this article, we have proposed a three-stage cbsir system that is different from the previous efforts. we have designed a novel feature called a hierarchical annular histogram (hah), which is proven to be not only accurate but also computationally efficient. the algorithm flowchart is shown in. the workflow first performs hierarchical searching using hah. it subsequently refines the search by computing a color histogram from eight equally divided segments of each square annular bin, which we refer to as the refined hah. finally, mean-shift clustering is executed to delineate densely overlapping candidates to generate the final content-based rank retrieval results. we also implemented a parallelization strategy for the cbsir system based on the well-known masterworker style execution to scale cbsir to large numbers of images. the masterworker strategy uses a demand-driven assignment scheme in which images are assigned by a master process to worker processes dynamically whenever workers become idle. this strategy is suitable for cbsir, as search for images patches similar to the query patch can be performed independently. we have developed a unique extension to this basic strategy to take advantage of hierarchical searching to reduce the list of images to be processed when resources are limited and shared by other clients and applications.in this article, we have presented the design and implementation of a content-based sub-image retrieval (cbsir) and navigation framework and its parallel implementation. this framework uses a simple yet powerful hierarchical searching based on a novel feature call hah to reduce the cost of extracting image patches from a large-scale, whole-slide scanned, high-resolution microscopy datasets with the purpose of seeking the most similar cases as the given query patch. we also presented its parallel implementation in details. our results show that performance savings can be significant with the hierarchical cbsir compared with non-hierarchical cbsir because the hierarchical searching step can be leveraged to reduce the number of images to be analyzed using a user-defined similarity measure. the cost of the hierarchical searching step is small enough that substantial reduction in resource usage can be achieved when a subset of images are selected and processed, even when the cost of the hierarchical searching step is added to the overall execution time.  
