genome analysis parent-specific copy number in paired tumor–normal studies using circular binary segmentation motivation: high-throughput techniques facilitate the simultaneous measurement of dna copy number at hundreds of thousands of sites on a genome. older techniques allow measurement only of total copy number, the sum of the copy number contributions from the two parental chromosomes. newer single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) techniques can in addition enable quantifying parent-specific copy number (pscn). the raw data from such experiments are two-dimensional, but are unphased. consequently, inference based on them necessitates development of new analytic methods. methods: we have adapted and enhanced the circular binary segmentation (cbs) algorithm for this purpose with focus on paired test and reference samples. the essence of paired parent-specific cbs (paired pscbs) is to utilize the original cbs algorithm to identify regions of equal total copy number and then to further segment these regions where there have been changes in pscn. for the final set of regions, calls are made of equal parental copy number and loss of heterozygosity (loh). pscn estimates are computed both before and after calling. results: the methodology is evaluated by simulation and on glioblastoma data. in the simulation, pscbs compares favorably to established methods. on the glioblastoma data, pscbs identifies interesting genomic regions, such as copy-neutral loh. availability: the paired pscbs method is implemented in an open-source r package named pscbs, available on cran (http://cran.r-project.org/).changes in the number of copies of genomic dna is an important step in the progression of cancer. comparative genomic hybridization (cgh) was developed to identify these changes at a resolution of 1020 mb . platforms for copy number (cn) analysis that employ microarray technology and that achieve high resolution include array cgh , roma and snp arrays . current technology has improved the resolution to as low as 1 kb. with custom arrays also available, the resolution in particular neighborhoods can be even higher. heretofore, cn analysis has consisted primarily of examining total copy number (tcn). tcn is the sum of the cns from the two parental chromosomes. for normal human cells, total cn is two, one from each parental chromosome. snp arrays allow separate estimates of cn from the parental chromosomes. this is parentspecific copy number (pscn). pscn may be interesting for two major reasons. first, there may be alleles that differentially undergo cn change . estimating pscn would help elucidate this situation. second, when the total cn is c, the pscns may be more complicated than (1,c 1). for instance, diploid (c = 2) cn is maintained when one parental copy is lost and the other is doubled. this type of alteration is called copy-neutral loss-of-heterozygosity (cn-loh), and it occurs often in many cancers including glioblastoma and hematologic malignancies (o). such a region would be assumed normal if there was analysis only of total cn. direct estimates of pscn can be made only for snps at which a subject is heterozygous. homozygous snps are not directly informative because all the cn signal is in one allele. for example, if both parents contributed g, then there would only be a g cn signal, and this would result in no information additional to that contained in total cn. for heterozygous snps, however, there are two components to the cn information. if the subject was gt at a snp, then there would be a cn estimate corresponding to g and one corresponding to t. one of the cns would be expected to have come from one parent and the other to have come from the otherhere, we assess the performance and correctness of paired pscbs. first, we assess the performance of pscbs relative to extant methods on previously simulated data. second, we show that pscbs finds interesting genomic regions on glioblastoma data and that its results are similar for affymetrix and illumina arrays.we developed an extension of cbs to estimate parent-specific cn from snp data. in a simulation it identified gains and losses accurately and performed favorably compared with some of its competitors. a matched affymetrix and illumina real data example showed consistent and visually appealing segmentation results. pscbs consists of a concatenation of several tests and estimates. in an ideal world we would compute an exact probability that it estimates allele-specific cn correctly. anyone who sees explicit computation as a target will conclude that at any step of the process, an accurate calculation would be conditional on the outcomes of all previous steps. such a computation is impossible, no matter the order in which it is attempted. despite our inability to provide a precise probability, we trust that readers will agree that there are persuasive arguments for use of the algorithm. they include demonstration that it is successful in achieving goals for which it is intended. as mentioned in section 3.1, regions in the simulation were called cn-loh if they were not called gained or lost and if the parentspecific estimates were unequal. the first should be uncontroversial,  
