gene expression parseq: reconstruction of microbial transcription landscape from rna-seq read counts using state-space models motivation: the most common rna-seq strategy consists of random shearing, amplification and high-throughput sequencing of the rna fraction. methods to analyze transcription level variations along the genome from the read count profiles generated by the rna-seq protocol are needed. results: we developed a statistical approach to estimate the local transcription levels and to identify transcript borders. this transcrip-tional landscape reconstruction relies on a state-space model to describe transcription level variations in terms of abrupt shifts and more progressive drifts. a new emission model is introduced to capture not only the read count variance inside a transcript but also its short-range autocorrelation and the fraction of positions with zero counts. the estimation relies on a particle gibbs algorithm whose running time makes it more suited to microbial genomes. the approach outper-formed read-overlapping strategies on synthetic and real microbial datasets.sequencing technologies play an increasing role in the investigation of gene expression [rna sequencing (. the most common rna-seq strategy is based on random shearing, amplification and high-throughput sequencing of the rnas, yielding millions of sequence reads that serve to characterize wholegenome transcriptional profiles . current protocols provide strand-specific data . after mapping onto a reference genome sequence, the number of reads found at each position of the genome is recorded and those counts can be used to derive estimates of gene expression up to the isoform level under the assumption that read counts are proportional to transcript length and transcription level. the read coverage along the genome also provides a rich information that is often used to map new transcriptionally active regions . despite the amount of data collected in the past decade, initially with microarrays and now with sequencing, for most of the organisms, there are still no or incomplete annotations of their transcripts. even the most studied model organisms are lacking a full characterization of their transcriptome architecture. not only the complete condition-dependent repertoire of transcripts proves difficult to establish but also the biological meaning of important transcripts categories, such as pervasive transcription in eukaryotes and antisense rnas in bacteria , remains elusivehence, the importance of developing new computational approaches that could help to extract more information from rna-seq datasets. a major research direction toward the identification of transcript structures is based on read assembling . reference-based methods begin with the alignment of reads on the genome. fragments are constructed by joining reads on the basis of paired-end or fragment length information. fragment overlapping is then examined to build a connection graph. at the end, the connected reads are predicted to belong to the same transcript. isoform structure can be inferred from the path of fragment contigs , and expression levels can be estimated after allocation of the reads to the inferred transcripts. although this approach provides insightful results at a computationally affordable cost and can use reads overlapping exon junctions as direct evidence for splicing , it has also some intrinsic limitations. the most obvious is that limited depth of sequencing combined with technical biases may cause gaps that lead to artificial splits in transcript structure. irrespective of the sequencing depth, this approach is also unable to point to overlapping transcripts caused by promoter multiplicity and incomplete termination. however, these two mechanisms contribute substantially to the transcriptomes complexity in organisms with compact-sized genomes . our aim in this study is to develop a principled strategy for analyzing changes in expression levels whose output could help to identify the variety of mechanisms shaping the transcriptional landscape. the task is complicated because of the existence of several types of protocol-induced biases that cause longitudinal variability of coverage along the chromosome. part of these artifacts can be explained by the influence of the local nucleotide to whom correspondence should be addressed.this article presents a model-based approach for analyzing the rna-seq read count profiles along the genome. the model aims for an account of artifactual longitudinal variabilitys sources, via a new model of overdispersion able to capture not only the variance versus mean relationships but also the fraction of zero counts and the short-range autocorrelations. from a methodological standpoint, our work also demonstrates the feasibility of analyzing genome-scale data within the framework of ssms. the recently described pg algorithm was instrumental in this success. running time does not depend on the depth of the sequencing, but is proportional to genome length, which makes it more suited to microbial genomes. the method outperforms a read assembly approach at low sequencing depth, and shows a clear improvement on real data even for high sequencing depth. we believe that the availability of such a tool will become increasingly useful as the use of rnaseq becomes more popular. in particular, the availability of confidence scores and credibility intervals will be relevant to build a reference annotation from a compendium of experiments as done from tiling array data and also to compare global rna-seq profiles with the results of protocols targeting more specifically the sequencing of transcript ends . in principle, one could also envision to extend the model for situations where data would be collected with distinct rna-seq protocols on the same biological sample.  
