data and text mining partdsa: deletion/substitution/addition algorithm for partitioning the covariate space in prediction motivation: until now, much of the focus in cancer has been on biomarker discovery and generating lists of univariately significant genes, as well as epidemiological and clinical measures. these approaches, although significant on their own, are not effective for elucidating the synergistic qualities of the numerous components in complex diseases. these components do not act one at a time, but rather in concert with numerous others. a compelling need exists to develop analytically sound and computationally advanced methods that elucidate a more biologically meaningful understanding of the mechanisms of cancer initiation and progression by taking these interactions into account. results: we propose a novel algorithm, partdsa, for prediction when several variables jointly affect the outcome. in such settings, piecewise constant estimation provides an intuitive approach by elucidating interactions and correlation patterns in addition to main effects. as well as generating and statements similar to previously described methods, partdsa explores and chooses the best among all possible or statements. the immediate benefit of partdsa is the ability to build a parsimonious model with and and or conjunctions that account for the observed biological phenomena. importantly, partdsa is capable of handling categorical and continuous explanatory variables and outcomes. we evaluate the effectiveness of partdsa in comparison to several adaptive algorithms in simulations; additionally, we perform several data analyses with publicly available data and introduce the implementation of partdsa as an r package.by pinpointing and targeting specific early events in disease development, clinicians aim toward a more preventative model of attacking cancer. these early events can be measured as genomic, epidemiologic and/or clinical variables. genomic variables can be measured on expression or comparative genomic hybridization (cgh) microarrays, epidemiologic variables with questionnaires, to whom correspondence should be addressed. and clinical variables with pathology and histology reports. these measurements are then used to predict clinical outcomes such as number of nodes involved or response to treatment as measured by decrease in tumor size. in theory, given the interactions of biological components inherent in carcinogenesis, model building should require the examination of all possible combinations of variables. however, in practice, it is frequently impossible to search over this entire set. tree-based methods, which rely on the construction of piecewise constant estimators avoid this problem by attempting to approximate the search using recursive binary partitioning. perhaps the most popular methodology in use today is classification and regression trees (cart ;). there are three main aspects to this tree-structured estimation scheme: (i) the splitting rule for generating the candidate predictors; (ii) the selection of a right-sized tree, referred to as pruning; (iii) estimation of the parameter of interest within each terminal node. solutions to each of these problems typically involve optimization of a lossbased criterion. subsequently, the final cart model is represented primarily by a list ofalthough the cart algorithm does not intentionally build or statements, it is sometimes possible post-analysis to form such conjunctions with two or more terminal nodes. unlike cart, which fits a piecewise constant estimate within every terminal node, multivariate adaptive regression splines (mars;) fit piecewise linear functions. the result is a function that is continuous with respect to a continuous covariate. mars was originally developed for a continuous outcome although adaptations are possible for those that are categorical. after cart and mars, the most analogous method in the statistical literature is logic regression, a novel algorithm that constructs predictors as boolean combinations of binary covariates . one restriction of logic regression is that it does not allow for continuous covariates, only binary. therefore, to accomplish the task of aggressively searching a highly complex variable space with a variety of variable types, we propose partdsa: a deletion/substitution/addition algorithm for partitioning the covariate space in prediction. in addition to generating and statements, partdsa explores and chooses the best among all possible or statements to build the most parsimonious model. there are numerous motivating examples of this in carcinogenesis. for instance, during the cell cycle there may be several regions of dna that have been altered leading to a gain on one chromosome and a loss on another. although thesepage: 1358 13571363partdsa is a novel tool for generating a piecewise constant estimation sieve of candidate estimators based on an intensive and comprehensive search over the entire covariate space. the strength of this new algorithm is that it builds precise estimates of the parameter of interest based on and and or statements. these conjunctions allow combinations and substitutions of partitions for the purpose of discovering intricate correlation patterns and interactions in addition to main effects. as such, partdsa provides users an additional tool for their statistical toolbox. depending on the application, partdsa will supersede other methods by being not only more aggressive but also more flexible. as seen in the synthetic and real data sections, as well as the supplementary material, partdsa consistently had a lower error than cart, mars and, when applicable, logic regression. in addition, partdsa selected the correct variables and built more page: 1363 13571363  
