genome analysis pass-bis: a bisulfite aligner suitable for whole methylome analysis of illumina and solid reads the sequencing of bisulfite-treated dna (bi-seq) is becoming a gold standard for methylation studies. the mapping of bi-seq reads is complex and requires special alignment algorithms. this problem is particularly relevant for solid color space, where the bisulfite conversion c/t changes two adjacent colors into 16 possible combinations. here, we present an algorithm that efficiently aligns bi-seq reads obtained either from solid or illumina. an accompanying methylation-caller program creates a genomic view of methylated and unmethylated cs on both dna strands. availability and implementation: the algorithm has been implemented as an option of the program pass, freely available at http:// pass.bisulfite sequencing (bi-seq) is an established method to provide information on methylation status of dna . unmethylated cs are deaminated by bisulfite treatment, and after pcr, they turn into ts, whereas methylated cs remain unchanged. the bi-seq reads are mapped onto the reference genome by taking into account that cs may have become ts. the resulting t/c discrepancies are then used to infer the methylation status. although the general rationale of bi-seq is easily understood, the analysis of the data is difficult. the two dna strands change asymmetrically, as the cs occur in different positions. as a result, each strand produces a different reference genome for bi-seq mapping, with the consequent increase of complexity and a possible loss of mapping specificity. a further specificity loss may be due to the diminished linguistic complexity, as we essentially switch from a four-base to the three-base alphabet (agt). some early methods for bi-seq mapping required long execution times, being based on probability vectors or on iterations of all possible c/t conversions . more recently, some efficient algorithms have been developed such as bs seeker and bismark . these latter algorithms are based on the full c/t conversion on both plus and minus strands of the reference genome as well as a full c/t conversion of the reads, so that the mapping is performed using only the three letters agt. a post-mapping procedure will then re-consider the original four-base sequences and compare the occurrences of cs in the genome and in the reads. the agt conversion approach is effective, but it cannot be directly applied to solid reads because they are encoded in color space, where each color corresponds to four possible words of two bases. as a consequence, the available software to align bi-seq solid reads is still slow and inefficient. in this respect some of the best programs are socs-b , based on an iterative algorithm, and b-solana the difficulty of mapping bi-seq solid reads is unfortunate, as color space has some interesting potential owing to the double encoding of each base and to the fact that after bisulfite treatment, the full set of four colors would still be present. here we introduce a new implementation of pass that allows the mapping of bi-seq reads on an agt simplified genome, managing both base space as well as native color space. the program is able to perform alignments with gaps, a feature that is not available in most programs for bisulfite mapping. furthermore, when possible, it discriminates the genomic strand from which the read originated.  
