path2ppi: an r package to predict protein– protein interaction networks for a set of proteins we introduce path2ppi, a new r package to identify proteinprotein interaction (ppi) networks for fully sequenced organisms for which nearly none ppi are known. path2ppi predicts ppi networks based on sets of proteins from well-established model organisms, providing an intuitive visualization and usability. it can be used to combine and transfer information of a certain pathway or biological process from several reference organisms to one target organism. availability and implementation: path2ppi is an open-source tool implemented in r. it can be obtained from the bioconductor project: http://bioconductor.org/packages/path2ppi/plenty of databases exist which contain proteinprotein interaction (ppi) data for various organisms (e.g.). for some well-established model organisms, species-specific data repositories are available (e.g.) providing also ppi data. in contrast, for the majority of organisms such a comprehensive amount of ppi data is not available. therefore, different approaches have been developed to predict ppis. some of these approaches aim to deduce new interactions from known ppis by means of homology-based mapping based on sequence similarity. other methods apply supervised learning to filter and score the predicted interactions, using additional biological data, e.g. functional annotation, co-expression and / or text-mining data (; for a recent review see). approaches that predict ppis based on sequence data or network topology information often provide only precomputed data or predict interactions only for a set of predefined organisms . furthermore, most of the methods do not supply information about the underlying reference interactions. in the majority, only the scores are provided to validate a predicted interaction. often it is necessary to easily access the entire underlying information about the predicted interactions since the interpretation and experimental validation is one of the most important steps after the prediction. as we were interested in aging processes and interaction networks of age-related pathways in the fungal model organism podospora anserina , we found only a few data repositories for interaction data. for example, the kegg database provides small subnetworks of some selected, mainly metabolic, pathways. recently, also the string database (e.g.) involves some predicted interactions for p.anserina. nevertheless, there was no satisfactory solution and no easy and fast way to directly gain knowledge about proteins and their interactions of certain biological processes, which are well established in some model organisms, but nearly unknown in the target organism. homology-based tools which theoretically enable to predict or transfer interactions between species are mostly implemented for a set of predefined organisms or v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.we introduced a new r package to predict ppi networks based on sets of proteins which may belong to a specific biological pathway, providing an intuitive visualization and usability. we implemented path2ppi to reveal putative proteins and interactions for a pathway or a biological process in organisms for which nearly none ppi information is available. the results can serve as starting points for further network modeling studies and experimental validations.  
