pathscore: a web tool for identifying altered pathways in cancer data pathscore quantifies the level of enrichment of somatic mutations within curated pathways, applying a novel approach that identifies pathways enriched across patients. the application provides several user-friendly, interactive graphic interfaces for data exploration, including tools for comparing pathway effect sizes, significance, gene-set overlap and enrichment differences between projects. availability and implementation: web application available at pathscore.publichealth.yale.edu. site implemented in python and mysql, with all major browsers supported. source code available at github.com/sggaffney/pathscore with a gplv3 license.we present an algorithm and web application, pathscore, for the identification of known pathways that are enriched for mutations within a multi-patient somatic gene variant dataset. the algorithm belongs to a class of pathway analysis techniques known as overrepresentation analysis (ora) tools . like other ora tools, this new algorithm uses a hypergeometric test to estimate pathway alteration probability, but distinguishes itself in three ways. first, it segregates data by patient, calculating patientspecific pathway alteration probabilities that account for varied total mutation counts per patient. second, it accounts for gene transcript length, incorporating the increased chance of mutation in longer genes. third, it uses empirically-derived background mutation rates to account for varied mutation probability across the genome, which to our knowledge is a unique feature among pathway analysis tools. our web app implementation of the algorithm uses the collection of canonical pathways from the molecular signatures database , which includes pathways from the kegg, biocarta, reactome and nature-nci databases, among others. unlike tools such as memo and hotnet2 , that detect significantly altered subnetworks, pathscore calculates an enrichment score for every pathway, and all activity in a pathway contributes to the score. in contrast to tools that, for tractability, require stringent gene filtering (memos filters include a threshold for a minimum patient to whom correspondence should be addressed frequency), pathscore has no filtering requirement. even a gene that is mutated only once in a dataset will increase the enrichment score if mutated in a patient with no other pathway alterations. applications of pathscore to lung adenocarcinoma and lung squamous cell carcinoma data from the cancer genome atlas demonstrate its potential to uncover patterns in low frequency events . numerous pathways known to be frequently affected in these cancers are identified by pathscore. additional pathways identified include the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nachr) and gaba receptor pathways (21 and 33 patient coverage, respectively). hotnet2 results include their genes, but scattered in separate low coverage subnetworks (max 10 and 17 coverage). both pathways are missed by memo due to the low frequencies of their genes. these two related gene families are thought to play a role in lung cancer and have been suggested as potential therapeutic targets . our demonstration of pathway enrichment supports this hypothesis.  
