pathtext: a text mining integrator for biological pathway visualizations motivation: metabolic and signaling pathways are an increasingly important part of organizing knowledge in systems biology. they serve to integrate collective interpretations of facts scattered throughout literature. biologists construct a pathway by reading a large number of articles and interpreting them as a consistent network, but most of the models constructed currently lack direct links to those articles. biologists who want to check the original articles have to spend substantial amounts of time to collect relevant articles and identify the sections relevant to the pathway. furthermore, with the scientific literature expanding by several thousand papers per week, keeping a model relevant requires a continuous curation effort. in this article, we present a system designed to integrate a pathway visualizer, text mining systems and annotation tools into a seamless environment. this will enable biologists to freely move between parts of a pathway and relevant sections of articles, as well as identify relevant papers from large text bases. the system, pathtext, is developed by systems biology institute, okinawa institute of science and technology, national centre for text mining (university of manchester) and the university of tokyo, and is being used by groups of biologists from these locations. contact: brian@monrovian.com.the core of systems biology is the biochemical/signaling network. signaling and metabolic pathways are an increasingly important part of organizing knowledge in systems biology and are often represented through collective interpretations of facts scattered throughout literature (;). because of the very integrated nature of pathways, they require substantial human effort to construct. biologists have to read a large number of published papers, interpret them and construct a pathway . the curation of a constructed pathway also requires monitoring of recent publications in order to maintain relevance. furthermore, since biologists may have different interpretations of the same set of facts, a biologist wants to read original papers based on which a pathway is constructed to ensure to whom correspondence should be addressed. it is done in a manner consistent with his or her interpretation. the biologist would like to see the biological context, stated in original papers, from which the constructed pathway abstracts away . pathtext (http://www.pathtext.org) is an integrated environment for combining standards compliant biological pathway models and original papers relevant to selected parts of the pathway, through the use of text mining (tm) technology and tools to facilitate the creation of manual annotations. unlike existing pathway building platforms, such as wikipathways , the edinburgh pathway editor , and pathcase , pathtext brings together the strengths of different tm tools in a unified and extensible framework. some of the existing pathway editors offer the functionality of linking parts of a pathway with literature at a very coarse (e.g. pubmed id) level. perhaps one of the most similar to pathtext in terms of the richness of tm functionality combined with pathway visualization is pathway studio , which is a commercial tool for building and analyzing biological pathways. it integrates an automated text processing tool called medscan to extract biological interactions from scientific literature using natural language processing (nlp) technology. medscan employs a full syntactic parser to analyze the semantic and lexical structure of an english sentence and finds relations between any types of objects including proteins, small molecules, protein functional classes, cell processes and diseases . pathtext distinguishes itself from other pathway editing tools by providing a seamless combination of advanced tm technologies, including deep syntactic analysis of individual sentences (medie), named entity recognition and disambiguation of acronyms (kleio), and real time co-occurrence searches (facta). it provides a flexible interactive environment which allows a biologist to navigate from pathway visualization to tm, to retrieve articles recently published which are potentially relevant, to browse them, and to associate them with relevant parts of pathways. pathtext has been used by biologists to construct signaling pathways of more than 1000 nodes with 400 links. in the following sections, we provide the overall architecture of pathtext, describe the manual annotation and tm components, describe how they are integrated with the overall system, and discuss future directions.page: i375 i374i381  
