pathvar: analysis of gene and protein expression variance in cellular pathways using microarray data finding significant differences between the expression levels of genes or proteins across diverse biological conditions is one of the primary goals in the analysis of functional genomics data. however, existing methods for identifying differentially expressed genes or sets of genes by comparing measures of the average expression across predefined sample groups do not detect differential variance in the expression levels across genes in cellular pathways. since corresponding pathway deregulations occur frequently in microarray gene or protein expression data, we present a new dedicated web application, pathvar, to analyze these data sources. the software ranks pathway-representing gene/protein sets in terms of the differences of the variance in the within-pathway expression levels across different biological conditions. apart from identifying new pathway deregulation patterns, the tool exploits these patterns by combining different machine learning methods to find clusters of similar samples and build sample classification models. availability: freely available atin the search for new diagnostic biomarkers, one of the first steps is often the identification of significant differences in the expression levels of genes or proteins across different biological conditions. commonly used statistical methods for this purpose quantify the extent and significance of changes in measures of the average expression levels of single genes/proteins [see for example smyth (2004);or analyze aggregated data for gene/protein sets representing entire cellular pathways and processes . however, since these approaches compare measures of averaged expression levels, they cannot study how the variance of expression levels across the genes/proteins of a cellular pathway (termed pathway expression variance here) changes under different biological conditions. in this article, we present a web application for microarray data analysis to identify and prioritize pathways with changes in the pathway expression variance across samples (unsupervised setting) or predefined sample groups (supervised to whom correspondence should be addressed.. left: box plot comparing the median expression levels in the kegg urea cycle pathway (hsa00220) for the prostate cancer dataset by across 50 healthy individuals (green) and 52 tumor patients (red); right: box plot comparing the variance of expression levels in the same pathway and microarray dataset (see also supplementary material). setting). in particular, we show example cases on cancer data in which significant pathway deregulations manifest themselves in terms of changes in the variance of gene/protein expression levels in pathways, while no significant changes can be detected in the median pathway expression levels (see section results on cancer microarray data and). finally, we discuss how the software enables automated sample clustering and classification using the extracted pathway expression variances.  
