systems biology pathvisio-mim: pathvisio plugin for creating and editing molecular interaction maps (mims) motivation: a plugin for the java-based pathvisio pathway editor has been developed to help users draw diagrams of bioregulatory networks according to the molecular interaction map (mim) notation. together with the core pathvisio application, this plugin presents a simple to use and cross-platform application for the construction of complex mim diagrams with the ability to annotate diagram elements with comments, literature references and links to external databases. this tool extends the capabilities of the pathvisio pathway editor by providing both mim-specific glyphs and support for a mim-specific markup language file format for exchange with other mim-compatible tools and diagram validation. availability: the pathvisio-mim plugin is freely available and works with versions of pathvisio 2.0.11 and later on windows, mac os x and linux. information about mim notation and the mimml format is available at http://discover.nci.nih.gov/mim. the plugin, along with diagram examples, instructions and java source code, may be downloaded at http://discover.nci.nih.gov/mim/mim_pathvisio.html.understanding biological pathways requires knowledge of both the biological components of a pathway and the interactions between its components. improvements in molecular biology techniques have fueled a surge in this type of information. this has made the organization of biological knowledge along with consistent mechanisms for how this information is exchanged among researchers of utmost importance. one of the most common means of relating information about biological pathways is through the use of pathway diagrams which are oftentimes more natural to readers. the molecular interaction map (mim) notation is a graphical notation for depicting diagrams of biochemical and cellular processes designed to alleviate ambiguity that exists in many diagrams currently found in publications . mim diagrams are similar tothe pathvisio-mim plugin helps biologists draw diagrams in accordance with the mim notation. this combined with the many features of pathvisio will aid in making the mim notation accessible to a wider audience. to encourage usage of this software and the notation by first-time users, we provide example files, written documentation and instructional videos on the project web site. the plugin takes advantage of the extensible nature of pathvisio to provide support of all the major features of the mim notation and may serve as an example for mim support in other software. code additions that were made in the core pathvisio editor should facilitate the support of other notations in pathvisio, such as the systems biology graphical notation (sbgn) or the modified edinburgh pathway notation ; support for the sbgn notation is currently in development via a separate plugin. support for these notations or other notations within the same software tool presents a basis for translating diagrams between notations. future development of the plugin is expected as additions are made to the mim specification. also, we expect the addition of validation support in pathvisio for rulesets, such as the one developed for mimml.  
