pathwave: discovering patterns of differentially regulated enzymes in metabolic pathways motivation: gene expression profiling by microarrays or transcript sequencing enables observing the pathogenic function of tumors on a mesoscopic level. results: we investigated neuroblastoma tumors that clinically exhibit a very heterogeneous course ranging from rapid growth with fatal outcome to spontaneous regression and detected regulatory oncogenetic shifts in their metabolic networks. in contrast to common enrichment tests, we took network topology into account by applying adjusted wavelet transforms on an elaborated and new 2d grid representation of curated pathway maps from the kyoto enzyclopedia of genes and genomes. the aggressive form of the tumors showed regulatory shifts for purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis as well as folate-mediated metabolism of the one-carbon pool in respect to increased nucleotide production. we spotted an oncogentic regulatory switch in glutamate metabolism for which we provided experimental validation, being the first steps towards new possible drug therapy. the pattern recognition method we used complements normal enrichment tests to detect such functionally related regulation patterns. availability and implementation: pathwave is implemented in a package for r (www.r-project.org) version 2.6.0 or higher. it is freely available fromcancer cells exhibit a dramatically disturbed metabolism to satisfy their high bioenergetic demands for cell proliferation . accordingly, a long-standing strategy for cancer treatment is to attack basic tumor metabolism. mainly, these treatments are rather unspecific and hinder nucleotide biosynthesis to whom correspondence should be addressed.. besides this, the introduction of experimental high-throughput methods in functional genomics such as gene expression profiling using microarrays and genomewide sequencing has evoked the challenging task to observe and understand the pathogenic function of tumors on a mesoscopic level. however, the large volume of information generated in these experiments must be funneled into manageable and functionally sensible partitions to select components that well describe the tumor pathologies. intelligent embedding of the expression data into the underlying topology of the metabolic network may enable the detection of tumor-specific metabolism for directed and specific targeting of tumor cells. neuroblastoma is the most common solid, extracranial tumor of early childhood, mainly affecting children at the age of about 1 year. it is derived from primitive cells of the sympathetic nervous system. in many patients, neuroblastoma is metastatic at the time of diagnosis and undergoes rapid progression with fatal outcome. alternatively, neuroblastomas, especially in infants younger than 1 year at diagnosis can regress spontaneously, and the tumor can differentiate into benign ganglioneuroma in older infants . detailed diagnosis and appropriate adjustment of therapy requires the support of investigations at the molecular level. dna microarray technology improved the prediction of patient outcome in comparison to established risk markers . we wanted to track how aggressive neuroblastomas have specifically regulated their metabolism to optimize oncogenetic fitness, and to elucidate ways to severely perturb this process. an analysis method was required that discovers pathways in the metabolic network, especially showing significant shifts (similar and contrasting) in regulation. when analyzing data on a metabolic network, enzymes can be represented by their corresponding genes. transcriptional data, and the topological information derived from the metabolic network, was connected by calculating zscores of highly correlated sub-networks .improved classification of breast cancers with expression patterns of small subnets of a signal transduction network. common gene expression levels of neighboring nodes in a metabolic network were calculated by averaging over all neighbors  
