pathwayaccess: celldesigner plugins for pathway databases celldesigner provides a user-friendly interface for graphical biochemical pathway description. many pathway databases are not directly exportable to celldesigner models. pathwayaccess is an extensible suite of celldesigner plugins, which connect celldesigner directly to pathway databases using respective java application programming interfaces. the process is streamlined for creating new pathwayaccess plugins for specific pathway databases. three pathwayaccess plugins, metnetaccess, biocycaccess and reactomeaccess, directly connect celldesigner to the pathway databases metnetdb, biocyc and reactome. pathwayaccess plugins enable celldesigner users to expose pathway data to analytical celldesigner functions, curate their pathway databases and visually integrate pathway data from different databases using standard systems biology markup language and systems biology graphical notation. availability: implemented in java, pathwayaccess plugins run with celldesigner version 4.0.1 and were tested on ubuntu linux, windows xp and 7, and macosx. source code, binaries, documentation and video walkthroughs are freely available atcelldesigner is a tool for graphically building biochemical pathway models, which integrate model representation by systems biology markup language (sbml;) with graphical representation by systems biology graphical notation (sbgn;). there exist many databases providing application programming interface (api) libraries enabling programmatic queries. these api libraries include many biologically meaningful objects, which carry out intuitive functions. for example, a pathway object can report the set of reaction objects it contains, a protein complex object can report the monomer objects that contsruct it and a metabolite object might report its smiles and inchi codes. the problem is that a pathway object in one api is not the same as a pathway object in the api of a different database. the same biological concept is represented using independently developed in-silico representations, preventing any single application from communicating and integrating across databases. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
