pathway analysis of high-throughput biological data within a bayesian network framework motivation: most current approaches to high-throughput biological data (htbd) analysis either perform individual gene/protein analysis or, gene/protein set enrichment analysis for a list of biologically relevant molecules. bayesian networks (bns) capture linear and non-linear interactions, handle stochastic events accounting for noise, and focus on local interactions, which can be related to causal inference. here, we describe for the first time an algorithm that models biological pathways as bns and identifies pathways that best explain given htbd by scoring fitness of each network. results: proposed method takes into account the connectivity and relatedness between nodes of the pathway through factoring pathway topology in its model. our simulations using synthetic data demonstrated robustness of our approach. we tested proposed method, bayesian pathway analysis (bpa), on human microarray data regarding renal cell carcinoma (rcc) and compared our results with gene set enrichment analysis. bpa was able to find broader and more specific pathways related to rcc. availability: accompanying bpa software (bpas) package is freely available for academic use at http://high-throughput biological data (htbd) are generated in a variety of ways, including through deep sequencing and microarrays. these data can provide a snapshot of regulatory processes in the cell by inferring gene networks from experimental data. in particular, bayesian network (bn) models have gained popularity for the task of learning biological pathways from microarray gene expression data . in gene network modeling studies using bns, nodes generally represent expression level of a gene and edges represent relationship between genes. bn models capture both linear and non-linear interactions between sets of random variables and handle stochastic events in a probabilistic framework accounting for noise. this results in the emphasis of only to whom correspondence should be addressed. the strong relations in the observed data. bns are, therefore, viable candidates for modeling gene regulation systems, where stochastic effects and large amounts of noise are expected. furthermore, bns are able to focus on local interactions, where each node is directly affected by a relatively small number of nodes and interactions defined by a bn can be related to causal inference . these properties are similarly observed in biological networks justifying the use of bns in exploring pathways in the setting of gene interaction networks, using htbd. arguably the most popular htbd type is microarrays, where an identification of differentially expressed genes between two groups of samples initially relied on individual gene analysis (iga). an alternative approach, called pathway analysis, functional enrichment analysis or gene set analysis (gsa) , which focuses on directly determining predefined gene sets or classes that are significantly regulated, has received a great deal of attention. gsa methods score groups of genes and can identify genes that exhibit subtle changes at an individual level, but show concordant enrichment within a set . here we propose a new method of pathway analysis, which uses a graph theoretic approach and bn theory to evaluate whether a putative pathway successfully describes the underlying htbd. previously described gsea or gene ontology based methods do not take into account the connectiveness of analyzed gene lists. there have been methods proposed to take into account the go graph topology , overlap between go categories in the go hierarchy or modeling interactions between go categories in assessing the significance of enrichment of a go term based on experimental data. however, none of these methods takes into account the network or structure defining the relation between the genes in each category. the proposed method [bayesian pathway analysis (bpa)] considers the topology via which genes interact with each other when analyzing a group of genes. using pathway information from global databases, we model each biological pathway as a bn after merging repeating entries and, if necessary, solving for cyclicity, while preserving the dependencies entailed by the original pathway. we consider the resulting bn, which is a graphical representation of gene interactions rendered by the given pathway, with non-informal, uniform belief priors. we quantify the degree to which observed experimental data fit this bn using bayesian dirichlet equivalent (bde) score calculation, where the bn is updated with input datawe described a method that models biological pathways as bns and determines the fitness of given microarray data using bde score. the proposed method overcomes representation, mapping, data discretization and cyclicity problems that arise in modeling pathways as bns. we have chosen multinomial bns with dirichlet priors because: (i) their posterior can be efficiently calculated in closed form; (ii) they capture non-linear interactions; and (iii) they render a plain model requiring less parameter adjustment. moreover, algorithms scoring mutinomial bns have low time complexity. alternative models such as linear gaussian models, gaussian process networks or regression models are usually preferred in the task of structure learning. linear gaussian models and regression models in bn setting can only detect linear dependencies between the child and parent variables. in gaussian process bn models, gaussian process priors are used as parametric families to model non-linear relations. however, the problem then becomes one of selecting the best fitting covariance function and the number of its hyperparameters in gaussian process modeling, which requires various approximations and assumptions that may not be suitable in htbd settings . rcc represents a spectrum of genetically diverse epithelial tumors with a common derivation from the renal tubular epithelium and a variable clinical course. approximately 30 of cases present with metastatic disease at initial diagnosis and 30 of initially organ confined cases develop metastases during later follow up. since there are no reliable biomarkers available, patient management remains problematic despite improving understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms. in particular, treatment of advanced rcc still poses a great challenge, as the rcc is resistant to chemoand radiation therapy and cytokine-based therapies offer only low clinical response rates with considerable toxicity. the advent of targeted therapy has brought exciting therapeutic options with promising clinical results, although the clinical benefit with respect to overall survival is only marginal. however, high-throughput technologies that analyze the entire genome and proteome promise to elucidate the heterogeneity of this disease and eventually enable a patient-tailored, individualized treatment. in contrast to the analysis of single genes, gene pathways enable us to see the context of complex interactions and to understand the biologic relevance page: 1674 16671674  
