systems biology pathway commons at virtual cell: use of pathway data for mathematical modeling pathway commons is a resource permitting simultaneous queries of multiple pathway databases. however, there is no standard mechanism for using these data (stored in biopax format) to annotate and build quantitative mathematical models. therefore, we developed a new module within the virtual cell modeling and simulation software. it provides pathway data retrieval and visualization and enables automatic creation of executable network models directly from qualitative connections between pathway nodes. availability and implementation: available at virtual cell (http:// vcell.org/). application runs on all major platforms and does not require registration for use on the users computer. tutorials and video are available at user guide page.the pathway commons collection of databases provides access to 4442 000 interactions among 86 000 physical entities. the data are retrieved in the form of biological pathway exchange, biopax that can be converted to the systems biology markup language, sbml the gold standard for exchanging mathematical models and the native standard for the biomodels model database . however, while converting to sbml, the wealth of information in annotations is often lost because the semantics of general biological knowledge differs from that of mathematical models . here we describe a tool that allows users to access the rich trove of pathway data available through pathway commons and use it to build well-annotated mathematical models. it was implemented in the virtual cell (vcell) modeling and simulation framework , a platform designed for building and simulating compartmental and spatial models and analysis of simulation results. the vcell database contains 454 000 user models of which 500 are public. however, most of these models were created ad-hoc, using multiple iterations. in doing so, users rarely used detailed names to identify variables and functions in the mathematical model, but most often used simplified abbreviations like r, atp or even arbitrary symbols such as s1, p1 and so forth. as a result, in the absence of extensive accompanying documentation, a model is often difficult or even impossible to understand by anyone except for the model author(s). as models increase in complexity, sharing and reusing models and components become a necessity, and creating a well-annotated model is essential. for this purpose, minimal information required in the annotation of models (miriam) community standard was developed (lenov re et al., 2005). our software facilitates this by linking every model element to extensive documentation coming from pathway databases, helping researchers to produce models that are easier to understand and shared with the community. the tool stores connectivity information derived from pathway interactions and can convert it into a reaction network in vcell, which can then be populated with rate constants and initial concentrations to generate kinetic simulations, which is a useful feature for researchers learning how to model. online tutorials describe simple ways to create a simulation-ready qualitative model of a complete pathway. we also expect the tool to be appealing to bioinformaticians as a browser and editor for data in pathway commons. we hope that the ease of creating computational models to use pathway data can bring together researchers doing mathematical modeling, biologists working with pathway data and bioinformaticians querying and visualizing it.  
