sequence analysis pavis: a tool for peak annotation and visualization we introduce a web-based tool, peak annotation and visualization (pavis), for annotating and visualizing chip-seq peak data. pavis is designed with non-bioinformaticians in mind and presents a straightforward user interface to facilitate biological interpretation of chip-seq peak or other genomic enrichment data. pavis, through association with annotation, provides relevant genomic context for each peak, such as peak location relative to genomic features including transcription start site, intron, exon or 5 0 /3 0-untranslated region. pavis reports the relative enrichment p-values of peaks in these functionally distinct categories, and provides a summary plot of the relative proportion of peaks in each category. pavis, unlike many other resources, provides a peak-oriented annotation and visu-alization system, allowing dynamic visualization of tens to hundreds of loci from one or more chip-seq experiments, simultaneously. pavis enables rapid, and easy examination and cross-comparison of the genomic context and potential functions of the underlying genomic elements, thus supporting downstream hypothesis generation. availability and implementation: pavis is publicly accessed at http://manticore.niehs.nih.gov/pavis.the advance of sequencing technology and its exponential declining cost have made it possible to conduct many genomewide studies to understand complex biological processes such as gene regulation, epigenomic changes and chromatin remodeling. these studies have generated a large number of chip-seq datasets that are subsequently parsed by peak calling programs to report statistically significant peaks. for a genome-wide study, the number of significant peaks can be tens to hundreds of thousands. the biological relevance of a chip-seq peak and the functions of its underlying dna element are often dependent on its position relative to nearby genes or other functional elements. it can be a challenging and time-consuming task to examine all peaks, and to develop meaningful biological interpretations of their functional relevance. motivated by this challenge, we developed the pavis tool to facilitate data comparison, interpretation and hypothesis generation from chip-seq peak data. there are several existing software tools that can be used for annotation and visualization of chip-seq peaks, e.g. cisgenome and peakanalyzer/peakannotator . all of these tools are useful for chip-seq peak data analysis and interpretation, but they each have limitations. peakanalyzer/peakannotator is a highly efficient tool with utilities not only for functional annotation of peaks, but also for sequence extraction supporting motif analysis. however, it does not provide peak visualization capability. cisgenome provides capabilities similar to peakanalyzer. cisgenome, however, does not support the annotation of many existing chip-seq peak files including many of those from the encode project . both the ucsc genome browser and the integrative genomics viewer are powerful tools and have more capabilities, displaying multiple relevant data in different tracks. their visualization capabilities, however, are designed to display maximal information for a single genomic region one at a time. as a complimentary tool, pavis is designed to display multiple loci simultaneously with each locus linked to the ucsc browser for additional information. furthermore, pavis can be used to annotate chip-seq peaks in the context of nearby gene features.  
