paxtoolsr: pathway analysis in r using pathway commons purpose: paxtoolsr package enables access to pathway data represented in the biopax format and made available through the pathway commons webservice for users of the r language to aid in advanced pathway analyses. features include the extraction, merging and validation of pathway data represented in the biopax format. this package also provides novel pathway datasets and advanced querying features for r users through the pathway commons webservice allowing users to query, extract and retrieve data and integrate these data with local biopax datasets. availability and implementation: the paxtoolsr package is compatible with versions of r 3.1.1 (and higher) on windows, mac os x and linux using bioconductor 3.0 and is available through the bioconductor r package repository along with source code and a tutorial vignette describing common tasks, such as data visualization and gene set enrichment analysis. source code and documentation are at http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/paxtoolsr. this plugin is free, open-source and licensed under the lgpl-3.the amount of biological pathway data in machine-readable databases and formats continues to increase. pathway analysis allows researchers to gain new understanding of the functions of biological systems. a common task has been to aggregate pathway data across databases. this task has been simplified through the creation of standardized data representations, such as the biological pathway exchange (biopax) format . pathway commons is an ongoing effort to aggregate pathway data over a number of databases supporting the biopax notation and webservices to access these data . the core component that facilitates the development of projects using data in the biopax format, such as pathway commons, has been paxtools, a biopax application programming interface (api) written in java . although the r programming language is widely used in areas of computational biology, there is a deficiency in the availability of pathway data provided through r packages. a recent review by) describes 12 r packages for working with pathway data. the majority of these packagesincluding kegggraph, pathview and reactomepautilizes and provides data from kegg and reactome. a number of the packages are generic parsers for a variety of formats, including the systems biology markup language (sbml), kegg markup language (kgml) and biopax. through the paxtoolsr package, we extend the literature-curated pathway data available to r users, we provide a number of paxtools api functions, and provide an interface to the pathway commons webservice. through this interface, paxtoolsr provides native support for the aggregated pathway commons database, including data imported from the nci pathway interaction database (pid), pantherdb, humancyc, reactome, phoshositeplus and hprd.the paxtoolsr package extends the available biological pathway data available to researchers working primarily in an r environment. this package makes many of the features available from the biopax paxtools api and the pathway commons webservice. the data and functionality provided here can be used for a wide range of biological pathway analysis studies and can be easily integrated with the rich ecosystem of existing r packages. future development of this r package is expected as additions are made to the underlying paxtools java library and pathway commons webservice. furthermore, we invite developers of network analysis r packages interested in the pathway commons data to work with us to help make the data we provide available to their methodologies.. pathway commons graph query of interactions between akt1 and mtor using paxtoolsr and visualized using igraph. data for the figure were retrieved with the command: graphpc(sourcec( akt1 , irs1 , mtor , igf1r ), kind pathsbetween , format binary_sif )paxtoolsr  
