payao: a community platform for sbml pathway model curation payao is a community-based, collaborative web service platform for gene-regulatory and biochemical pathway model curation. the system combines web 2.0 technologies and online model visualization functions to enable a collaborative community to annotate and curate biological models. payao reads the models in systems biology markup language format, displays them with celldesigner, a process diagram editor, which complies with the systems biology graphical notation, and provides an interface for model enrichment (adding tags and comments to the models) for the access-controlled community members. availability and implementation: freely available for model curation service at http://www.payaologue.org. web site implemented in seaser framework 2.0 with s2flex2, mysql 5.0 and tomcat 5.5, with all major browsers supported.creating an extensive model of gene-regulatory and biochemical networks with the latest data is a painstaking task. curation is essential to creating an accurate model. yet as science and technology advances rapidly, once curated models soon become out-of-date and need to be revised constantly. many pathways and networks are now available online via pathway databases, such as reactome, biomodels.net, panther pathways and many pathway editors are available . what is needed is a framework to facilitate tracking and update mechanism for modelers and researchers in the community to contribute to the collaborative model building and curation process. wikipathways is an effort for such a collaborative platform in the wiki style. while the wiki system has its strength in collaborative editing and version tracking, it does not provide access control or explicit community tagging mechanisms. in a community-driven model enrichment environment, it is effective to differentiate privileges to special interest group (sig) members for curation activitiescommenting on existing tags, adding tags to models, annotating individual component inside a model and validating the annotations. in view of the complexity of biological pathways and the expertise of biologists in different areas, to whom correspondence should be addressed. a community platform for biology requires an exquisite balance of federated resource sharing and quality control of information by a sig of experts in the particular pathway or process. an access control privilege system allows the community to share and disseminate the knowledge, while enabling a dedicated sig to maintain high-quality, curated information. to provide such a curation framework, we have developed a system called payao. the system is named after a fish aggregating device, an artificial floating raft where fish congregate and popular in okinawa/philippine area. payao aims to become a biological knowledge aggregating system, which enable a community to work on the same models simultaneously, insert tags as pop-up balloon to the parts of the model, exchange comments, record the discussions and eventually update the models accurately and concurrently. the current workflow for pathway curation has two phases working in a cyclical manner, as shown in: pathway editing using biological pathway editors (celldesigner) and communitydriven pathway enrichment and knowledge sharing. payao serves for enrichment phase of the curation. payao is a web-based platform, providing an interface for adding tags and comments to the components (such as species, reactions and specified area) of the model, as well as community management functionality. the information on the users and tag data is stored in a relational database (rdbms) on the server. payao adopts community standards, accepting systems biology markup language (sbml;) format models and displays them in systems biology graphical notation compliant celldesigner graphical notation. curation data on payao can be easily reintegrated into the original model via celldesigner.page: 1382 13811383  
