pboost: a gpu-based tool for parallel permutation tests in genome-wide association studies downloaded from motivation: the importance of testing associations allowing for interactions has been demonstrated by marchini et al. (2005). a fast method detecting associations allowing for interactions has been proposed by wan et al. (2010a). the method is based on likelihood ratio test with the assumption that the statistic follows the v 2 distribution. many single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) pairs with significant associations allowing for interactions have been detected using their method. however, the assumption of v 2 test requires the expected values in each cell of the contingency table to be at least five. this assumption is violated in some identified snp pairs. in this case, likelihood ratio test may not be applicable any more. permutation test is an ideal approach to checking the p-values calculated in likelihood ratio test because of its non-parametric nature. the p-values of snp pairs having significant associations with disease are always extremely small. thus, we need a huge number of permutations to achieve correspondingly high resolution for the p-values. in order to investigate whether the p-values from likelihood ratio tests are reliable, a fast permutation tool to accomplish large number of permutations is desirable. results: we developed a permutation tool named pboost. it is based on gpu with highly reliable p-value estimation. by using simulation data, we found that the p-values from likelihood ratio tests will have relative error of 100 when 50 cells in the contingency table have expected count less than five or when there is zero expected count in any of the contingency table cells. in terms of speed, pboost completed 10 7 permutations for a single snp pair from the wellcome trust case control consortium (wtccc) genome data (wellcome trust case control consortium, 2007) within 1 min on a single nvidia tesla m2090 device, while it took 60 min in a single cpu intel xeon e5-2650 to finish the same task. more importantly, when simultaneously testing 256 snp pairs for 10 7 permutations, our tool took only 5 min, while the cpu program took 10 h. by permuting on a gpu cluster consisting of 40 nodes, we completed 10 12 permutations for all 280 snp pairs reported with p-values smaller than 1:6 10 12 in the wtccc datasets in 1 week. availability and implementation: the source code and sample data are available at http://bioinforin genome wide association studies (gwas), single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) pairs have significant associations with diseases via the combination of their main effects and interactions. this effect is referred to as associations allowing for interactions .proposed an efficient likelihood ratio test method and reported 280 snp pairs having significant associations allowing for interactions. this method is based on v 2 test and requires adequate expected count in each cell of the contingency table. otherwise, the statistic may not follow the v 2 distribution, and the likelihood ratio test is not applicable. cochran (1952) suggested a rule of thumb that at least 80 cells should have expected counts larger than or equal to five. there are also discussions claiming that there should be no cell with zero expected count . in gwas, it is common to see snp pairs whose contingency tables violate this rule. thus, we like to examine the likelihood ratio test results with the permutation test method. in a permutation test, the p-value is calculated as n 0 1=n 1, where n 0 is the number of permutations with statistics at least as extreme as the one of the original data, and n is the total number of permutations. the resolution of the p-value is 1=n 1. clearly, a large number of permutations are required to estimate a very small p-value. in gwas, we always need the p-value to be extremely small due to the multiple testing issue. in the wtccc datasets, around 3:5 10 5 snps remain after initial quality check. the total number of snp pairs reaches 6:1 10 10. the p-value needs to be smaller than 1:6 10 12 to denote significance when multiple testing correction (such as bonferroni correction) is applied. the development of graphics processing units (gpus) enables fast implementation of permutation. here, we implemented a gpubased permutation test tool. using this tool, we investigated the eligibility condition of the likelihood ratio test. we also examined snp pairs with associations allowing for interactions reported by likelihood ratio test.pboost makes it possible to test associations allowing for interactions using permutation. the empirical rule requiring that no 20 cells having expected count less than five is conservative. it can be relaxed to that 50 cells having expected count less than five and no cell having zero expected count. in this article, we only focused on the identified snp pairs. in fact, there are a lot more non-significant snp pairs (3:7 10 9 in type-i diabetes dataset) which also violate the above rule. some of them might be significant. testing these snp pairs remains an open challenge.  
