genome analysis pbsim: pacbio reads simulator—toward accurate genome assembly motivation: pacbio sequencers produce two types of characteristic reads (continuous long reads: long and high error rate and circular consensus sequencing: short and low error rate), both of which could be useful for de novo assembly of genomes. currently, there is no available simulator that targets the specific generation of pacbio libraries. results: our analysis of 13 pacbio datasets showed characteristic features of pacbio reads (e.g. the read length of pacbio reads follows a log-normal distribution). we have developed a read simulator, pbsim, that captures these features using either a model-based or sampling-based method. using pbsim, we conducted several hybrid error correction and assembly tests for pacbio reads, suggesting that a continuous long reads coverage depth of at least 15 in combination with a circular consensus sequencing coverage depth of at least 30 achieved extensive assembly results.the advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies enables us to determine various genomes rapidly. a number of sequencers have been developed (e.g. illumina, 454 and solid), and pacific biosciences, or pacbio for short, has provided a unique sequencer, which produces two types of reads: (i) continuous long reads (clr) (long reads with high error rates), and (ii) circular consensus sequencing (ccs) reads (short reads with low error rates) (see supplementary tables s1s3 for empirical statistics of clr and ccs reads). these two types of read set could be useful for hybrid de novo genome assembly, and, using the pacbio sequencers, chin and sorenson (2011) have determined the genome sequences of two clinical vibrio cholerae strains. there are several simulators for reads produced by highthroughput sequencing technologies, such as pirs , art , grinder , flowsim , metasim and dwgsim in samtools (see also supplementary). however, no read simulator has targeted the specific generation of pacbio libraries so far. we have therefore developed a simulator (called pbsim) that simulates both clr and ccs reads of pacbio sequencers. we adopted two simulation approaches: (i) a sampling-based simulation (in which both length and quality scores are sampled from a real read set), and (ii) a model-based simulation. in addition, we conducted hybrid error correction and assembly tests for datasets simulated by pbsim, suggesting that a clr coverage depth of at least 15 in combination with a ccs coverage depth of at least 30 achieved extensive assembly results.  
