an image-based multi-label human protein subcellular localization predictor (ilocator) reveals protein mislocalizations in cancer tissues motivation: human cells are organized into compartments of different biochemical cellular processes. having proteins appear at the right time to the correct locations in the cellular compartments is required to conduct their functions in normal cells, whereas mislocalization of proteins can result in pathological diseases, including cancer. results: to reveal the cancer-related protein mislocalizations, we developed an image-based multi-label subcellular location predictor, ilocator, which covers seven cellular localizations. the ilocator incorporates both global and local image descriptors and generates predictions by using an ensemble multi-label classifier. the algorithm has the ability to treat both single-and multiple-location proteins. we first trained and tested ilocator on 3240 normal human tissue images that have known subcellular location information from the human protein atlas. the ilocator was then used to generate protein localization predictions for 3696 protein images from seven cancer tissues that have no location annotations in the human protein atlas. by comparing the output data from normal and cancer tissues, we detected eight potential cancer biomarker proteins that have significant localization differences with p-value50.01.the knowledge of the subcellular/organelle localization of protein molecules can provide important help for understanding their functions in cells . in the past decade, a variety of methods have been developed for predicting the subcellular localizations of proteins . these methods can be grouped into two categories: one-dimensional (1d) amino acid sequencebased and two-dimensional (2d) image-based methods. the sequence-based methods usually generate protein subcellular location predictions through homology transfer , target signal search or statistical machine learning . these methods have been successfully applied to genome-wide large-scale function annotations, but they are hard to detect protein translocations, which often cause changes in the related biological network functions. one reason is that when the translocation occurs, the primary sequences of the translocated protein are about the same, which cannot be detected by the sequence-based comparisons. therefore, the intuitive 2d image-based algorithms are explored in this situation . efforts on the 2d image-based approaches are mainly focused on three aspects: (i) studies on new representative image descriptors, with examples including the subcellular location features (slfs) for protein distributions as proposed by; (ii) studies on improving the accuracy of classification algorithms, with examples including the classification based on multi-resolution subspaces as reported by, and the two discriminative models by, which extended the logistic regression with structure latent variables; and (iii) applications of existing predictors to the data analysis . most of the 2d methods are single-label predictors, i.e. they assumed that each protein corresponds to only one location. however, nearly 20 of human proteins co-exist at !2 different subcellular locations . these multi-label proteins often contain significant biological information, such as protein complex transcription in cell cycles. only few studies have attempted to predict distribution from human protein images in multiple-location cases . these studies tried to use statistics of fluorescence objects to differentiate location patterns. in these approaches, protein fluorescence objects in images are detected and clustered into several types based on their shape, size and position in cells; then each single-label pattern is represented by a set of objects in distinct types. finally, a multi-label image is linearly decomposed into the object frequencies in each type . such methods have several limitations: (i) overlapping objects and filamentous proteins will confuse the object detection algorithm because a continuous region of pixels was defined as an object; and (ii) prediction accuracy is limited by the simple linear model. the former limitation may lead to incorrect object to whom correspondence should be addressed. targets, and the latter tends to cause the constructed classifier to be too sensitive to the noise and overfitting. instead of the linear statistics, in this study we seek to develop a more flexible and accurate machine learning predictor, named ilocator, which can handle multi-and single-label samples simultaneously. three factors critical for machine learning algorithm developments, including high-quality benchmark dataset, highly discriminative image descriptors and accurate multi-label learning algorithms, will be carefully designed and systemically examined. for benchmark training and testing, we will collect the highresolution immunohistochemistry (ihc) microscopy images from the human protein atlas (hpa, http://www.proteinatlas. org/) pont n et al., 2008). the efficiency of both global and local image descriptors will be examined as input to the classifiers. the global features contain the haralick texture features and the dna distribution features, which both belong to the well-defined slfs . the local binary patterns (lbps) are applied for the first time to this multi-label problem to describe the local details. moreover, we will implement an ensemble classifier in ilocator composed of two multi-label learning modes, i.e., binary relevance (br) and classifier chains (cc) , because both have been reported performing well in multi-label image pattern recognition. for normal cell function, it is critical to have the proteins appear at the right location at the correct time for forming appropriate interactions with correct molecular partners. mislocalization will make the proteins inaccessible, and thereby not be integrated into the proper functional biological networks or pathways. protein function loss caused by the mislocalization will inevitably affect the whole biological system, which has been found to be associated with many human diseases . several potential reasons can result in aberrant protein locations, such as amino acid mutations in targeting signal sequence, changes in the post-translational modifications and the expression level, and trafficking machinery deregulations. to fully understand the underlying mechanisms of the protein mislocalizations, it is important to first identify the mislocalized protein targets. although studies to look for biomarker proteins have been previously reported , these studies only involved single-label classifiers, which cannot detect changes from multiple locations to a single location, from a single location to multiple locations or from multiple locations to different multiple locations. considering the fact that there are $20 human proteins co-localized in more than one location, these changes can occur frequently. for example, in a healthy cell, protein cylin d1 can shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm. in contrast, a reduction of cyclin d1 exported from the nucleus can lead to overexpression of this protein in the nucleus, and the inactivation of retinoblastoma, which is a tumor-suppressing protein . other such multiple-location shuttling proteins associated with cancers include p53, brca1, sox9 and apc . detecting these changes requires accurate multi-label predictors. in this study, ilocator has been applied to screen such potential mislocated biomarkers in our protein dataset, which includes multi-label proteins. by comparing the predictions output from ilocator between cancer and normal tissues, several proteins have been detected as potential cancer biomarkers.we have built an ihc image-based multi-label human protein subcellular location predictor ilocator and presented a framework to screen cancer biomarkers. the ilocator is an efficient bioimage-based predictor that can handle both single-and multiple-location site proteins simultaneously. by applying ilocator to the datasets from both normal and cancer tissues, eight proteins were identified as cancer biomarkers. we showed that those proteins that can shuttle between multiple subcellular locations are important for normal cell functions, and losing one of the locations may cause disease. these identified mislocated diseasecausing protein targets have also opened a new avenue for the therapeutic treatment of some human diseases. for example, by relocating these mislocated proteins to the correct subcellular localizations, they can restore their correct functions, which are helpful to cure the diseases. although these techniques are still in the infancy stage, they have a promising and bright future. based on the current study, the following efforts will be made in future studies toward improving the performance of ilocator.in this article, we used both the global and local features as the input to the prediction engine and found that the local features are sensitive to detect the distribution differences among multiple locations. here, we used lbp as the local feature, which is a baseline texture descriptor. actually, some lbp variants, such as local ternary patterns and local quinary patterns, have been proposed and proven to be powerful in image descriptions . therefore, we will try to use these lbp variants as a future development. (2) to handle high-dimensional image feature vectors, the feature reduction is demonstrated necessary in our experiments and other studies. the sda method was used in this article to select representative features and performed well. as an alternative, we also tested the random subspace ensemble of svm, for it saves the feature selection step, and performs well in other studies . according to our experiments, the random subspace ensemble of the svm approach is not as good as the ensemble of br and cc algorithms used in this study (data not shown). the reason could be that the random selected features are not informative to reflect the multi-label samples, and the output of the follow-up single classifiers can cause the fluctuation of the voting results, which are sensitive to noise. these results demonstrate the importance of the development of an effective control mechanism that is able to make the subspace approach suitable to handle multi-label samples. (3) fusion of br and cc algorithms in ilocator is demonstrated useful for enhancing the classification accuracy of multilabel samples. the performance of cc mode confirms that passing association information among labels is able to reflect the different propensities of cellular component co-localizations of proteins. thus, for the bioimage-based multi-label protein classification problem, it is also important to dig into the existing large databases to model the associations among labels.the sequence-based and image-based protein subcellular location prediction approaches differ in many ways, including the feature descriptors and classification algorithms. considering that they both deal with protein samples, the combination of the two strategies should help enhance the classification accuracy because of the complementarities, which can also provide a better understanding of the protein translocations both intuitively and at the amino acid level. in the next step, we plan to explore the idea and combine our 1d sequence-based protein subcellular location predictor cell-ploc and the 2d image-based ilocator as developed in this work.  
