pdiviz: analysis and visualization of protein–dna binding interfaces specific recognition of dna by proteins is a crucial step of many biological processes. pdiviz is a plugin for the pymol molecular visualization system that analyzes proteindna binding interfaces by comparing the solvent accessible surface area of the complex against the free protein and free dna. the plugin provides three distinct three-dimensional visualization modes to highlight interactions with dna bases and backbone, major and minor groove, and with atoms of different pharmacophoric type (hydrogen bond donors/acceptors, hydrophobic and thymine methyl). each mode comes in three styles to focus the visual analysis on the protein or dna side of the interface, or on the nucleotide sequence. pdiviz allows for the generation of publication quality images, all calculated data can be written to disk, and a command line interface is provided for automating tasks. the plugin may be helpful for the detailed identification of regions involved in dna base and shape readout, and can be particularly useful in rapidly pinpointing the overall mode of interaction. availability and implementation: freely available at http://melolab.org/pdiviz/ as a pymol plugin.specific recognition of dna by proteins is a prerequisite of many biological processes and is essentially understood when analyzed at a three-dimensional (3d) structural level. the steadily increasing number of proteinnucleic acid complexes deposited in the protein data bank (4500 by end of 2014;) now allows for a more fine-grained structural analysis of the key determinants of proteindna interactions. these interactions may be broadly classified into base readout (sequence-dependent interactions with dna bases via the major or minor groove) and shape readout (detection of global or local variation of the canonical dna shape;). however, proteindna interactions are complex and a simple recognition code does likely not exist . 3d visual analysis of proteindna complexes today often requires the use of several computer programs for contact analysis and visualization. here we present pdiviz, a plugin for the pymol molecular visualization system (schr dinger, llc) that is specifically designed to visualize proteindna interfaces and to focus visual analysis on various aspects of proteindna interactions.  
