pease: predicting b-cell epitopes utilizing antibody sequence antibody epitope mapping is a key step in understanding antibodyantigen recognition and is of particular interest for drug development, diagnostics and vaccine design. most computational methods for epitope prediction are based on properties of the antigen sequence and/or structure , not taking into account the antibody for which the epitope is predicted. here, we introduce pease, a web server predicting antibody-specific epitopes, utilizing the sequence of the antibody. the predictions are provided both at the residue level and as patches on the antigen structure. the tradeoff between recall and precision can be tuned by the user, by changing the default parameters. the results are provided as text and html files as well as a graph, and can be viewed on the antigen 3d structure.antibody (ab) epitopes, or b-cell epitopes, are used in many applications, such as diagnostics, therapy, vaccine design and biological research. correct identification of ab epitopes is crucial for all these applications and is also required for the understanding of ab-ag recognition and specificity . experimental methods for mapping ab epitopes are expensive, laborious and time consuming, and many of them also fail to identify some of the epitopes . developing an accurate computational method for epitope prediction has been proven to be a difficult task . most methods attempt to differentiate between epitopic and non-epitopic surface residues of the ag, based on properties associated with ag sequence and/or structure . however, it appears that almost any residue on the ag surface may become an epitope under some circumstances . inspired by the success of t-cell epitope prediction methods, where predictions depend on the specific major histocompatibility complex molecule presenting the epitope , we hypothesized that a b-cell epitope should be predicted for a certain ab rather than for any ab, and that the information from the ab should be utilized to enable such ab-specific predictions. we have shown that this approach can achieve substantially improved predictions when compared with predictions based on the ags features only . several strategies that take into account the ab sequence or structure were proposed and introduced, in the last few years: antibody specific epitope prediction (asep) is an index, computed based on ab-ag residue preferences, used to narrow down candidate residues predicted by conventional methods. bepar and abepar are sequence-based methods predicting ab-specific epitopes based on association patterns of ab-ag residues (bepar) and on abag preferences of individual residues and residue pairs (abepar).epipred is a fully structure-based method combining geometric matching with ab-ag residue preferences. here, we present predicting epitopes using antibody sequence (pease), a web-server that predicts epitopes, provided an ab sequence and its cognate ag structure. for a detailed description of the pease algorithm, see sela. briefly, for a given pair of ab sequence and ag structure, all combinations of one residue from the ab complementarity determining regions (cdrs) and one residue from the ag surface are evaluated by a machinelearning model trained on properties from 120 ab-ag complexes. each such pair of residues is assigned a pair-score representing the prediction that these ag and ab residues contact each other in reality. a residue-score for an ag surface residue is its highest pairscore, where a higher score means that the residue is predicted more strongly to be in that abs epitope. an optional additional step identifies surface patches on the ag, which contain multiple residues with high residue-scores. each patch is assigned a patch-score which is the average residue-score of all residues in the patch that are above the cutoff-score (see later). higher patch-scores represent stronger predictions. pease was successfully applied for blindly predicting the epitopes of 12 abs of the vaccinia virus, later confirmed experimentally by several methods, including x-ray crystallography .  
