pedmerge: merging pedigrees to facilitate family-based genetic statistical analyses pedmerge allows users to accurately and efficiently merge separately ascertained pedigrees that belong to the same extended family. in addition to validation checks of pedigree structure, the software provides files in linkage or pedsys format that easily allow to be used by a variety of genetic statistical software packages including linkage, solar, slink or can be further manipulated with mega2.to investigate the genetic background of a disease or other traits, a variety of genetic statistical software has been developed . the development of this type of analytical software has been phenomenal. however, researchers continue to have to manage a variety of complex, time-consuming tasks to prepare data for these analyses, indicating that the development of data management software has not kept up with that of analytical tools. for example, data management of extended families remains still tedious, especially when pedigree ascertainment is ongoing, pedigree structure continues to change and interim analyses need to be performed. additionally, fieldwork may demand a more flexible handling of pedigree data when, e.g. families are large and include multiple and/or consanguineous marriages/matings. to date, this kind of merging can only be performed in a restricted way. for example, the pedigree drawing program progeny allows merging of pedigrees in the drawings. however, pedigrees with multiple and/or consanguineous marriages/matings can have complex visual presentations. merging them in this way may not be easy and error prone (e.g. linking false individuals). no summary report of the merge is provided, thus making it difficult to document and quality-control the development of a pedigree. the pedigree drawing programs cyrillic and pedigree-draw cannot perform such a merge at all. pedmerge fills in this gap. it supports pedigree management in any stage of fieldwork and data management without any restrictions to whom correspondence should be addressed. on size, number of marriages/matings or consanguinity loops. it therefore can be used for pedigree management in (i) human genetics and (ii) animal breeding projects (see, examples below), as well as (iii) pedigree projects investigating, e.g. inbreeding loads and evolutionary potentials of (endangered) wild animal populations .  
