performance assessment of copy number microarray platforms using a spike-in experiment motivation: changes in the copy number of chromosomal dna segments [copy number variants (cnvs)] have been implicated in human variation, heritable diseases and cancers. microarray-based platforms are the current established technology of choice for studies reporting these discoveries and constitute the benchmark against which emergent sequence-based approaches will be evaluated. research that depends on cnv analysis is rapidly increasing, and systematic platform assessments that distinguish strengths and weaknesses are needed to guide informed choice. results: we evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of six platforms, provided by four leading vendors, using a spike-in experiment. nimblegen and agilent platforms outperformed illumina and affymetrix in accuracy and precision of copy number dosage estimates. however, illumina and affymetrix algorithms that leverage single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) information make up for this disadvantage and perform well at variant detection. overall, the nimblegen 2.1m platform outperformed others, but only with the use of an alternative data analysis pipeline to the one offered by the manufacturer.copy number variant (cnv) loci are a major source of variation observed among human genomes (; hurles to whom correspondence should be addressed). while some cnvs have no known functional consequence, some are associated with inherited microdeletion or microduplication syndromes (;). high-density microarrays permit the measurement of dna copy number variation across the genome with broad coverage of all chromosomes and high resolution. approaches based on high-throughput sequencing technology have been tried and are very promising. however, at this time genome sequence-based detection of cnvs is not yet a competitive strategy in terms of costs, availability of established analysis tools for general use and wealth of published performance appraisal from experience. the several microarray-based platforms for cnv detection that have been developed are currently subject to active price and performance competition. research and clinical laboratories are seeking to determine the technology platform(s) that perform best for detection of cnvs: accurately and precisely reporting their length, their copy number and other features such as homozygosity. here we provide an assessment of the major vendors in the current marketplace based on direct comparison of the performance of samples containing intentional copy number alterations. these are evaluated using company-recommended software tools, as well as independent methods. cnvs spanning one megabase (mb) are detectable by cytogenetic techniques such as spectral karyotyping and fluorescence in situ hybridization. however, the level of resolution attained by these methods does not permit detection of copy number change in smaller segments. microarray comparative genomic hybridization (array-cgh) was the first technique developed to achieve a higher resolution . in this technology, dna from a test sample and a reference sample are labeled using different fluorophores (cy3 and cy5), and hybridized to probes printed on a glass slide. the log-ratio of the fluorescence intensity of the test to that of the reference dna is calculated and used as a measure of(b) for illumina 1m duo, the bac spike-in is not detected by the sum of snp intensities. (c) however, the baf for illumina 1m duo shows a pattern of values distributed away from heterozygosity, reflecting the presence of the spike-in. relative dosage. however, the level of random variation in these log-ratios does not permit copy number calls at the individual feature level. therefore, analysts use smoothing, a statistical procedure that averages neighboring measurements to improve precision . with smoothing techniques, precision, and therefore specificity, can be improved by increasing the size of the averaging window, but at a cost of averaging over, and therefore missing, smaller cnvs. competing statistical techniques provide different solutions to this sensitivityspecificity tradeoff. examples are hidden markov models and segmentation algorithms such as circular binary segmentation (cbs) . note that specificity can be improved without detrimentally affecting sensitivity by increasing the resolution of the array, because the number of averaged points increases when keeping the neighborhood sizes the same (averaging window sizes). recently, agilent and nimblegen have developed high-resolution microarrays, with roughly 1 million or 2 million features respectively, in which the oligonucleotide features are chosen to represent a tiling path through the human genome. in parallel development, genotyping arrays from illumina and affymetrix originally designed for genome-wide genotyping of snps were adapted to provide cnv calls providing both polymorphic and non-polymorphic elements . the most recent platforms contain features for 1 million snps, and translate to a resolution of one feature per 3000 bps. for each snp, these platforms provide an intensity-based measurement for each allele, denoted generally as a and b. while the ratio of these intensities (a : b) is used for genotyping, the sum (a + b) provides a quantitative measure of copy number dosage. if a reference sample is available, then we can form a ratio as in array-cgh and use the same smoothing techniques . the affymetrix 6.0 platform includes 906 600 snp probes as well as 945 806 nonpolymorphic probes used strictly for cnv detection to roughly double the resolution. in their latest product, the affymetrix 2.7m array includes many more cnv features (2 394 920 compared to 400 103 snp features). algorithms developed by illumina and affymetrix make clever use of the bi-allelic information from snp probes to detect copy number change. for example, illumina defines the b-allele frequency (baf) as the estimated number of b alleles divided by the sum of both alleles at a given snp location. this estimate is based upon interpolation from plotted canonical clusters of the aa, ab and bb genotypes at a given snp, with the x-axis representing b to a allelic intensity ratios and the y-axis representing b + a intensity sums . the expectation, when copy number dosage is 2, is to see three clouds of points when plotting baf across the genome: one cloud for each genotype aa, ab and bb. cnvs can be detected by looking for regions with an unexpected number of clusters in the baf measure even in cases where the dosage measure does not show strong signal (shows intensity (a + b);shows baf). in this work, we compare performance on the six platforms listed in. this set consists of one snp genotyping, three arraycgh, and two hybrid array platforms, i.e. platforms in which a substantial number of probes are non-polymorphic. to guide the comparison we developed a spike-in experiment in which known genomic fragments were added in varying quantities to diploid lymphoblastoid genomic dna samples from two individuals with known large deletions. real-time quantitative pcr (qpcr) was used to estimate the concentration of bacterial artificial clones (bacs) containing between 141 and 217 kb of human genomic dna. four spike-in cocktails were prepared according to a modified latin square design. actual relative representation of bac insert in each cocktail was determined as read number per base in singleend sequence output from a solexa genome analyzer. the four spike-in reagents were added to lymphoblastoid genomic dna, and each dna sample was hybridized in replicate to each of the six platforms (, methods in supplementary material). sample labeling, hybridization, and scanning were performed at publicly accessible laboratory service sites with recognized expertise, and all protocols conformed to company-specified recommendations. data were analyzed in two modes: one based on company-recommended software for detection of cnv calls and one independent of company-recommended software to evaluate the specificity and sensitivity of cnv and dosage measurements. we also evaluated the fidelity of the start and end estimates of cnv regions detected in each platform.we have performed a thorough comparison of six cnv detection platforms: agilent 1m, nimblegen 2.1m, nimblegen 3x720k, illumina 1m duo, affymetrix 6.0, and affymetrix 2.7m. we used a carefully designed spike-in experiment to facilitate the data analysis. we found that removal of strong wave artifacts greatly improved analysis, in particular for agilent 1m, nimblegen 2.1m, and affymetrix 2.7m arrays. precision from replicates was similar across all platforms. greater probe density does result in higher breakpoint resolution among platforms tested here, even though diverse technologies are used for sample labeling and signal detection. our analysis demonstrated that, when using companyrecommended software, the illumina 1m duo and affymetrix 6.0 platforms performed well at detecting cnvs while not performing well in dosage sensitivity. this presented an apparent paradox. it is explained by the use of the baf measure, which is quite sensitive to copy number changes in cases where the dosage-related measures perform poorly (e.g.). we found various examples where dosage measures do not detect cnvs but baf measures do (supplementaryincludes four examples). however, the use of snp allele frequency to detect copy number alterations introduces two obstacles to cnv analysis. first, the accuracy of dosage estimates is below that of the cgh arrays from nimblegen and agilent. secondly, the density of naturally occurring snps limits genotyping array density. this, in turn, hinders the detection ability of illumina 1m duo and affymetrix 6.0 for small cnvs (less than 50100 kb) which arrays of high density, and nimblegen 2.1m in particular, are able to detect. after consideration of dosage sensitivity, precision, specificity, sensitivity and cnv border definition, the nimblegen 2.1m platform demonstrated the best overall performance. however, careful removal of the wave artifact is a necessity. for researchers who depend on current company-recommended analysis algorithms, the illumina 1m duo platform performed best as it is able to detect cnvs with high sensitivity and specificity if they are 100 kb. however, in addition to its insensitivity to small cnvs, this platform underperforms at estimation of dosage and cnv start/end location. we expect new high-throughput cnv detection platforms to emerge and new technologies, such as analysis of second generation sequence data, to become practical in the near future. our study design and statistical analysis strategies are not specific to the platforms addressed here, and this approach can be readily applied to incorporate comparisons of newer technologies as they enter the research and clinical marketplace. technical assessments comparing extant and emergent methods can support informed platform choice for a given research or clinical purpose, provide context for crossplatform results comparison where needed, and sharpen focus on the relative technical limitations and strengths that drive improvements in competing technologies.  
