structural bioinformatics performance of protein-structure predictions with the physics-based unres force field in casp11 downloaded from participating as the cornell-gdansk group, we have used our physics-based coarse-grained united residue (unres) force field to predict protein structure in the 11th community wide experiment on the critical assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction (casp11). our methodology involved extensive multiplexed replica exchange simulations of the target proteins with a recently improved unres force field to provide better reproductions of the local structures of polypeptide chains. all simulations were started from fully extended polypeptide chains, and no external information was included in the simulation process except for weak restraints on secondary structure to enable us to finish each prediction within the allowed 3-week time window. because of simplified unres representation of polypeptide chains, use of enhanced sampling methods, code optimization and parallelization and sufficient computational resources, we were able to treat, for the first time, all 55 human prediction targets with sizes from 44 to 595 amino acid residues, the average size being 251 residues. complete structures of six single-domain proteins were predicted accurately, with the highest accuracy being attained for the t0769, for which the carmsd was 3.8 a for 97 residues of the experimental structure. correct structures were also predicted for 13 domains of multi-domain proteins with accuracy comparable to that of the best template-based modeling methods. with further improvements of the unres force field that are now underway, our physics-based coarse-grained approach to protein-structure prediction will eventually reach global prediction capacity and, consequently, reliability in simulating protein structure and dynamics that are important in biochemical processes. availability and implementation: freely available on the web attemplate-based and other knowledge-based methods are currently used routinely for the modeling of unknown protein structures. however, despite tremendous advancement in the field the quality of the resulting structures depends strongly on the similarity of the target protein sequences to those in the protein data bank (pdb). if even a small section of the sequence has weak similarity to those of pdb proteins, the uncertainty of the prediction increases dramatically. therefore, advantage is taken of our coarse-grained procedure, united residue (unres), which performs successfully with comparable accuracy as that of homology modeling. the latter performs better than unres only when there is a good template in the pdb. however, when no such templates exist, homology modeling is not superior to unres. for that reason, for the proteins for which there are no good templates in the databases, the de novo methods, not using knowledge-based information, are superior to the template-based modeling (tbm) methods. in the physics-based approaches, the prediction candidates are selected from the basin(s) with the lowest free energy and, consequently, such methods involve large-scale molecular dynamics (md) simulations which enable us to perform extensive walks in the conformational space [e.g. replica-exchange monte carlo , replica-exchange molecular dynamics (remd) or the multiplexed remd (mremd) application (. such simulations are very expensive to perform with all-atom representations even for small proteins and even with the use of the most powerful supercomputers available because of too large discrepancy between the md time step (110 fs) and the time-scale of protein folding (microseconds for the fastest folders to seconds;). use of dedicated supercomputers such as anton helps to overcome some of the limitations, but the access to such machines is restricted, and the size or the effective time-scale of the simulation is limited to 200 amino acid residues and microseconds, respectively . owing to the elimination of the fast-moving degrees of freedom , using the coarsegrained approaches, enables us to extend both the time-scale (by about 34 orders of magnitude) and the size-scale of simulations. thus, the main advantage of coarse-grained models, with properly designed knowledge-based potentials such as cabs and primo or physics-based potentials such as martini and unres that can locate native-like structures (not necessarily with perfect experimental-quality resolution) in free monte carlo or md simulations, is the ability to simulate the dynamics of the relatively large systems in reasonable time-scale . however, the development of coarse-grained force fields is much more difficult than that of all-atom force fields because the effective energy function originates from the potential of mean force of the system, in which the insignificant degrees of freedom have been integrated out, and additional terms, like multibody potentials, are necessary to compensate for the missing effects in our laboratory, we have been developing the unres force field which uses a coarse-grained representation of polypeptide chains. our physicsbased approach to protein-structure prediction, that uses the unres force field, performed reasonably well in biannual casp community wide experiment on the critical assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction, exercises to obtain fold topology, e.g. for targets t0061, t0063 and t0079 in casp3 , t0102 in casp4 , t0129 and t0149 in casp5, t0215, t0223, t0230 and t0281 in casp6 , t0534, t0537 and t0578 in casp9 and t0644, t0663, t0668 and t0740 in casp10 . however, because the unres predictions are generally of medium-resolution quality, which is remarkably lower than those for tbm targets, unres was featured only for new-fold targets (proteins with unique orientation of the local structure) and for targets with new types of domain packing. in the casp10 experiment, two unres-based predictions made only by the cornell-gdansk group, and by one other group with additional participants, were featured by the assessors . the first one was a two-domain target t0663 (treated by the cornell-gdansk group) , and the second one was t0740 (treated by the wfcpunk group within the wefold initiative) ; in the second prediction exercise, unres was supplemented with contact-prediction restraints. in the casp10 experiment, we proved that the unres force field is a very good tool to predict the orientation of the domains for the 2-fold symmetry target t0663 that was further confirmed by post-casp tests with use of restraints within the domains, but not between them . in the past casp experiments, we were not able to predict all of the human-prediction targets within the 3-week time-window from the target announcement to the submission deadline, because of limited manpower and computer resources. casp11 was the first exercise in which the cornell-gdansk group was able to perform simulations for every human-prediction target using our physicsbased approach, treating all 55 human-prediction targets, varying in size from 44 (for target t0797) to 595 amino acid residues (for target t0793), with the average size being 251 residues. these targets represented all structural classes. we used the newest version of the unres force field supplemented with energy terms corresponding to the coupling between backbone-local and sidechainlocal conformational states .knowledge-based methods, in particular the template-based methods and methods with mixed approaches for the prediction ofprotein structure, are at present more successful than the physicsbased approaches. however, as demonstrated by the recent casp exercises, new proteins whose structures cannot be predicted with these approaches continue to emerge. moreover, the physics-based methods are the only ones with which to study protein dynamics and large-scale conformational changes, which are crucial in the functioning of the machinery of life and, further, to study the mechanisms of diseases and to help design effective therapies. in this regard, assessment of the capability of the physics-based methods to predict protein structures enables us to assess their applicability in the simulations of biochemical processes. the cornell-gdansk group was the only group in the casp11 experiment that used only molecular-dynamics simulations without any knowledge-based information (except for weak secondarystructure restraints, which were necessary in order to accomplish the predictions within the strict 3-week time window), and which carried out all human-prediction targets and achieved satisfactory results. moreover, the applied prediction procedure was also physics based because mean structures from the conformational ensembles with the lowest free energy, rather than the lowest-energy conformations, were selected as candidate predictions. with our physicsbased approach, we achieved good predictions of complete structures of six medium-sized single-domain proteins and the structures of 13 complete protein domains and the general fold of the large multi-domain proteins. the best prediction in terms of rmsd was achieved for the tbm target t0769 (the c a-rmsd from the experimental structure being 3.8 a over the 97 residues). however, the optimum character of the unres force field can be seen from the prediction of the small fm target t0855, which is an example of the situation, in which, due to the lack of good homologous proteins in the database, the structure prediction with the tbm methods is not as good as that with the superior unres force field. unres force field managed to achieve comparable results to the most of the tbm methods also for other fm targets and domains, such as t0763d1, t0771-d1, t0775-d2, t0793-d2, t0820-d1 and t0834-d2. it is also remarkable that, in casp11, there is only a small differencebetween the ranking of our model 1s and our best models indicating that the unres force field, supplemented with the recently introduced terms corresponding to the coupling of the backboneand side-chain-local interactions , enables us to select the most native-like predictions out of the five models more accurately than the previous version of the force field used in casp10. the better overall performance of our approach in casp11 compared with previous casp exercises was achieved because of recent addition of the new potentials coupling the backbone-local and sidechain-local conformational states. this improvement enables us to predict more folds and rank the models better. nevertheless, the results show that, even though unres predicts a large number of folds correctly and the accuracy of a few targets is comparable with the best tbm methods, especially for the tbm targets, the predicted structures have higher rmsds from the experimental structures compared with those predicted by tbm methods. to improve the capacity of unres to predict new folds and to improve the accuracy of predictions, at present, we are working on the calibration of the force field, which is aimed at the refinement of the energy-term weights of the parameters of the expressions for the energy terms in equation (1). for this purpose, we have recently developed a new method for force-field calibration , which is based on the maximum-likelihood approach . a very early variant of the unres force field optimized with the use of this approach was already used in casp11 for a very limited number of 12 targets. the performance of this variant of unres will be described in a separate paper (a.k. sieradzan et al., unpublished data). full optimization of unres is now being carried out with the maximum-likelihood approach, and the first results demonstrate that it improves the capability of finding the folds and to rank the models and the accuracy of the predicted structures . because the simulations could not be run to achieve full convergence for the largest targets during casp11, work is also being carried out in our laboratory to optimize and improve the parallel efficiency of the unres code for use with the optimized force field. it can be anticipated that these improvements will constitute yet another important step toward accurate prediction of protein structure without the use of any database information and, consequently, simulations of important biochemical processes with a great degree of reliability.  
