permanova-s: association test for microbial community composition that accommodates confounders and multiple distances downloaded from motivation: recent advances in sequencing technology have made it possible to obtain high-throughput data on the composition of microbial communities and to study the effects of dysbiosis on the human host. analysis of pairwise intersample distances quantifies the association between the microbiome diversity and covariates of interest (e.g. environmental factors, clinical outcomes, treatment groups). in the design of these analyses, multiple choices for distance metrics are available. most distance-based methods, however, use a single distance and are underpowered if the distance is poorly chosen. in addition, distance-based tests cannot flexibly handle confounding variables, which can result in excessive false-positive findings. results: we derive presence-weighted unifrac to complement the existing unifrac distances for more powerful detection of the variation in species richness. we develop permanova-s, a new distance-based method that tests the association of microbiome composition with any covariates of interest. permanova-s improves the commonly-used permutation multivariate analysis of variance (permanova) test by allowing flexible confounder adjustments and ensembling multiple distances. we conducted extensive simulation studies to evaluate the performance of different distances under various patterns of association. our simulation studies demonstrate that the power of the test relies on how well the selected distance captures the nature of the association. the permanova-s unified test combines multiple distances and achieves good power regardless of the patterns of the underlying association. we demonstrate the usefulness of our approach by reanalyzing several real microbiome datasets.biological and empirical evidences suggest that a diverse microbial community plays an important role in human health . understanding the composition of the microbial community provides insight into the functions of bacteria and their effects on the human host. sequencing technology has made it possible to capture highthroughput data on the microbiome composition in human specimens. a common unit of analysis for sequencing-based microbiome identification studies is the operational taxonomic unit (otu). otus represent the conceptualization of species and are typically constructed by clustering sequences at a certain similarity threshold (e.g. 97) . comparison of otu profiles with respect to differential clinical outcomes or conditions lends important knowledge towards understanding the underlying disease mechanisms and the effects of dysbiosis . testing associations of the microbiome composition with covariates of interest is challenging because the sample size is typically modest and the number of otus is large. distance-based omnibus tests are popular, as these tests successfully address the challenges by partitioning the distance matrix among sources of variation and evaluating the statistical significance by permutation . specifically, when testing for the community difference between groups, the distance-based method contrasts the pairwise distance within and between groups. this statistic is an analogue to fishers f-ratio. the difference between two microbial composition profiles follows various patterns. the difference may exist in one or several clusters of the species on the phylogenetic tree (lineages) or random sets of species. the difference may be driven by the change of species richness, evenness or a combination of the two. richness and evenness are the two main factors that describe species diversity in microbial communities. each of these measures addresses a different aspect of community ecology; thus, by considering them together, a much more insightful picture of the community structure is provided. increased richness and evenness are often associated with more stable and longer established ecosystems . such ecosystems tend to be resistant to environmental pressures, such as diet, antibiotic use and pathogen invasion . over two dozen distance measures are available in open source packages, like vegan , ade4 and phyloseq , to quantify the variation in composition between microbiome samples (beta diversity). the unweighted and weighted unifrac are two commonly-used distances constructed on the phylogenetic tree . these distances are efficient in detecting differential species in lineages of the tree. the unweighted unifrac uses the difference of the species presenceabsence status between two samples to determine the inclusion of a particular tree branch. the weighted unifrac uses the difference of the species relative abundance (proportion) between two samples to weight the branch. as an extension of the weighted unifrac, the generalized unifrac introduces a parameter to attenuate the contribution from high abundant lineages . bray-curtis and jaccard distances are two popular dissimilarity measures that do not utilize the phylogenetic tree. they tend to be efficient in detecting association on arbitrary species rather than in lineages. bray-curtis distance is defined as the difference of the abundance divided by the total abundance contributed by both samples. jaccard distance is defined as the number of unique species present in either sample, divided by the number of species present in any of the two samples. although distance-based methods provide powerful tools to discover associations between the microbiome composition and covariates, they suffer from two main limitations. first, existing distancebased tests cannot flexibly handle confounders, which are defined as variables correlated with both the covariates of interest and the microbiome composition. extending these methods to accommodate moresophisticated outcomes and study designs in the presence of confounders is challenging . treating confounders as covariates or omitting the confounders in the distance-based test distorts the true association. hence, the ability to properly model and adjust for confounders becomes critically important. second, existing distance-based tests cannot simultaneously incorporate multiple distances. as the underlying biology is unknown a priori, the selected distance is most likely suboptimal and may not yield good statistical power. searching multiple distances and reporting the one that produces the smallest p-value is too liberal and yields excessive false discoveries, unless adjustments are made for multiple comparisons. on the other hand, adjustments for multiple comparisons may result in poor power when an excessive number of distances is tested. hence, it is highly desirable to have a unified test that combines multiple distances. in this article, we derive presence-weighted unifrac to complement the existing unifrac distances for more powerful detection of variation in species richness. the presence-weighted unifrac distances achieve adequate power in a wide range of scenarios. we develop permanova-s, a new distance-based method to test the association of microbial communities with any covariates of interest. permanova-s improves the commonly-used permutation multivariate analysis of variance (permanova) test by allowing flexible confounder adjustments and ensembling multiple distances. we conducted extensive simulations to evaluate the performance of different distances under various patterns of association. our studies demonstrate that the power of the test relies on how well the selected distance captures the nature of the association. the permanova-s unified test combines multiple distances and achieves good power regardless of the patterns in the underlying association. application to real microbiome datasets demonstrates the usefulness of the proposed methods. the relevant software miprofile incorporating the new development is freely available.we derive the presence-weighted unifrac based on the presenceabsence data of the microbial species. such distances are sensitive to variation of richness. we develop permanova-s as an improved version of permanova in order to facilitate the association study of microbiome composition. permanova-s is superior to permanova because it flexibly accommodates confounders and multiple distances. we investigated the type i error and power of permanova-s under different patterns of association by fluctuating the richness and evenness on various otu sets. our results show that permanova-s properly controls type i error, and the unified test is more robust than the single-distance test. a method based on the maximum of the pseudo-f statistics (maxf) has been proposed to combine different distances . the validity of the maxf test relies on the assumption that the reference distributions of the pseudo-f statistics are the same under different distances. permanova-s uses the minimum p-values as the test statistic, which is a scale-free approach that is more robust to the various structures of the microbiome data and distances under consideration. we have conducted maxf test on the psoriasis dataset across the six distances and obtained a p-value of 1:2 10 3 , which is substantially less significant than the p-value of our unified test (3:1 10 5 ). the permutation strategy of the unified test proposed in this paper is very general and can be applied to any unified tests minimizing p-values. for instance,cast the problem in the kernel machine framework and developed a regression-based kernel test mirkat. their framework allows for multiple distances. however, the p-value calculations of their unified test depend on the asymptotic approximation, which is not accurate when the sample size is modest. the supplementarydemonstrates that mirkat tends to be overly conservative with small sample size. our permutation strategy can be readily implemented to improve the small-sample performance of their test. failure to take into account the sampling variation can cause inflated beta diversity and produce false positive results. to overcome the potential adverse effects of unbalanced sampling, rarefaction is usually adopted to subsample reads to equal depth. however, if the signal is mainly driven by the change of evenness, throwing away large numbers of observations adversely affects the power. fortunately, the abundance distances based on the unrarefied data stabilize very quickly with increasing depths (supplementary tables s4 and s5). as the read depth is usually large (1000) in most target sequencing studies, we suggest to use unrarefied data for the abundance distances and rarefied data for the presenceabsence distances when testing the association of microbiome compositions. of note, rarefaction does not always obscure association when the presence absence distances are used (see power of the d 1 pw in supplementary tables s4 and s5). for instance, the p-value for d 1  
