pez: phylogenetics for the environmental sciences pez is an r package that permits measurement, modelling and simulation of phylogen-etic structure in ecological data. pez contains the first implementation of many methods in r, and aggregates existing data structures and methods into a single, coherent package. availability and implementation: pez is released under the gpl v3 open-source license, available on the internet from cran (http://cran.r-project.org). the package is under active development, and the authors welcome contributions (seecommunity phylogenetics (or eco-phylogenetics) combines ecology and evolutionary biology, linking ecological phenomena with the evolutionary processes that generate species and their traits (see). this growing field has produced a number of statistical tools and software code to implement them (e.g.), but this code is disparate and handles data differently, making routine data analyses challenging. in many cases, published methods are not formally implemented in a software package and are available only as supplementary materials to papers. without active (public) maintenance, these valuable techniques are effectively lost to the scientific community. here, we present the pez r (r core) package which provides an intuitive framework that merges existing tools and supports the development of the next generation of eco-phylogenetic methods. it is based around an r class (comparative.comm) that links phylogenetic, community, environmental and trait data in a single object. with a comparative.comm object, one can presently calculate over 30 phylogenetic and trait diversity metrics (described in the documentation for pez.metrics), including more than 10 that were previously unavailable in r. pez additionally implements statistical models to infer the processes that underlie patterns in community phylogenetic and trait data. users can also perform simulations under various community assembly and evolutionary processes, to help test hypotheses about the structure of biodiversity.). pez integrates and makes use of much existing r code , and its comparative.comm class is directly compatible with all caper code, easing comparative analysis of species trait data.  
