sequence analysis pfsearchv3: a code acceleration and heuristic to search prosite profiles the prosite resource provides a rich and well annotated source of signatures in the form of generalized profiles that allow protein domain detection and functional annotation. one of the major limiting factors in the application of prosite in genome and meta-genome annotation pipelines is the time required to search protein sequence databases for putative matches. we describe an improved and optimized implementation of the prosite search tool pfsearch that, combined with a newly developed heuristic, addresses this limitation. on a modern x86_64 hyper-threaded quad-core desktop computer , the new pfsearchv3 is two orders of magnitude faster than the original algorithm. availability and implementation: source code and binaries of pfsearchv3 are freely available for download at http://web.expasy. org/pftools/pfsearchv3, implemented in c and supported on linux. prosite generalized profiles including the heuristic cutoff scores are available at the same address.falling costs and continuing technological developments have led to a dramatic increase in the rate of sequencing of individual species genomes and the diversity of the ecological niches sampled by metagenomic sequencing . the identification, classification and functional annotation of the putative protein sequences encoded by these samples is essential to understand the diversity of the underlying biological systems, and will ultimately allow the construction of biological models that simulate and make testable predictions about their behaviour . most functional annotation is predicted using sequence homology-based methods that infer the function of uncharacterized protein sequences based on their similarity to characterized templates. these methods include generalized profiles and hidden markov models (hmms), which can detect more subtle homologies than pairwise sequence alignments . the application of these computationally expensive methods on large datasets has been made feasible by the development of heuristics for sequence database search and faster more efficient code (e.g.). our prosite method combines manually constructed generalized profiles for efficient domain detection with rules for precise functional annotation . here, we describe a new heuristic method and code optimization and parallelization for the prosite profile-sequence database search tool pfsearch. these developments increase the speed of pfsearch by two orders of magnitude using a modern x86_64 hyperthreaded quad-core computer (seelegend for specifications of the computer used in our tests), making the annotation of large sequence datasets using prosite feasible.  
