genome analysis pgap: pan-genomes analysis pipeline with the rapid development of dna sequencing technology, increasing bacteria genome data enable the biologists to dig the evolutionary and genetic information of prokaryotic species from pan-genome sight. therefore, the high-efficiency pipelines for pan-genome analysis are mostly needed. we have developed a new pan-genome analysis pipeline (pgap), which can perform five analytic functions with only one command, including cluster analysis of functional genes, pan-genome profile analysis, genetic variation analysis of functional genes, species evolution analysis and function enrichment analysis of gene clusters. pgaps performance has been evaluated on 11 streptococcus pyogenes strains. availability: pgap is developed with perl script on the linux platform and the package is freely available from http://pgap.sf.net.with the rapid development of dna sequencing technology, many large-scale microbial genomes projects are being processed, such as ten thousand microbial genomes project and nih human microbiome project (hmp) . accumulations of bacterial whole genome sequences also give the biologists more opportunities to explore and test the evolutionary hypotheses on a larger scale than before. in 2005, tettelin and colleagues introduced a new conception pan-genome . soon afterwards, pan-genome has been widely used to provide insight into the analysis of the evolution of streptococcus pneumoniae , haemophilus influenzae , escherichia coli , and so on. besides evolution, pan-genome has been widely used to detect strain-specific virulence factors for some pathogens, legionella pneumophila (d). it is also helpful to investigate the pathogens of epidemic diseases by scanning variable functional genes in core genomes and develop vaccines against bacterial pathogens from reverse vaccinology sight . to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors.in order to make pan-genome analysis for one bacterial population as easy as possible, there is a great need to develop high-efficiency tools for bacterial pan-genome analysis. for pan-genome analysis, there are only panseq and pgat so far. panseq does well in extracting the core and accessory regions among genomic sequences and detecting the snp among core regions. however, it is short of the ability to present the pan-genome profiles of given strains, trace the evolutionary history with multiple materials and point out the variation and function enrichment of functional genes. as a web-based database, pgat has integrated ortholog assignments, gene content queries, sequences polymorphisms and metabolic pathways information. however, so far it only provides analytical result of limited species in the database and it cannot analyze the genome data from users. we have developed a new stand-alone program called pan-genomes analysis pipeline (pgap), which has integrated multiple function models and could be used to study the evolutionary history of bacteria, discover pathogenic mechanism, and prevent and control epidemics.  
