pgat: a multistrain analysis resource for microbial genomes motivation: the prokaryotic-genome analysis tool (pgat) is a web-based database application for comparing gene content and sequence across multiple microbial genomes facilitating the discovery of genetic differences that may explain observed phenotypes. pgat supports database queries to identify genes that are present or absent in user-selected genomes, comparison of sequence polymorphisms in sets of orthologous genes, multigenome display of regions surrounding a query gene, comparison of the distribution of genes in metabolic pathways and manual community annotation. availability and implementation: the pgat website may be accessed at http://nwrce.org/pgat.whole-genome sequence comparison of related bacteria is increasing in scale owing to second-generation sequencing technologies such as illumina (http://www.illumina.com/) and 454 pyrosequencing (http://www.454.com) that can sequence more than a hundred bacterial genomes in few months. the main challenge currently presented by those technologies is the ability to compare a large number of draft sequences efficiently in order to elucidate the biological significance of the differences. substantial progress has been made to accurately align whole genome sequences to uncover genetic polymorphisms . however, linking polymorphisms with functional differences still requires examination of their effect on proteins encoded by these regions (e.g. non-synonymous substitutions, gene inactivation by frameshifts, etc.). the motivation for the development of the prokaryoticgenome analysis tool (pgat) was the need for a data-mining tool by which draft genome sequences could be compared among themselves and with completed genomes to explore genetic differences that result in functional differences. the main features of pgat are as follows:(i) implementation as a web-based database application to support data mining; (ii) ability to efficiently integrate large numbers of genomes including draft genome assemblies; (iii) homogenization of genome annotation across the genomes; and (iv) support for manual community annotation. pgat integrates many features of current online resources such as the integrated microbial genomes img , the burkholderia to whom correspondence should be addressed. genome database and neisseria base . its main difference is the homogenization of gene features across the genomes and the integrated functionality to compare gene content, single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) in orthologous genes, and the resulting impact of snps and indels on the encoded proteins. currently, pgat websites host burkholderia pseudomalleib.mallei, francisella tularensis, yersinia pestis and salmonella enterica.  
