data and text mining pgdspider: an automated data conversion tool for connecting population genetics and genomics programs the analysis of genetic data often requires a combination of several approaches using different and sometimes incompatible programs. in order to facilitate data exchange and file conversions between population genetics programs, we introduce pgdspider, a java program that can read 27 different file formats and export data into 29, partially overlapping, other file formats. the pgdspider package includes both an intuitive graphical user interface and a command-line version allowing its integration in complex data analysis pipelines. availability: pgdspider is freely available under the bsd 3-clause license onin the last few years, high-throughput sequencing made it possible to sequence a huge amount of dna at a rapidly decreasing cost, allowing for budget-tight studies to produce large sequencing and population genetics datasets . a proper analysis of these data requires a combination of several approaches, beginning with those describing basic properties of the data, followed by more specialized and often computer intensive analyses . most of the times, it requires the use of several population genetic programs and different input formats, which necessitate numerous file conversions. however, data format conversion can be tedious and error prone if not fully automatized, especially when dealing with large amounts of data. to our knowledge, only three programs are available to transfer populations genetics data between programs: convert , formatomatic and create . whereas these programs can sometimes bridge many population genetics program (create reads 12 input formats and outputs 62 formats; convert reads 2 and outputs 7, whereas formatomatics reads 4 and outputs 13), these programs have some limitations. for instance, create and convert only handle codominant diploid genotypic data, to whom correspondence should be addressed.create focuses mainly on parentage analysis programs and formatomatics only deals with microsatellite data. to improve data exchange between programs for a vast range of data types , we introduce here pgdspider, an automated data conversion tool for population genetics and population genomics.  
