data and text mining pgs: a tool for association study of high-dimensional microrna expression data with repeated measures motivation: micrornas (mirnas) are short single-stranded non-coding molecules that usually function as negative regulators to silence or suppress gene expression. owning to the dynamic nature of mirna and reduced microarray and sequencing costs, a growing number of researchers are now measuring high-dimensional mirna expression data using repeated or multiple measures in which each individual has more than one sample collected and measured over time. however, the commonly used univariate association testing or the site-by-site (sbs) testing may underutilize the longitudinal feature of the data, leading to underpowered results and less biologically meaningful results. results: we propose a penalized regression model incorporating grid search method (pgs), for analyzing associations of high-dimensional mirna expression data with repeated measures. the development of this analytical framework was motivated by a real-world mirna dataset. comparisons between pgs and the sbs testing revealed that pgs provided smaller phenotype prediction errors and higher enrichment of phenotype-related biological pathways than the sbs testing. our extensive simulations showed that pgs provided more accurate estimates and higher sensitivity than the sbs testing with comparable specificities. availability and implementation: r source code for pgs algorithm, implementation example and simulation study are available for down-load at https://github.com/feizhe/pgs.micrornas (mirnas) are short single-stranded rnas of nearly 2024 nt in length that are transcribed from dna but not translated into proteins . most mirnas inhibit the translation of proteins, destabilize their target messenger rnas (mrnas) and control many cellular mechanisms dynamically . even small changes in mirna expression levels may have profound consequences for the expression levels of target genes . the dynamic nature of mirnas distinguishes it from genetics. therefore, owing also to the reduced microarray and sequencing experiments cost, a growing number of researchers are conducting investigations that measure high-dimensional mirna expression data using repeated or multiple measures in which each individual has more than one sample collected and measured over time . repeated or multiple measures data allow the researcher to exclude mirna expression variation between individuals depending on the outcomes and pinpoint the causal role of mirna expressions such as longitudinal study design. the popular site-by-site (sbs) testing using generalized estimation equation (gee) or linear mixed model (lmm) represents a feasible approach to accommodate the presence of high-dimensional mirna expression data measured at different time points. sbs testing is a type of analysis that performs univariate tests of associations for each of the biomarker sites, followed by multipletesting adjustments, for example, the bonferronis p-value correction or the false discovery rate (fdr) q-value . however, this approach is particularly problematic in high-dimensional mirna expression data because it ignores the underlying dependent structure between mirnas. in addition, not like genetics, mirna expressions are modifiable by environmental factors including diet, air pollution and other external exposures . hence, for better delineation of the direct effects of mirnas, adjusting for these environment factors in models are recommended . but issues such as overfitting, collinearity and obscuring biomarkers with small effect sizes are usually encountered in typical regression approaches, e.g. gee and lmm. therefore, computationally feasible methods are required to tackle these problems. ythe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. to whom correspondence should be addressed.we propose to apply a variable selection method with specific application in high-dimensional mirna expression data with repeated or multiple measures. wang et al. proposed a novel penalized gee (pgee) method to select variables when the number of covariates is moderate in a repeated or multiple measures setting. pgee is able to account for both within subject correlation and dependencies between different biomarkers. however, pgee typically fails in the presence of high-dimensional biomarkers, i.e. when the number of biomarkers is larger than the sample size. to tackle this issue, we develop a prescreening-based pgee with grid search (pgs) method. our method consists of an iterative two-step approach. step 1, uses the screening method to downsize the biomarkers, whereas step 2 feeds the survived biomarkers to the pgee. we repeat these two steps in a grid search and perform k-fold crossvalidation to determine tuning parameters. we test our methods in a mirna profiling dataset generated from our beijing truck driver air pollution study (btdas) . in btdas, we measured air pollution and health outcomes, including lung functions, twice with 12 weeks apart. we also collected blood samples twice for biomarker measurements, including mirna profiling. based on repeated measures mirna collected in btdas, we apply pgs to model the lung function levels measured by forced expiratory volume in one second (fev1), with the goal of detecting lung function-related mirnas and uncovering regulatory pathways. we also compare pgs with gee/lmm sbs testing in terms of prediction error of lung function levels and enrichment of lung function-related biological pathways. in addition, a simulation study is conducted to examine the extensions of pgs.in this study, we proposed and applied pgs method to handle high-dimensional mirna expression data with repeated measures. we compared performances of the pgs and the traditional sbs testing. pgs performed consistently better than gee/lmm sbs testing in terms of higher phenotype prediction performance, higher enrichment of phenotype-related biological pathway, more accurate estimates, and higher sensitivity. one of the regularity conditions for pgee algorithm is that p = o(n), which requires the number of predictors (p) in model, should be comparable with the sample size (n). to ensure the tuning penalty parameter yields an overall effect size estimation that best fits the data and avoid exceeded number of input biomarkers (p m ) for pgee algorithm, we incorporated the grid search method. a 20-fold cross-validation was implemented to determine the best pgee selection results in terms of the smallest prediction error among the parameter searching grid (p m , ). though pgs has a relatively high computational intensity, the most common and systematic way, as we have done in current study, is through the cross-validation, which is well documented in other established penalized models lasso and elastic net . pgs is a data-driven and self-training analytical framework that can achieve maximum data utilization while constraining model complexity simultaneously. one key merit of pgs is its capacity to handle a multitude of biomarkers at the same time and select the influential ones. using sbs testing, we only found few significant results after having corrected for a high number of multiple testing. while using pgs, we identified a set of influential and meaningful mirnas without encountering multiple testing issues, which offers a novel perspective in analyzing high-dimensional data with repeated measures. another distinct advantage of pgs is that it considers all informative biomarkers as a whole instead of treating them individually. using the sbs testing, although some mirnas successfully pass the multiple testing, it is possible that meaningful biological events might not even be detected because of the correlations and interactions among mirnas. however,note: mean estimates were calculated from the 100 simulation runs, respectively. number of selections were the number of times each true effect selected by models out of the 100 runs. sensitivity and specificity for each method were the average for all 100 runs. rmse is root mean square error between mean estimates and true effects, which describes mean accuracy of the model estimates.note: mean prediction errors were computed by 10-fold cross-validation errors from 50 repeats. the 10 influential mirnas selected by lmm-based pgs were used to calculate the prediction errors. p-values were calculated by paired t-tests between the lowest prediction errors from gee/lmm using top 10 mirnas and the prediction errors from pgs using the selected 10 influential mirnas.. enrichment score of seven laboratory-proven kegg signaling pathways related to lung function. pgs selection results were from lmm-based pgs the effects of these biomarkers could be significant when modeled together. pgs is able to capture these complex features across all input biomarkers and detect influential ones that sbs testing would potentially ignore. it is worth noting that pgs does not provide exact p-values, as the estimates do not follow normal distribution under the null hypotheses. therefore, the criterion for determining influential biomarker in pgs is not based on p-value, but on the threshold for coefficient estimates of biomarkers. influential biomarkers are selected when the estimates are greater than the threshold. as suggested in wangs paper , the default threshold is 0.001, which is also proved to be a practical and robust threshold in our simulation study in terms of sensitivity and specificity. to ensure that the threshold of 0.001 works uniformly for any dataset, it is required to standardize each of the biomarkers with mean of zero and standard deviation of one as a typical procedure before running penalize model. robust selection of biomarkers by pgs relies on the setting of grid boundary and grid resolution. too large would shrink all estimates to zero, whereas too small would not shrink the estimates at all. our numerical experience in similar settings suggests that a range of from 0.01 to 0.30 should cover the optimal for most of the cases. within this range, an increment of 0.02 in provides a proper grid resolution to capture subtle effect changes of on biomarker selection results without much extra computational burden. on the other hand, a too large p m might defy the application of pgs, whereas a too small p m might underexploit the data. an optimal p m could be found around the sample size, as is the case in our mirna study example, where the optimal p m = 110. besides, an increment of 10 or 20 in p m provides a sufficient resolution for capturing the effects of increasing p m on biomarker selection. for all practical usage, the initiation of vector can be varied from 0.01 to 0.30, and the initiation of p m can be a vector with a few numbers varied around the sample size minus the number of confounders (in our case, it is 120 10 = 110). it is not necessary to initiate a full vector of p m , as it adds redundant parameter pairs to the grid. extension of boundary and/or p m boundary will be considered only when the optimal and/or p m hit the initial boundaries. in this article, we used different elaborate ranges (but all were within the 0.010.30 range) for better results representations, and higher grid resolution (i.e. smaller increment of ) for more reliable method evaluations in simulation studies. insensitive to mis-specification of the covariance structure is a feature that distinguishes gee from lmm. inheriting this feature from gee, pgs is able to estimate the correlation matrix regardless of whether the structure is specified. based on the estimation, one could either use lmm-based pgs with a solid guess of the covariance structure or use gee-based pgs if there is no good choice of the structure. prescreening step prioritizes potentially influential biomarkers, which facilitates pgs to handle the situation in which the number of biomarkers is considerably larger than the sample size. gee and lmm are two handy approaches for prescreening. however, the potential limitation of prescreening is that mirnas with small but true non-zero effects may be excluded during the prescreening step. nevertheless, with a given sample size, the grid search method in pgs ensures that pgee can include as many biomarkers as possible.the performance of pgs is comparable with the approaches being benchmarked, i.e. sbs gee/lmm. however, pgs is more suitable for high-dimensional mirna expression data with repeated measures in that, by exploiting underlying dependent structures, it relies on variable selection in the context of a multiple regression model, which circumvents multiple testing issues. pgs is also applicable to other longitudinally collected high-dimensional quantitative data, such as epigenomics, mrna transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, etc. the growing number of studies conducting high-dimensional profiling dataset using different platforms requires a more comprehensive evaluation of pgs in various study settings.  
