phage display can select over-hydrophobic sequences that may impair prediction of natural domain–peptide interactions motivation: the phage display peptide selection approach is widely used for defining binding specificities of globular domains. pdz domains recognize partner proteins via c-terminal motifs and are often used as a model for interaction predictions. here, we investigated to which extent phage display data that were recently published for 54 human pdz domains can be applied to the prediction of human pdzpeptide interactions. results: promising predictions were obtained for one-third of the 54 pdz domains. for the other two-thirds, we detected in the phage display peptides an important bias for hydrophobic amino acids that seemed to impair correct predictions. therefore, phage display-selected peptides may be over-hydrophobic and of high affinity, while natural interaction motifs are rather hydrophilic and mostly combine low affinity with high specificity. we suggest that potential amino acid composition bias should systematically be investigated when applying phage display data to the prediction of specific natural domainlinear motif interactions.many protein complexes that function in cellular regulation and signalling are assembled by multiple linear motifglobular domain interactions, which are mostly specific, yet of low affinity . one well studied example of such interactions consists of the pdz domains, which mainly recognize linear motifs at the extreme c-terminus of partner proteins . pdzs are implicated in the regulation of cell polarity, tight junctions, intercellular communication and neuronal synapses . the last residue (referred to as position p0) in pdz-binding motifs usually is val or leu. the third last peptide residue (position p-2) can be either thr or ser, hydrophobic or glu or asp, thereby defining three main categories of pdz-binding motifs . these characteristics make pdzbinding motifs relatively easy to predict. however, the correct prediction of pdz domain binding specificities, i.e. prediction of which pdz-binding motif will bind to which pdz domain, remains challenging and numerous approaches have been proposed to tackle this problem (; hui and to whom correspondence should be addressed.). most predictors rely on prior experimental knowledge about binding preferences between peptides and globular domains. phage peptide display has been widely used to provide such information . this approach is based on selecting, out of a library of billions of peptides expressed on the surface of bacteriophages, a limited number of peptides that bind strongly to a given protein attached to a solid support. several phage display studies have been performed on particular pdz domains derived from the proteins magi1 , inadl , pdzrhogef and larg , mupp1 and dlg4 , ptp-bl (van den), erbin , htra1 and htra3 .applied phage display in a highthroughput manner to determine and compare binding preferences of 28 caenorhabditis elegans and 54 homo sapiens pdz domains. the data obtained in this study represent a highly valuable resource that allows to test the general application of phage display data to predictions of natural pdzprotein interactions using positionspecific scoring matrices (pssms). this approach was validated on a few pdz domains in the study of, and the phage display data were subsequently used in several recent studies for predictions of natural pdzpeptide interactions . pdz phage display data have also been used as test data in the dream4 peptide recognition domain specificity prediction challenge . thus, phage display is supposed to capture accurately the binding specificities of domainlinear motif interactions. here, we performed and evaluated predictions of human pdzpeptide interactions using the phage display data of. promising predictions were obtained for one-third of the 54 pdz domains. in contrast, for the other two-thirds of the pdz domains we detected important bias for hydrophobic amino acids in the phage display peptides that will probably impair the correct prediction of naturally occurring pdz-binding peptides. we suggest that utilization of phage display data for prediction of natural binders should systematically involve prior analysis of potential sequencial bias in the data.here, we addressed the problem of predicting natural pdzpeptide interactions using phage display data. we observed that phagepeptide lists ofcan be classified on the basis of their hydrophobic character. human c-termini matched better to the sequence profiles defined by the phage peptides, when they were hydrophilic. more specifically, human c-termini that are identical to phage peptides could be found more frequently for hydrophilic phage peptides. in addition, we realised that in average the phage peptides were much more hydrophobic than published natural pdz-binding sequences as well as human c-termini in general. in particular, the phage display data showed a very strong preference for the largest aromatic amino acid trp at peptide position p-1. all these results indicate that prediction of interactions between pdzs and naturally occurring peptides perform better when based on hydrophilic phage peptides. it should be noted that short linear interaction motifs (slims) have been found to display a particular amino acid composition, which distinguishes them from both folded and disordered regions . the least conserved positions in slims are usually non-hydrophobic, whereas the highest conserved positions are very often occupied by hydrophobic and charged amino acids. indeed, published pdz ligands generally agree with this trend, since the canonical pdz-binding motif pattern consists of a hydrophobic (usually not aromatic) amino acid at peptide position p0 and thr/ser, hydrophobic (usually not aromatic) or glu/asp at position p-2. the phage display procedure of tonikian et al. often selected such characteristics at positions p0 and p-2, but the other less conserved positions (p-1, p-3 and p-4) were, for two-thirds of the pdz domains tested, very frequently hydrophobic, thereby deviating from sequence characteristics of slims. biological interactions are characterized both by their affinity and specificity. affinity represents absolute interaction strength, whereas specificity is a relative property derived from the comparison of interaction strengths of different interacting partners. for instance, if a pdz domain binds with higher (but not necessarily high) affinity to a few peptides than to all others, it will be specific. molecular dynamic studies have indicated that hydrophobic interactions are the most important force contributing page: 902 899902  
