pharmacogx: an r package for analysis of large pharmacogenomic datasets pharmacogenomics holds great promise for the development of biomarkers of drug response and the design of new therapeutic options, which are key challenges in precision medicine. however, such data are scattered and lack standards for efficient access and analysis, consequently preventing the realization of the full potential of pharmacogenomics. to address these issues, we implemented pharmacogx, an easy-to-use, open source package for integrative analysis of multiple pharmacogenomic datasets. we demonstrate the utility of our package in comparing large drug sensitivity datasets, such as the genomics of drug sensitivity in cancer and the cancer cell line encyclopedia. moreover, we show how to use our package to easily perform connectivity map analysis. with increasing availability of drug-related data, our package will open new avenues of research for meta-analysis of pharmacogenomic data. availability and implementation: pharmacogx is implemented in r and can be easily installed on any system. the package is available from cran and its source code is available from github.one of the main challenges in precision medicine consists in identifying the best therapy for each patient. this is crucial in oncology where multiple cytotoxic and targeted drugs are available but their therapeutic benefits are either insufficient or limited to a subset of cancer patients. there is therefore a dire need for new anticancer drugs and robust biomarkers predictive of therapy response for individual patients. in this context, large-scale pharmacogenomic studiescould effectively achieve these goals by screening large panel of cancer cell lines using multiple drug candidates; these data are referred to as drug sensitivity datasets. the genomics of drug sensitivity in cancer (gdsc) and the cancer cell line encyclopedia (ccle) studies have reported results of such screens, revealing several known and novel drug sensitivities and biomarkers. subsequent evaluation, however, found only moderate inter-laboratory concordance in the drug response phenotypes, possibly due to differences in the experimental protocols used in the two studies . other pharmacogenomic studies, such as the connectivity map project , characterized the transcriptional changes induced by a large set of drugs; these data are referred to as drug perturbation datasets. for the full potential of these pharmacogenomics to be realized, new analytical approaches must be developed to best leverage the large quantity of valuable molecular and pharmacological data in the context of drug discovery and biomarker development. however, the lack of standardization of experimental protocols and annotations hinders meta-analysis of large pharmacogenomic studies. to address these issues we developed pharmacogx, an r package enabling users to download and interrogate large pharmacogenomic datasets that were extensively curated to ensure maximum overlap and consistency. pharmacogx provides parallelized functions not only to assess the reproducibility of pharmacological and molecular data, but also to identify the molecular features that are consistently associated with drug effects.the pharmacogx package enables easy and efficient analysis of the increasingly available compendium of pharmacogenomic data.to the best of the authors knowledge, this package is the first to integrate multiple pharmacogenomic datasets using structured objects incorporating standardization of cell line and drug identifiers. pharmacogx includes functions to link molecular features to drug sensitivity and perturbation phenotypes, therefore providing with a unified framework to develop drug-related molecular signatures. given that the gdsc and ccle pharmacoset objects contain multiple types of molecular profiles, which are linked to pharmacological profiles; these datasets open new avenues of research for the development of integrative biomarkers of drug response. as more datasets will be curated in pharmacosets, our package will enable meta-analysis of large pharmacogenomic studies, with the aim to build better biomarkers by using multiple datasets in the discovery phase. generation of robust biomarkers of drug response would constitute a major step toward the realization of precision medicine.  
