data and text mining phasetank: genome-wide computational identification of phasirnas and their regulatory cascades emerging evidence has revealed phased sirnas (phasirnas) as important endogenous regulators in plants. however, the integrated prediction tools for phasirnas are still limited. in this article, we introduce a stand-alone package phasetank for systematically characterizing phasirnas and their regulatory networks. (i) it can identify phasirnas/tasirnas functional cascades (mirna/phasirna!phas loci!phasirna!target) with high sensitivity and specificity. (ii) by one command analysis, it generates comprehensive annotation and quantification of the predicted phas genes from any given sequences. (iii) phasetank has no restriction with regards to prior information of sequence homology of unrestricted organism origins. availability and implementation: phasetank is a free and open-source tool. the package is available at http://phasetank.sourcesecondary phased sirnas (phasirnas) play crucial roles in post-transcriptional regulatory networks in plants . well-characterized trans-acting sirnas, as a special subgroup of phasirnas, are initiated by mirna-mediated cleavage and converted to dsrna, yielding sirnas in a 21-nt phase . currently, eight tas loci have been identified in arabidopsis, and tas3 is experimentally validated to suppress the juvenileto-adult transition . moreover, phasirnamediated regulation of nb-lrr encoding disease-resistance proteins appears to be widespread in dicots . however, the significance and broad roles of phasirnas remain unclear in plants . next-generation sequencing technology provides a powerful tool for genome-wide screening of phasirnas , and several methods were proposed correspondingly . however, no methods could systematically identify phasirnas and their regulatory cascades, and none reports the detailed annotation and quantification of candidate phas loci . in this study, we present a novel tool phasetank to identify phas loci, which contains our new sights and also incorporates the advantages of the previous methods. we propose that the relative small rnas production (rsrp) of phas loci is higher than that of the transcripts processed by random cleavage, inasmuch as the phas loci should generate considerable phasirnas to maintain their biological functions . in our method, the phased ratio, abundance and number of a phasirna cluster are considered as three main contributors to score a candidate phas loci. additionally, phasetank could detect both triggered mirnas and phasirna targets for predicted phas loci. therefore, phasetank employs a new filter and scoring system to perform de novo prediction of phas loci and their regulatory cascades on a genome-wide scale.in conclusion, our results demonstrate that phasetank is an effective and highly applicable tool for comprehensive annotation and quantification of regulatory cascades involved in phasirna pathways. therefore, phasetank would help to elucidate the function and evolution of this special class of small rnas in land plants.  
