data and text mining phenoclustering: online mining of cross-species phenotypes recently, several methods for analyzing phenotype data have been published, but only few are able to cope with data sets generated in different studies, with different methods, or for different species. we developed an online system in which more than 300 000 phenotypes from a wide variety of sources and screening methods can be analyzed together. clusters of similar phenotypes are visualized as networks of highly similar phenotypes, inducing gene groups useful for functional analysis. this system is part of phenomicdb, providing the worlds largest cross-species phenotype data collection with a tool to mine its wealth of information. availability: freely available at http://www.phenomicdb.de contactsince mendel, phenotypes, especially with regard to diseases, have been studied intensively to reveal genotypephenotype relationships. recently, the number of available methods to generate such data has grown significantly, leading to the availability of large amounts of data, scattered over a multitude of data sources mostly dedicated to single species or diseases . from these, integrative cross-species databases, like phenomicdb have emerged, building the ground for performing meta-analyses of phenotypes across species or studies with the goal to gain insights into the genetic origin of diseases. however, there are only very few tools that allow analyzing such complex data. in a recent meta-analysis of cross-species phenotype data , we showed that clustering the free-text descriptions of phenotypes (phenoclustering) using advanced natural language processing methods induces a clustering of genes (by similarity of their associated phenotype) that can be exploited for guilt-byassociation analysis. in particular, we showed that it is possible to predict gene function within such groups with high precision. this method is now freely available as an interactive tool integrated into the phenotype database phenomicdb.  
