phenomescape: a cytoscape app to identify differentially regulated sub-networks using known disease associations phenomescape is a cytoscape app which provides easy access to the phenomeexpress algorithm to interpret gene expression data. phenomeexpress integrates protein interaction networks with known phenotype to gene associations to find active sub-networks enriched in differentially expressed genes. it also incorporates cross-species phenotypes and associations to include results from animal models of disease. with expression data imported into phenomescape, the user can quickly generate and visualise interactive sub-networks. phenomescape thus enables researchers to use prior knowledge of a disease to identify differentially regulated sub-networks and to generate an overview of altered biologically processes specific to that disease.the interpretation of gene expression data to gain insights into molecular mechanisms of disease after differentially expression analysis is challenging. looking at groups of genes using enrichment or network based methods adds power to the analysis and aids interpretation. gene set enrichment approaches are limited to predefined sets of genes and ignore the known interaction information. finding de novo subnetworks/pathways from a protein-protein interaction (ppi) network and the expression data itself is an alternative approach employed by many tools . for many diseases, there are genes, which are known through human mendelian disease and animal models, where perturbation gives rise to observed phenotypes present in the disease under study. projects such as the international knockout mouse consortium are adding much new information as they systematically identify gene to phenotype associations . this prior knowledge is valuable, since when combined with the gene expression data it indicates which genes and pathways/regions of the interactome are of importance in the disease.we recently described an algorithm named phenomeexpress for analysis of disease related expression data that makes use of known crossspecies phenotype to gene associations to generate sub-networks of differentially expressed genes that are linked to the observed phenotypes . we here present phenomescape, a cytoscape application allowing a user to quickly run the described phenomeexpress algorithm on gene expression data within the cytoscape gui environment .phenomescape allows users to rapidly explore analysed gene expression data. compared to existing tools such as reactomefiviz, phenomescape is unique in allowing integration of the prior phenotypic knowledge of disease genes into the expression analysis. no coding experience is needed to run phenomescape making it suitable for bench scientists who have gene expression data available. the resulting sub-networks produced in cytoscape allow the user to extend the analysis with additional apps for regulatory analysis. phenomescape provides new insights in active processes revealed by expression data in the context of the prior knowledge of the disease phenotypes.  
