genome analysis phenonet: identification of key networks associated with disease phenotype motivation: at the core of transcriptome analyses of cancer is a challenge to detect molecular differences affiliated with disease phenotypes. this approach has led to remarkable progress in identifying molecular signatures and in stratifying patients into clinical groups. yet, despite this progress, many of the identified signatures are not robust enough to be clinically used and not consistent enough to provide a follow-up on molecular mechanisms. results: to address these issues, we introduce phenonet, a novel algorithm for the identification of pathways and networks associated with different phenotypes. phenonet uses two types of input data: gene expression data (rma, rpkm, fpkm, etc.) and phenotypic information , and integrates these data with curated pathways and proteinprotein interaction information. comprehensive iterations across all possible pathways and subnetworks result in the identification of key pathways or subnetworks that distinguish between the two phenotypes. availability and implementation: matlab code is available upon request.beginning in the mid-1990s, through unique conventions on public sharing and through the concentrated efforts of different groups around the world, an ever-growing abundance of transcriptome profiling sets of data have provided the systems medicine community with the foundations of what is now referred to as molecular signatures. many of these signatures have concentrated on identifying sets of genes that classify patients into relevant clinical affiliations, followed by the use of enrichment tools to further affiliate sets of genes with biological processes. additional layers of mechanism understanding have been introduced with the use of network metrics to quantify the orchestrated behavior of genes within the transcriptome (ben). these network approaches and the resulting insight suggest that biological, cellular and disease outcome strongly depend on the complex of interactions between genes, proteins and other molecules throughpathways in patients who exhibited liver metastasis versus patients who remained recurrence free after follow-up.integrated pathway information with disease classification procedure, to classify disease by looking at the activity signaling pathways or protein complexes.proposed a classification method based on probabilistic inference of pathway activities.developed a network method for estimating pathway activation in tumors from model signatures. in a recent work by, the authors provided a server for identifying network-based biomarkers that correlate with patient survival data. kim andmodified the gillespie algorithm by adding the hill function to describe protein activation. they applied their algorithm to simulate expression data that show switch-like and oscillatory behavior in the metabolite production system of microorganisms. here, we have developed phenonet , which is a network-based phenotype classification tool that integrates gene expression data (rma, rpkm, fpkm, etc.), clinical data and ppi knowledge for the identification of key subnetworks whose behavior and derived index stratifies the clinical states. phenonet works under the assumption that specific regulation mechanism can control specific phenotype, by doing so phenonet is able to detect phenotype-dependent gene-gene associations. by scanning all known ppis, phenonet is able to detect a specific single subnetwork with strong regulation in phenotype a and with a lesser impact regulation in phenotype b. such associations are identified through measuring correlation and lack of correlation among ppi components. because of the fact that these specific regulations are present in only one phenotype, we can assume that the absent or present of them is meaningful for disease course. to the best of our knowledge, phenonet is the first tool that is tuned to identify these changes according to their phenotype affiliations. although available tools are structured to identify mutation or methylation modifications across phenotypes, they are not structured to detect subnetworks that undergo changes in their gene-gene associations. phenonet, while completely unconcerned with mutation or methylation status, is structured to identify modifications in associations between gene pairs across a subnetwork. the identification of these changes may be a key for catalyzing new treatment and understanding specific phenotype mechanisms. at the core of the method is the calculation of correlations between all known ppis, phenonet is able to identify the most varied subnetwork that stratifies tested phenotypes. phenonet returns a single subnetwork for every two phenotypes presented. this network is the most varied between the two phenotypes.cancer is not a static disease; disease progression correlates with molecular modifications to evade natural defenses and to adapt to new environmental and micro-environmental circumstances. such drastic changes that stands at the core of the cancer phenotype are not isolated incidents but are systemic modifications; indeed, the initiation and progression of the disease are driven by a large set of factors such as: interactions among genes, proteins and the environment, rather than by single alterations in genetic variants . systemic approaches enable the integration of biological and computational knowledge, and help address fundamental questions regarding the complexity and connectivity of this system-wide rewiring. different molecular phenotypes are the manifestations of different molecular characteristics within the same, single disease. such complex profiles of molecular phenotypes are determined using molecular and genetic information from tumor cells. oncogenesis may be better considered not only as the rearrangement of chromosomes but also as the rearrangement of regulatory networks, their interactions and their interconnections. cancer is not a disease of a few genes but of a cluster of genes, whose altered global interactions evolve into the transformed and malignant state. these considerations, as well as their multilayered association with network features, call for a network behavior tool with the ability to identify core network alterations that are at the root of phenotypic changes. here, we describe phenonet, a novel algorithm for the identification of subnetworks of genes or known pathways whose molecular co-behavior stratifies phenotypes. correlations between the expression levels of interacting genes indicate regulatory control between network nodes. we search for subnetworks whose synchronization is visible in one phenotype and contrasted by another. thus, when we identify a highly correlated subnetwork in one group of patients and then identify the loss of this correlation in another, the assumption is that this regulation is fragmented during the course of progression into or out of the phenotype. phenonet is able to identify such networks.wrote that a regulatory network acts as the control system of a biochemical nanofactory with the rate of production of certain compounds being determined by the probability that certain sets of agents are activated. the approach presented here uses the known regulatory ppi network to extract a subnetwork that acts as a control system distinguishing between the two phenotypes. to determine phenonet robustness we compared it with a set of highly informative and well-structured tools: survnet , biolayout express and c3net . for this analysis, we used the two breast cancer datasets that were tested (see above) on phenonet. phenonet results demonstrated a 50 overlap between the networks discovered for the two breast cancer datasets. this robustness was not repeated in the three tested tools. as informative and useful as these tools are, and without specific criticism of the important results that can be obtained using them, they did not repeat the results obtained from the two datasets (supplementary figs s1 and s2; supplementary tables s2s5). this highlights a unique and important feature(b) a scatterplot showing the correlation between abl1 and ywhag in luminal a patients and the lack of correlation in luminal b patients in both datasets of phenonet, i.e. robustness, which is a necessity in transcriptomics-based biomarker discovery. we first applied phenonet to stratify network rewiring in breast cancer clinical subgroups: tn (er-, pgr-, her2-) and the non-tn. using breast cancer rna-seq data from the tcga, the network identified by phenonet as the most significant in distinguishing between those two groups, was dominated by t-gene (also known as brachyury), as can be seen in. the t-box family of genes is a group of highly conserved transcription factors (tf) that play an important role in embryonic development . it has been found that the t-box tf brachyury induces in tumor cells epithelial-mesenchymal markers, down regulation of epithelial markers and an increase in cell migration and invasion. inhibition of brachyury resulted in loss of cell migration and invasion, and reduced the ability of human tumor cells to form lung metastasis . these findings may support some of the results shown in this article. although the subnetwork identified in the tn group is highly correlated, this same subnetwork is uncorrelated in the non-tn group. this network may be the cause of the high level of aggressiveness of the tn tumors. as long as this network is controlled by t-gene migration, invasion and metastasis are promoted. once this control mechanism is lost (and with it the subnetwork correlation), the breast cancer phenotype becomes less aggressive and is manifested as non-tn. the use of two additional breast cancer datasets to validate our approach using samples from tumors with receptor status [er, pgr, and her2-(classified as luminal a), and er, pgr, and her2 (classified as luminal b)], demonstrated how phenonet directs the identification of a key player in the stratification of the subnetworks in both datasets, namely ywhag. ywhag belongs to the 14-3-3 family of proteins that regulate many cellular processes that are important in cancer biology, such as apoptosis and cell cycle check points . a recent study showed an association between single nucleotide polymorphisms in ywhag and breast cancer subtype er and her2-(p-value50.05) . in addition, ywhag was also found to be correlated with the expression pattern of er protein in breast cancer in a way that correlated with patient outcome . taken together, this may suggest an important role played by ywhag in controlling the networks and in stratifying the two subtypes. the article presented here provides means to identify core processes that are tightly linked with different phenotypic manifestations of disease. we believe that network target identification is the key for constructing drug-target networks and for improving the understanding of disease etiology.  
