genetics and population analysis phewas: demonstrating the feasibility of a phenome-wide scan to discover gene–disease associations motivationnumerous genome-wide association studies (gwass) have been performed using disease-specific definitions to identify novel genetic associations for many diseases . these to whom correspondence should be addressed. gwas typically derive their cases and controls from clinical trials, observational cohorts and, more recently, electronic medical record (emr) systems. several gwass have successfully investigated multiple phenotypes using a single cohort of genotyped samples . the growth of available genomic data, some of which is linked to rich phenotypic data such as that which is available in emr systems, suggests it would be possible to perform a reverse gwasdetermining, for a given genotype, the range of associated clinical phenotypes. the ability to conduct a true phenome-wide scan in an unbiased way can ultimately become a path to discover new genetic associations, gain insights into disease mechanisms and determine whether polymorphisms or variants exist, which confer broad susceptibility to multiple diseases across the phenome. while the concept of a phenome-wide scan is not new , to our knowledge methodology to perform such a scan in a systematic, high-throughput and reproducible fashion has not been developed. in this article, we present an algorithm to perform an initial phenomewide association scans (phewas), or phenome-wide association study. this adaptation uses readily available billing codes to replicate several known genotypephenotype associations and suggests novel possible associations. deployment of emr systems for routine clinical practice has improved the quality of patient care, reduced cost and has provided a longitudinal record of care available for clinical and translational research. typical emr systems contain diverse data sources, including billing data, laboratory and imaging results, medication records and clinical documentation. these data have proven useful for applied clinical research studies and for phenotyping in focused genomic studies . emr data have also proven useful in research studies looking across many phenotypes, such as drugadverse effect detection and mining for genetic overlaps among diseases . research involving emr systems often involves processing both structured (e.g. billing codes) and unstructured data (e.g. clinical documentation generated by physicians). in the usa, most clinical encounters generate international classification of disease (icd), version 9-cm, codes as a mechanism for billing for a given procedure, test or clinical visit. the icd9 coding system contains over 14 000 disease codes grouped into a multi-level hierarchy ofpage: 1206 12051210we present an algorithm to facilitate the performance of phenomewide associated studies to detect diseasegene associations using icd9 billing codes. this proof of concept study applied this algorithm to five snps with seven known disease associations. this study found that four of these previously known snp disease associations from the literature were identified using our phewas algorithm, and also indicated other potential disease gene associations not previously investigated. as the high-density genotype data becomes increasingly available, such phenomewide scans may have great utility to both discover new genetic associations and provide greater insight to the biology underlying certain associations.an exciting consequence of phewas analyses is that they, in combination with gwas or candidate gene studies, may help elucidate new biology. for example, gwas-identified associations with genetic variation in intergenic regions could be investigated with phewas to discover other potential associations. in this study, the 9p21 region identified by rs1333049 was also associated with portal thrombosis, intracranial hemorrhage and phlebitis and thrombophlebitis, possibly suggesting a common etiology related to coagulation that could be investigated with subsequent, adequately powered studies. phewas analyses may also help identify potentially causative associations between disease and snp associations discovered in disease-specific gwas. when performing a gwas in isolation, one may discover an association between an infection and a given snp (such as pneumonia and rs17234657), and potentially conclude that the snp confers susceptibility. the alternative explanation is that this snp increases the likelihood of autoimmune diseases, and the treatment for the autoimmune disease (such as corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive agents) may be the causative agent. similar to gwas, the current phewas study highlights the statistical challenges associated with analyzing high-dimensionality data. in this analysis, few diseasegene associations were significant when a bonferroni correction was applied. however, there are several reasons to suggest that a bonferroni correction is too conservative. unlike gwas, in which nearly every individual will have a genotype value for that snp, and thus its statistical power is limited primarily by the minor allele frequency and genetic effect size (i.e. or), phewas is limited by these factors and the prevalence of the disease in the population, which is often 5 of the population. thus, for most diseases, it may be unreasonable to expect p-values as extreme as seen in gwas with similar population sizes. indeed, several prior known gene-disease associations in this study had p-values between 2.8 10 6 and 0.011. furthermore, many diseases are associated with each other in much the same was as snps may be in linkage disequilibrium with each other. for example, cd and non-infectious gastroenteritis (both associated with rs17234657) not only represent similar conditions but often referred to the same individuals (72 of those with non-infectious gastroenteritis had both conditions). these collocations of disease reduce the hypothesis space and lend greater strength to the validity of discovered associations. like gwas, the true significance level of clinical and genetic interest will need to be experimentally determined with future study. while the associations in this study were often weak due to the small sample sizes for individual disease codes, the power of these data will only increase. as more genetic data is deposited, as is policy, into the biovu resource for reuse, the ability to detect true signals with sufficient statistical power even for rare diseases will be enhanced. furthermore, the broad availability of icd9 codes permits easy portability to other institutions and offers the potential of cross-institution application. this phewas study did not replicate three of the seven previously known snpdisease associations. our review of these cases revealed that each of these three icd9 code groups contained a number of false positives in which billing codes were recorded as a hypothetical reason for a test. repeating the study using only true positive cases revealed that af (or 1.51; p = 0.015) and sle (or 1.42; p = 0.039) both replicated the previously reported associations, and cas (or 1.32, p = 0.12) trended in a similar direction as previously noted. further work to refine the phewas case algorithms may improve performance beyond using prevalent icd9 codes. incorporation of laboratory data, natural language processing and machine learning algorithms may improve case accuracy. limitations caution interpretation of this initial feasibility study. this study was performed in a single institution with five snps. other institutions may have different coding practices, which can affect the ability to replicate these results if the phewas is undertaken at another institution. to define phenotypes in a highthroughput fashion, we used groupings of icd9 billing codes, which  
