systems biology phosphopick: modelling cellular context to map kinase-substrate phosphorylation events motivation: the determinants of kinase-substrate phosphorylation can be found both in the substrate sequence and the surrounding cellular context. cell cycle progression, interactions with mediating proteins and even prior phosphorylation events are necessary for kinases to maintain substrate specificity. while much work has focussed on the use of sequence-based methods to predict phosphorylation sites, there has been very little work invested into the application of systems biology to understand phosphorylation. lack of specificity in many kinase sub-strate binding motifs means that sequence methods for predicting kinase binding sites are susceptible to high false-positive rates. results: we present here a model that takes into account protein protein interaction information, and protein abundance data across the cell cycle to predict kinase substrates for 59 human kinases that are representative of important biological pathways. the model shows high accuracy for substrate prediction (with an average auc of 0.86) across the 59 kinases tested. when using the model to complement sequence-based kinase-specific phosphorylation site prediction, we found that the additional information increased prediction performance for most comparisons made, particularly on kinases from the cmgc family. we then used our model to identify functional overlaps between predicted cdk2 substrates and targets from the e2f family of transcription factors. our results demonstrate that a model harnessing context data can account for the shortfalls in sequence information and provide a robust description of the cellular events that regulate protein phosphorylation. availability and implementation: the method is freely available online as a web server at the websiteregulation of cellular processes occurs on multiple levels, with epigenetic modifiers and transcription factors (tfs) controlling gene expression, while various post-translational modifications regulate many protein functions (; choudhary motifs alone are insufficient for achieving respectable accuracy in predicting kinase-specific phosphorylation sites. as a result, prediction methods have often complemented sequence information with other types of data such as knowledge of 3d structure , sequence disorder and kinase family similarity . while such additional data typically improve prediction performance to an extent, they do not reflect the wider cellular regulatory mechanisms that cause kinases to target their correct substratesa protein with an appropriate kinase binding site will not necessarily come into contact with that kinase . the phosphorylation of a target substrate by a kinase is not determined solely by its binding affinity, but by various context factors that determine how a kinase comes into contact with its substrates . this is recognized by the networkin predictor , which combines sequence-based scores with a score generated on the basis of a string network . context factors can include cellular location , mediating and activating proteins such as scaffold proteins , cyclins and cell cycle-specific expression of kinases and their substrates. proteinprotein interaction (ppi) data can certainly be used to represent such context factors; though while there is vast amounts of ppi data currently available in databases such as biogrid and string, incomplete coverage and variable certainty means that the integration of context features into a model is non-trivial. in this study, we explore a probabilistic model to accommodate missing values, seamless combination of protein interactions and cell-cycle expression, and to provide flexible options for querying potential kinase substrates. the model we present here, named phosphopick (phosphorylation in a protein interaction context for kinases), integrates known kinasesubstrate relationships, ppi, and cell-cycle data to predict kinase substrates for 59 human kinases. phosphopick shows high prediction accuracy, with a mean auc of 0.86 across the 59 kinases. we then demonstrate how our method can boost the prediction accuracy of kinase-specific phosphorylation site prediction by combining phosphopick predictions with the phosphorylation site predictions from three previously published methods. we find that phosphopick improves kinase-specific phosphorylation site prediction for most comparisons made, though greater performance increases were noticed on cmgc kinasesin particular cyclin-dependant kinases (cdks), where we observed substantial performance gains as measured by auc50. we show that proteins predicted to be cdk2 substrates by phosphopick have go terms consistent with known cdk2 substrates, and investigate the functional overlap between known and predicted cdk2 substrates, and the targets of specific e2f tfs using chip-seq data.apoptosis and ubiquitination. these are both processes that cdk2 has previously been implicated in , and ubiquitination is also known to play an important role in regulating apoptotic proteins . e2f1 is known to be a regulator of apoptosis , and similarly e2f6 can negatively regulate apoptosis , so it was interesting to find that the putative cdk2 substrates within the unique e2f1 and e2f6 target groups were enriched in apoptosis and ubiquitination go terms. these results seem to suggest a dynamic regulatory interplay between the e2f family at the transcriptional level, and the cdk2 kinase at the post-translational level.  
