phylogenetics advance access publication phylometa: a program for phylogenetic comparative analyses with meta-analysis phylometa is an easy to use console program for integrating phylogenetic information into meta-analysis. it is designed to help ecologists, evolutionary biologists and conservation biologists analyze effect size data extracted from published studies in a comparative phylogenetic context. this software estimates phylogenetic versions of all the traditional meta-analytical statistics used for: pooling effect sizes with weighted regressions; evaluating the homogeneity of these effect sizes; performing moderator tests akin to anova style analyses; and analyzing data with fixed-and random-effects models. phylometa is developed in c/c++ and can be used via command line in ms windows environments. availability: phylometa can be obtained freely as an executable on the web atthe statistics of meta-analysis consist of quantifying experimental outcomes with effect sizes, assigning a weight to each effect size that is inversely proportional to its variance, and then averaging these weighted effect sizes to provide an overall synthesis of multiple published studies . ecologists and evolutionary biologists rely heavily on these statistics to provide research summaries and to test hypotheses on moderators of experimental outcomesoften pooling research from different taxa to achieve these goals . however, pooling effect size data from multiple taxa can potentially bias the outcome of meta-analysis because of the non-independence of effect sizes due to the shared phylogenetic history of taxa . phylometa fills a gap in the statistical tools needed to assess and account for this form of non-independence when performing a meta-analysis on ecological research. this software reports all the familiar statistics of metaanalysis (e.g. pooled effect sizes paired with 95 confidence intervals and homogeneity tests) along with phylogenetic versions of these statistics (as reported in). my intention with this software is to overcome the current limitations of widespread meta-analytical software such as metawin and the emerging metafor package in r . these tools are unable to integrate the covariances necessary to account for phylogenetic correlations among effect sizes from related taxa.  
