phylogenetics phylowood: interactive web-based animations of biogeographic and phylogeographic histories phylowood is a web service that uses javascript to generate in-browser animations of biogeographic and phylogeographic histories from annotated phylogenetic input. the animations are interactive , allowing the user to adjust spatial and temporal resolution, and highlight phylogenetic lineages of interest. availability and implementation: all documentation and source code for phylowood is freely available at https://github.com/mlandis/phylo wood, and a live web application is available at https://mlandis.github. io/phylowood.the fields of phylogeography and biogeography study the processes that give rise to the observed geographical distributions of life. methods to infer migration processes and reconstruct ancestral geographical distributions in a phylogenetic context have recently enjoyed increased popularity . the resulting ancestral reconstructions are inherently high dimensional; they describe distributions across space, time and phylogenetic lineage and consequently can be difficult to interpret. here, we introduce phylowood, a web utility that generates interactive animations to facilitate the exploration and summarization of such complex reconstructions. phylowood takes phylogeographic output from beast or biogeographic output from bayarea in the form of newick trees with internal nodes annotated with inferred ancestral locations. phylowood plots the reconstructed geographic distributions and explores temporal dynamics through animation. although similar in basic approach to the program spread , phylowood is designed for ease-of-use and frictionless sharing. it is entirely implemented within the web browser, requiring no further software installation.phylogeographic and biogeographic methods combine genetic and geographic data across individuals or across species to infer complex spatiotemporal processes. joint phylogenetic and geographic reconstructions produced by these methods benefit from sophisticated visualization techniques that highlight connections between geography and genotype. as phylogeographic and biogeographic datasets continue to increase in size and complexity, harnessing appropriate visualization techniques will become increasingly important. we present phylowood as a method to explore and share geographically tagged phylogenies. to learn more about phylowoods features, visit http://github. com/mlandis/phylowood/wiki for help and tutorials.of the phylogenetic tree has been masked using mouse-issued commands, leaving two clades and their shared ancestry unmasked. the media slider indicates the current position of the animation with respect to the time-calibrated phylogeny for which time six unmasked lineages are animated. for the current animation time, each extant lineage is allocated an equal width slice of the pie. for each color, the depth of the slice indicates the approximate marginal posterior probability of the lineage occupying the area at that time. pie slices are sorted phylogenetically, making the relative position of absent slices informative. consulting the geography panel, we find the taxa from the top clade appear to be allopatric with respect to taxa from the bottom clade at 15.5 mya. the interactive animation is available at http://mlandis. github.io/phylowood/?urlexamples/vireya.nhx  
