phy-mer: a novel alignment-free and reference-independent mitochondrial haplogroup classifier motivation: all current mitochondrial haplogroup classification tools require variants to be detected from an alignment with the reference sequence and to be properly named according to the canonical nomenclature standards for describing mitochondrial variants, before they can be compared with the haplogroup determining polymorphisms. with the emergence of high-throughput sequencing technologies and hence greater availability of mitochondrial genome sequences, there is a strong need for an automated haplogroup classification tool that is alignment-free and agnostic to reference sequence. results: we have developed a novel mitochondrial genome haplogroup-defining algorithm using a k-mer approach namely phy-mer. phy-mer performs equally well as the leading haplogroup clas-sifier, haplogrep, while avoiding the errors that may occur when preparing variants to required formats and notations. we have further expanded phy-mer functionality such that next-generation sequencing data can be used directly as input.human mitochondrial dna (mtdna) sequences can be divided into distinct lineages known as haplogroups, which are important for population genetics and disease studies. conventional mtdna haplogroup assignment involves alignment of the mtdna sequence to a reference sequence and then matching the list of variants with the best-fitting haplogroup in a phylogenetic classification tree, mostly phylotree (http://www.phylotree.org) (van). existing software tools include mitotool , haplogrep , emma , h-mito (http://sourceforge.net/projects/h-mito/), mthap (http://dna.jameslick.com/mthap), haplofind (vianello) and mtoolbox . most of these tools, except mtoolbox, require a list of mtdna variants properly denoted according to different conventions in use . moreover, there are currently two mitochondrial reference sequences in use: the traditional revised cambridge reference sequence genbank nc_012920 and the recently created reconstructed sapiens reference sequence . the same variant may be named differently depending on the reference sequence used. as a result, haplogroup classification remains cumbersome and error-prone. given the need to simplify this process, we developed an alignment-free and reference-independent algorithm that encompasses the entire process from sequence input to haplogroup output without requiring additional efforts from the end user.phy-mer is a novel algorithm in that it avoids the alignment and variant-calling step, unlike all other haplogroup classifiers, yet performs equally well with a single command as the leading haplogroup classifiers. phy-mers k-mer library can be easily updated when there is a new release of phylotree. since it is implemented as a python package with few dependencies, phy-mer is platform-independent. it can be run like a unix command, offered as a web service, or incorporated into any ngs analysis pipeline. we anticipate wide applicability of phy-mer given the ever-increasing adoption of ngs technologies in both research and clinical care settings.  
