piecewise parameter estimation for stochastic models in copasi motivation: computational modeling is widely used for deepening the understanding of biological processes. parameterizing models to experimental data needs computationally efficient techniques for parameter estimation. challenges for parameter estimation include in general the high dimen-sionality of the parameter space with local minima and in specific for stochastic modeling the intrinsic stochasticity. results: we implemented the recently suggested multiple shooting for stochastic systems (mss) objective function for parameter estimation in stochastic models into copasi. this mss objective function can be used for parameter estimation in stochastic models but also shows beneficial properties when used for ordinary differential equation models. the method can be applied with all of copasis optimization algorithms, and can be used for sbml models as well. availability and implementation: the methodology is available in copasi as of version 4.15.95 and can be downloaded fromexperimental data from time series experiments has been widely modeled with ordinary differential equations (ode). due to progress in experimental techniques, e.g. the possibility to measure small numbers of molecules in single cells (raj and van), the importance of stochastic modeling is increasing. both types of models (i.e. ode and stochastic) need to be parameterized to experimental data. this parameter estimation can be challenging due to local minima in the parameter search space. in case of stochastic modeling, the treatment of the intrinsic stochasticity poses an additional challenge. we recently developed an objective function (multiple shooting for stochastic systemsmss) for parameter estimation that treats the intervals between measurements separately and uses a state updating mechanism for calculating initial values for the intervals. in contrast to a least squares functional, where the states are solely determined by the initial value and the ode system, this objective function allows a more flexible state estimation. this objective function has shown to be successfully applicable to the estimation of kinetic parameters in intrinsic stochastic models . furthermore, the flexibility in the state estimation also shows beneficial properties when dealing with ode systems.we implemented the mss objective function for parameter estimation in copasi. it splits the time horizon into intervals between the measurement points and uses state updating mechanism to create initial values for the intervals. this allows more flexible treatment of states as conventional least squares functional where states only depend on the initial value and the parameterized system. this allows us to successfully treat models containing intrinsic stochasticity. in addition, our functional can be applied to parameter estimation in ode systems. it leads to a reduction of local minima in parameter space. local minima are a highly discussed topic but only few methods focus on the influence of the choice of the objective function such asfor a more detailed discussion. our implementation in copasi allows for combining this powerful objective function with all the feature of copasi such as a variety of optimization algorithms, a sbml import/ export and a graphical user interface. thus, by integrating the newly developed method into a widely used and user friendly software package, it is made accessible for a wider community for evaluation and practical application.. left: copasi, and a plot of a time series with discrete events describing the measured data; middle, right: plot of the logarithm of the objective function landscape for a lotka-volterra model. darker color stands for lower objective function value. middle side shows landscape for the conventional least squares. right side for the new mss functional. optimization is easier as there are no local minima  
