systems biology pinalog: a novel approach to align protein interaction networks—implications for complex detection and function prediction motivation: analysis of proteinprotein interaction networks (ppins) at the system level has become increasingly important in understanding biological processes. comparison of the interactomes of different species not only provides a better understanding of species evolution but also helps with detecting conserved functional components and in function prediction. method and results: here we report a ppin alignment method, called pinalog, which combines information from protein sequence, function and network topology. alignment of human and yeast ppins reveals several conserved subnetworks between them that participate in similar biological processes, notably the proteasome and transcription related processes. pinalog has been tested for its power in protein complex prediction as well as function prediction. comparison with psi-blast in predicting protein function in the twilight zone also shows that pinalog is valuable in predicting protein function. availability and implementation: the pinalog web-server is freely available from http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/pinalog. the pinalog program and associated data are available from the download section of the web-server.in recent years, there has been a substantial increase in the quantity of proteinprotein interactions (ppis) being detected by experimental methods. the analysis of ppi networks (ppins) at the system level has become increasingly important in understanding biological processes. comparison of the interactomes of different species not only provides a better understanding of species evolution but also helps with detecting conserved functional components and in function prediction. several methods have been developed to align interactomes, both globally and locally, most of which use sequence similarity or network topology or both in establishing the equivalence. pathblast marked the first local alignment method and was similar in principle to the blast search algorithm. to whom correspondence should be addressed.other local alignment methods include: networkblast , which is the next generation of pathblast; mawish , which adopts the evolutionary models of match, mismatch and deletion of the proteins; graemlin 1.0 , which infers an alignment from network modules; the bayesian method ; the match and split algorithm ; and phunkee , which aligns proteins based on sequence and context in the networks. the global alignment of networks proves to be more challenging due to the complexity and scale of the problem. graemlin 2.0 formulates a model for protein duplication, deletion and mutation and aligns the network progressively using a hill-climbing algorithm. the markovrandom field-based method and isorank solve the problem by eigenvalue-based methods. graal uses only the network topological similarity to align the networks using a seed-and-extend method for graph alignment. in many applications of ppin alignment, the underlying objective is to equivalence proteins with related function and interacting partners. however, in most alignment methods only the sequence data or network topology are used to align the input networks despite the availability of other sources of information such as function annotation or gene expression. while sequences are informative in elucidating the orthologous relationships of proteins across species, they do not necessarily indicate functional similarity. the omission of function information could therefore result in many pairs of equivalenced proteins having little or no similarity of function. this in turn makes it less accurate in detecting conserved functional modules or predicting protein function. recently,have introduced functional similarity of proteins into a local alignment method. they used functional similarity in combination with sequence similarity in the local alignment match and split algorithm and identified similar functional subnetworks. the recently developed method mi-graal presents a global alignment algorithm in which different information can be incorporated such as topological features, sequence similarity and functional similarity. however, there has been no assessment on how the inclusion of functional similarity might influence the resulting alignments and any subsequent applications. here we describe pinalog, a global network alignment algorithm. pinalog forms the alignment between two ppins based on the similarities of protein sequence and the protein function between the two networks. functional similarity is formalizedalthough many methods have been developed to align ppins, comparing their performance remains difficult due to the absence of an unambiguous correct alignment, the complexity of the networks and the differing aims of the alignment methods. for local alignment methods, the difficulty is less severe as some local alignments can be evaluated by their agreement with known protein complexes. however, this approach is less useful to evaluate global alignment methods. often assessment is performed based on the correctness of mapping orthologous protein pairs. however, this assessment measure would always penalize equivalences based on network topology when this conflicts with equivalences between orthologous pairs. therefore this assessment method is not ideal in evaluating the performance of network alignment algorithms. accordingly, we have also used a series of other measures. pinalog is flexible in allowing the use of sequence only alignment or sequence-function alignment depending on the requirement of the user. for the sequence-function alignment, parameters are automatically calculated from the input species and this will help non-experts. when aligning two species where one or both species are poorly annotated, alignment might be biased towards aligning well-annotated proteins whose functions are similar. then it is advisable that sequence and network topology only are used to align the networks to avoid bias. we are developing a version of pinalog to perform alignment of ppins from multiple species. a web-server for pinalog is available allowing users to upload necessary information and receive alignment results by email and by a link to the results file (http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/pinalog/). the computing time of the alignment process depends on the size of the input networks. the typical computing time is 24 h with the longest run in our assessment being the human-yeast alignment which takes 24 h on a computer with 2.8 ghz processor with 8 gb memory (see supplementary material). given the importance of the resulting alignment, this time is acceptable. the code for pinalog is available from the website, download section.  
