pincage: probabilistic integration of cancer genomics data for perturbed gene identification and sample classification motivation: cancer development and progression is driven by a complex pattern of genomic and epigenomic perturbations. both types of perturbations can affect gene expression levels and disease outcome. integrative analysis of cancer genomics data may therefore improve detection of perturbed genes and prediction of disease state. as different data types are usually dependent, analysis based on independence assumptions will make inefficient use of the data and potentially lead to false conclusions. model: here, we present pincage (probabilistic integration of cancer genomics data), a method that uses probabilistic integration of cancer genomics data for combined evaluation of rna-seq gene expression and 450k array dna methylation measurements of promoters as well as gene bodies. it models the dependence between expression and methylation using modular graphical models, which also allows future inclusion of additional data types. results: we apply our approach to a breast invasive carcinoma dataset from the cancer genome atlas consortium, which includes 82 adjacent normal and 730 cancer samples. we identify new biomarker candidates of breast cancer development (ptf1a, rabif, rag1ap1, timm17a, loc148145) and progression (serpine3, znf706). pincage discriminates better between normal and tumour tissue and between progressing and non-progressing tumours in comparison with established methods that assume independence between tested data types, especially when using evidence from multiple genes. our method can be applied to any type of cancer or, more generally, to any genomic disease for which sufficient amount of molecular data is available. availability and implementation: r scripts available atcancer genomics aims to improve patient diagnosis, prognosis and treatment opportunities. identification and optimal use of molecular biomarkers is key to achieve this, as they may allow for stratification of clinically relevant cancer subtypes and prediction of clinical outcome. individual molecular markers of different types have long been used in the cancer field, however, their predictive performance is often limited , which may at least in part be explained by tumour molecular heterogeneity . combined use of multiple markers of different molecular types is generally thought to improve discriminatory power and clinical performance . however, integration using standard machine learning (ml) approaches often fails to deliver a performance gain . accordingly, there is a need for novel integrative approaches. we hypothesize that the predictive performance of integrative approaches can be improved by including existing knowledge on the biological relationships between the different molecular types. hence, we propose a model-based strategy that can be extended to the increasing array of molecular profiling data types and demonstrate its use with dna methylation and gene expression data. both gene expression and dna methylation have been extensively studied as cancer biomarker candidates . biomarker screens from individual laboratories have typically included only relatively few patients and profiled only a single data type. in contrast, large patient cohorts with hundreds of patients profiled for several molecular types are now available from the international cancer genome consortium (icgc;) and the cancer genome atlas (tcga;). these datasets offer new opportunities for exploring and developing integrative predictive approaches. integration can be done across both data types and genomic loci.three main strategies for data integration exist: (i) navenave combination of individual methods, (ii) use of general-purpose machine-learning methods and (iii) structured integration using prior knowledge . the first and simplest strategy combines results from separate analysis methods for individual data types, for instance in a sequential (greedy) manner by intersecting lists with significant candidates. this approach, however, requires that a genomic marker is statistically significant for each analysed data type. alternatively, p-values from analyses of individual data types may be combined given independence assumptions, based on either calculation of products or sums (reviewed by). a weakness of this approach is the assumption of independence between tested data types, which is often not fulfilled. the second strategy applies general-purpose ml methods to multiple molecular data types. for instance, methods selecting relevant features from normalized heterogeneous data, such as lasso or elastic net , have been followed by building logistic regression (lr) models or performing clustering . these methods typically also miss dependencies between data types. some studies successfully address this (e.g.), but at the expense of interpretability, individual biomarkers identification, and increased variation in predictive performance. the third strategy explicitly incorporates prior knowledge on the structure of possible interactions between data types. in one study, the modules of copy number perturbation that best explained observed gene expression variation were called as cancer drivers . paradigm is another attractive integrative approach . it derives patient-specific pathway activities from gene expression profiles and copy number status and uses these to cluster tumours into subtypes. the subtypes were shown to stratify patient survival for breast cancer and glioblastoma. a more comprehensive review of the various integrative methods, including the three types discussed here, is given in. here, we propose a structured integrative model, called probabilistic integration of cancer genomics data (pincage), which includes dna methylation at individual cpg sites and mrna expression. the model is modular and may be extended to other data types. we demonstrate its use for both candidate biomarker identification and sample classification. this novel method separately models the relationships between gene expression and methylation of two gene regions: promoter and gene body. it also explicitly models the distribution of the data types and the sampling of the underlying high-throughput measurements. we evaluate the method on breast invasive carcinoma (brca) dataset from tcga .cancer genomics data types are often integrated under a simplifying assumption of independence . we have introduced pincage, a flexible model for integration of multiple gene-level genomic data types based on the probabilistic graphical model formalism. we applied it to three types of data: gene expression, promoter methylation and gene body methylation. pincage integrates these by modelling pairwise interactions between both dna methylation types and gene expression. this permits joint analysis and evaluation of data tuples while considering their relationships. the genome-wide analysis of gene expression and dna methylation across tumours and an samples in the brca dataset revealed patterns and correlations that support joint analysis of data types with flexible, non-parametric models. our findings also suggested that regulation of expression by methylation is usually concerted with other mechanisms in the healthy system, while in cancer, the impact of methylation changes on expression is more limited . the strength likely depends on the genomic context, with other factors such as copy number variation, binding by transcription factors, mutation of regulatory elements, histone modifications or nucleosome positioning also affecting expression. we implemented pincages probability distributions with gaussian kernels. by doing so, we can encode the complex and often multimodal distributions across data types, relationships, and groups. similarly to established methods for count-based rna-seq expression analysis that introduce a gamma prior to account for the overdispersion of poisson-distributed read counts , we also model the overdispersion, however, using the gene-specific empirical priors instead. this improves model fits in the analysis of cancer datasets known for high variance. to our knowledge, no other method models the overdispersion in the integrative context. benefits of such integrated data analysis are 2-fold. first, it enables detection of subtlein the last row, auc values for single rank classifiers represent the mean performance across all 54 ranks for given method. the bold aucs denote highest value at given rank.  
