databases and ontologies advance access publication pip-db: the protein isoelectric point database a proteins isoelectric point or pi corresponds to the solution ph at which its net surface charge is zero. since the early days of solution biochemistry, the pi has been recorded and reported, and thus literature reports of pi abound. the protein isoelectric point database (pip-db) has collected and collated these data to provide an increasingly comprehensive database for comparison and bench-marking purposes. a web application has been developed to warehouse this database and provide public access to this unique resource. pip-db is a web-enabled sql database with an html gui front-end. pip-db is fully searchable across a range of properties. availability and implementation: the pip-db database and documentation are available at http://www.pipfor a macromolecular polyprotic systemsuch as protein, dna or rnathe isoelectric or isoionic pointcommonly referred to as the isoelectric point (pi)can be defined by the point of singularity in a titration curve, corresponding to the solution ph value at which the net overall surface charge, and thus, the mobility, of the ampholyte sums to zero . protein pis can be determined in several ways, but are generally determined using either polyacrylamide gel-based isoelectric focusing (or ief) or capillary ief (or cief) . separation by pi is a key component of 2d gel electrophoresis, a key precursor of proteomics, where discrete spots can be digested in-gel, and proteins subsequently identified by analytical mass spectrometry . analysis of whole proteomes indicate that at the system level, pis exhibit a multimodal distribution indicative of significant phylogenetic constraints on surface charge . theoretical calculation of pis can aid proteome analysis: assuming the protein to be denatured, calculation is rapid, requiring only the sequence to be known . most techniques exploit tabulated values for pka values for ionizable amino acid residues , which are assumed constant irrespective of structural context . a proteins pi is one of the most comprehensively determined and widely reported characteristic quantities in biochemistry and proteomics. however, such reports are typically almost incidental within the wider characterization of a protein or proteins. thus far, no dedicated, web-accessible database of protein pi values has been made available. thus, we describe here the protein pi database (pip-db), our ongoing attempt to catalogue comprehensively the pis of proteins, as reported in the literature.  
