sequence analysis pipipes: a set of pipelines for pirna and transposon analysis via small rna-seq, rna-seq, degradome-and cage-seq, chip-seq and genomic dna sequencing motivation: piwi-interacting rnas (pirnas), 2336 nt small silencing rnas, repress transposon expression in the metazoan germ line, thereby protecting the genome. although high-throughput sequencing has made it possible to examine the genome and transcriptome at unprecedented resolution, extracting useful information from giga-bytes of sequencing data still requires substantial computational skills. additionally, researchers may analyze and interpret the same data differently, generating results that are difficult to reconcile. to address these issues, we developed a coordinated set of pipelines, pipipes, to analyze pirna and transposon-derived rnas from a variety of high-throughput sequencing libraries, including small rna, rna, degradome or 7-methyl guanosine cap analysis of gene expression (cage), chromatin immunoprecipitation (chip) and genomic dna-seq. pipipes can also produce figures and tables suitable for publication. by facilitating data analysis, pipipes provides an opportunity to standardize computational methods in the pirna field.pirnas, a class of 2336 nt long small silencing rnas, suppress transposon expression in the metazoan germ line and, in some animals, the adjacent gonadal somatic cells . by preventing transposition, the pirna pathway ensures that genetic information passes faithfully to the next generation. disruption of the pirna pathway typically leads to transposon mobilization, double-stranded dna breaks and sterility. high-throughput sequencing technologies have been widely deployed in the study of pirnas. small rna-seq reveals the identity and abundance of pirnas ; rna-seq detects and quantifies mrna and transposon transcripts ; degradome-seq (also termed race-seq) detects the cleavage products of piwi-proteins guided by pirnas ; chromatin immunoprecipitation (chip)-seq detects chromatin modifications directed by pirnas or transcription factor-binding events that regulate pirna precursor or target transcription ; and genomic dna sequencing detects new transposition events caused by transposons that escape pirna repression or background differences between experimental strains and the assembled genome . correctly extracting biological knowledge from such voluminous data requires significant computational expertise and effort. the repetitive nature of transposon sequences lays another layer of complexity. moreover, different laboratories use diverse methods to analyze and interpret data (e.g. the way of treating reads that map to multiple locations in a reference genome). to provide a standardized set of tools to analyze these diverse data types, we developed pipipes, a collection of integrated pipelines for small rna-seq, rna-seq, degradome-and cap analysis of gene expression-seq (cage-seq), chip-seq and genome-seq analyses.  
