genome analysis pipit: visualizing functional impacts of structural variations pipit is a gene-centric interactive visualization tool designed to study structural genomic variations. through focusing on individual genes as the functional unit, researchers are able to study and generate hypotheses on the biological impact of different structural variations, for instance, the deletion of dosage-sensitive genes or the formation of fusion genes.structural variation is defined as a change of genomic dna greater than 1 kb in size and can be either balanced or unbalanced . a structural variation may be benign, it may influence phenotypes, it may predispose to or cause diseases, and it may be transmitted to next generations. in addition, it may also result in the formation of new transcripts through gene fusion or exon skipping when breakpoints disrupt gene structures . understanding the structural change in the genome, as well as its functional impact, is critical for studying phenotypic variations and genetic diseases in human and model organisms . when structural variations are studied, the structure of these variants are usually visualized by encoding breakpoints on a linear or circular layout . other visual encodings such as dot plot and graph representations show the changes in the reference genome introduced by the structural rearrangement . these visual encodings pose two challenges in analysis of structural variation data. first, they focus on size and position, rather than the consequence of structural rearrangement. second, they introduce an implicit correlation between size and effect, whereas small structural variations may have more severe effects than some large variations. therefore, an effective visual encoding of structural and copy-number variations based on functional units is essential to gain insights into impact on human health and disease. we introduce an exploratory visualization tool, named pipit, which uses a novel gene-centric visual encoding to examine how gene structures individually are affected by structural variants. pipit takes a genome variation format file as input and encodes an affected gene structure as a disk, showing how it is modified and oriented towards other genes. by means of this data abstraction, the focus of the structural variants is shifted from the genomic distance to the biologically relevant feature, i.e. the underlying genes. this encoding enables swift visual inspection of genes that are affected by structural variants, which may be examined further if deemed interesting. not constrained or biased by variation sizes, pipit permits in-depth analysis and exploration of structural variation data.pipit introduces a novel visualization paradigm and user interaction method to examine structural variants based on the affected gene region. it facilitates the study of structural variants from a gene-centric perspective to investigate various events, for instance, how known dosage-sensitive genes are affected or whether gene fusions are formed. future work includes extending the functional unit to encompass important regulatory elements as elaborated in the encode project . additionally, functions to compare multiple samples from various data formats, such as variant call format , and options to incorporate other conventional linear or circular representations are essential for more comprehensive study of structural variants. funding: iminds, university of leuven research council  
