pirs: profile-based illumina pair-end reads simulator motivation: the next-generation high-throughput sequencing technologies, especially from illumina, have been widely used in re-sequencing and de novo assembly studies. however, there is no existing software that can simulate illumina reads with real error and quality distributions and coverage bias yet, which is very useful in relevant software development and study designing of sequencing projects. results: we provide a software package, pirs (profile-based illumina pair-end reads simulator), which simulates illumina reads with empirical base-calling and gc-depth profiles trained from real re-sequencing data. the error and quality distributions as well as coverage bias patterns of simulated reads using pirs fit the properties of real sequencing data better than existing simulators. in addition, pirs also comes with a tool to simulate the heterozygous diploid genomes.in recent years, the next-generation high-throughput sequencing technologies (ngs) have been widely used for re-sequencing and de novo assembly, such as the 1000 human genomes project (http://www.1000genomes.org) and the 10 000 vertebrate genomes project (http://genome10k.soe.ucsc.edu). according to information from genomeweb (http://www.genomeweb.com), illumina has become dominant in the ngs market by the end of 2010. it has been reported that the illumina technology rarely contains insertion and deletion errors, but it may produce systematic and sequence-specific substitution errors and coverage bias problems during library construction and sequencing process. it is thus important to be aware of these characteristics for method development. although, evaluating software performance on real sequencing data to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first four authors should be regarded as joint firstis preferred, not all evaluations can be conducted on real data due to the lack of a ground truth. it is frequently more convenient to test the software with simulated data from a known genome, which helps us monitoring every step. there are already some simulators that can produce illumina reads, such as maq , wgsim from samtools , metasim and art . of all the existing softwares, wgsim only simulates reads with uniform substitution errors and dummy quality values; metasim is designed for simulating metagenomic data, and it supports empirical error profile to generate reads without quality values; art simulates illumina reads with empirical quality profile, which determines quality value first and then uses the qualityderived error rate to randomly generate substitution error; maq adopts a first-order markov chain to model quality distribution of each cycle, which generates quality values based on the transition probabilities and then uses the quality-derived error rate to randomly generate substitution error. in this article, we present a new illumina pair-end (pe) reads simulator pirs (profile-based illumina pair-end reads simulator), which adopts an empirical base-calling profile that is more like the real illumina data. moreover, it can use a gc content-coverage depth (gc-depth) profile to simulate reads with coverage bias along the genome. we also provide a tool to introduce changes (substitution, insertion, deletion and other variations) to the genome, to facilitate simulation of heterozygous data.illumina has introduced eamss filtering in its casava package, which masks low-quality g-rich regions at the end of each read with fixed quality value b. it is mainly designed for easier data trimming in general re-sequencing analyses, but this will slightly influence our profile generation. we suggest all quality-aware analysis to run casava with -no-eamss to disable the eamss filtering. the current base-calling and indel profiles in pirs focus on the perread-cycle properties but do not take the sequence-structure-specific errors into consideration. in illumina sequencing, coverage bias is a complex problem and gc-content is a well-studied one of all the influencing factors. we will introduce more types of coverage biases once they are well-studied.we designed and implemented an effective illumina reads simulator pirs using empirical profiles, to reproduce reads that are more like real illumina data compared with existing simulators, which is likely to be very helpful for development of ngs software such as de novo assembly, snp calling and structural variation detection. the independent profile generating module in pirs grants great freedom to users, who can generate new profiles with their own sequencing data when machine or reagent updates. moreover, the additional tool for simulating heterozygous genome is especially useful for applications that need heterozygous data.  
