sequence analysis plaac: a web and command-line application to identify proteins with prion-like amino acid composition prions are self-templating protein aggregates that stably perpetuate distinct biological states and are of keen interest to researchers in both evolutionary and biomedical science. the best understood prions are from yeast and have a prion-forming domain with strongly biased amino acid composition, most notably enriched for q or n. plaac is a web application that scans protein sequences for domains with prion-like amino acid composition. users can upload sequence files, or paste sequences directly into a textbox. plaac ranks the input sequences by several summary scores and allows scores along sequences to be visualized. text output files can be downloaded for further analyses, and visualizations saved in pdf and png formats. availability and implementation: http://plaac.wi.mit.edu/. the ruby-based web framework and the command-line software (implemented in java, with visualization routines in r) are available at http://github. com/whitehead/plaac under the mit license. all software can be run under os x, windows and unix.prions are proteins that can switch from non-aggregated states to self-templating highly ordered aggregates. this property allows them to confer stable changes in biological states that are of great interest in molecular and evolutionary biology . for example, they create neurodegenerative diseases, perpetuate activity states in neural synapses and provide access to a broad realm of phenotypic diversification in microbes. the ability to identify potential prion-like proteins from sequence data would speed the search for new prions across a wide variety of taxa. we previously developed a hidden markov model (hmm) to identify candidate prions and parse these candidates into prion-like domains (prlds) and non-prlds, on the basis of amino acid (aa) composition. briefly, the hmm has two hidden states, for prld and background, and the output symbols are the 20 aas. the output probabilities for the prld state were constructed based on the aa frequencies in the prlds of four prions of saccharomyces cerevisiae that were known at the time. this algorithm and extensions have since been used in several studies to identify prion-like sequences in yeast and also in humans , in which several proteins with prlds are associated with als and related neurodegenerative disorders. here we describe a web-based front end to the prion-prediction algorithm, plaac, and give an overview of implementation and extensions; further details are provided on the plaac web site. multiple sequences and whole proteomes: to scan multiple protein sequences (including whole proteomes), the user again pastes or uploads them in fasta format. (upload is recommended for more than a few sequences.) l core and parameters may be adjusted, and background frequencies may be computed directly from the provided sequences (not recommended if uploading or pasting just a few sequences). the user is presented with a summary table with a row for each uploaded protein ranked by corescore from highest to lowest and then may select candidates in this summary list to generate plots for further visualization. output ranking and scores: multiple sequences are ranked for prion-like properties by the corescore metric , which is the maximum sum of per-residue log-likelihood ratios for any subsequence of length l core that falls entirely within the prld state in the hmm viterbi parse, provided a sequence of this length exists, and is undefined (nan) otherwise. in addition, we compute a score llr (for log-likelihood ratio) that is otherwise identical to corescore, but without the requirement that the sequence falls entirely within the prld state of the hmm parse. because llr does not impose a hard cutoff, it can be useful when doing exploratory whole-proteome analyses, e.g. on the overall distribution of (near) prlds. however, examining whether the region with the highest llr score falls entirely within the prld state in the hmm parse may be informative, e.g. when selecting domains to clone for studies of candidate prlds fused to reporter proteins. algorithm updates: since the publication of , the aa frequencies for the prld state of the hmm have been updated based on 28 candidate prlds that showed switching behavior or strong amyloid formation experimentally (see source code for details). these updated aa frequencies were used in later publications . a subsequent algorithm called papa that uses aa scores derived from a random mutagenesis screen can downweigh many of the apparent false positives from, and can give sharper predictions for the results of point mutations . it appears that a small number of hydrophobic residues can speed amyloid formation in regions otherwise highly enriched for polar uncharged residues such as q and n . plaac and papa are complementary, as plaac identifies such regions, and papa has been validated only on such regions. (single scores based on local averages of per-residue aa scores do not adequately capture the trade-off between hydrophobic and polar uncharged residues.) we reimplemented papa, and included this score in the output and visualizations, along with predictions of intrinsically unfolded protein regions from a reimplementation of foldindex . it is also important to note that there are several known prions that are not strongly q/n-rich (e.g. het-s, prp, mod5), but as systematic experimental screening for prion-like propagation is lacking for non-q/n-rich proteins, it is difficult to estimate the false-negative rates of these algorithms. plaac has been developed as a web application to allow users to scan single protein sequences as well as whole proteomes for the presence of prlds. we have also augmented the original algorithm with additional scores, making unified comparisons possible.  
