plantmirnapred: efficient classification of real and pseudo plant pre-mirnas motivation: micrornas (mirnas) are a set of short (2124 nt) non-coding rnas that play significant roles as post-transcriptional regulators in animals and plants. while some existing methods use comparative genomic approaches to identify plant precursor mirnas (pre-mirnas), others are based on the complementarity characteristics between mirnas and their target mrnas sequences. however, they can only identify the homologous mirnas or the limited complementary mirnas. furthermore, since the plant pre-mirnas are quite different from the animal pre-mirnas, all the ab initio methods for animals cannot be applied to plants. therefore, it is essential to develop a method based on machine learning to classify real plant pre-mirnas and pseudo genome hairpins. results: a novel classification method based on support vector machine (svm) is proposed specifically for predicting plant pre-mirnas. to make efficient prediction, we extract the pseudo hairpin sequences from the protein coding sequences of arabidopsis thaliana and glycine max, respectively. these pseudo pre-mirnas are extracted in this study for the first time. a set of informative features are selected to improve the classification accuracy. the training samples are selected according to their distributions in the high-dimensional sample space. our classifier plantmirnapred achieves 90 accuracy on the plant datasets from eight plant species, including a.thaliana, oryza sativa, populus trichocarpa, physcomitrella patens, medicago truncatula, sorghum bicolor, zea mays and g.max. the superior performance of the proposed classifier can be attributed to the extracted plant pseudo pre-mirnas, the selected training dataset and the carefully selected features. the ability of plantmirnapred to discern real and pseudo pre-mirnas provides a viable method for discovering new non-homologous plant pre-mirnas. availability: the web service of plantmirnapred, the training datasets, the testing datasets and the selected features are freely available at http://nclab.hit.edu.cn/plantmirnapred/.derived from hairpin precursors (pre-mirnas), mature micrornas (mirnas) are non-coding rnas that play important roles in gene regulation by targeting mrnas for cleavage or translational repression . mirnas are involved in many important biological processes including plant development, signal transduction and protein degradation . however, systematically detecting mirnas from a genome by experimental techniques is difficult . as an alternative, the computational prediction methods are used to analyze the genomic dna and to obtain the putative candidates for experimental verification. since many mirnas are evolutionarily conserved in multiple species, methods that use comparative genomics to identify putative mirnas have been presented. mirfinder predicted the potential mirna of in the arabidopsis thaliana genome. it is based on the conservation of short sequences between the genomes of arabidopsis and oryza sativa. microharvestor can identify candidate plant mirna homologs for a given query mirna. the approach is based on a sequence similarity search step followed by a set of structural filters. the mirnas of vigna unguiculata are identified through homology alignment of highly conserved mirnas in multiple species . although these methods are effective in identifying new conserved mirnas, they cannot discover novel mirnas with less homology. on the other hand, since mirnas in plants often have near perfect matches to their target mrnas, methods that are based on the complementarity characteristics have also been proposed. mircheck (jones) searches for the new mirnas whose target sites are conserved in a.thaliana and o.sativa. findmirna predicts potential arabidopsis mirnas from candidate pre-mirnas that have corresponding target sites within transcripts. in order to decrease the number of mirna candidates, the predicted candidates are required to have orthologs in rice. mimatcher also predicts the plant mirnas through exploiting the complementarity of plant mirnas. however, since the candidates that are complementary to target mrnas are enormous within intergenic regions and introns, rigorous criteria such as conservation among multiple species are introduced to significantly reduce thepage: 1369 13681376  
