genetics and population analysis pleiogrip: genetic risk prediction with pleiotropy motivation: although several studies have used bayesian classifiers for risk prediction using genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) datasets, no software can efficiently perform these analyses on massive genetic datasets and can accommodate multiple traits. results: we describe the program pleiogrip that performs a genome-wide bayesian model search to identify snps associated with a discrete phenotype and uses snps ranked by bayes factor to produce nested bayesian classifiers. these classifiers can be used for genetic risk prediction, either selecting the classifier with optimal number of features or using an ensemble of classifiers. in addition, pleiogrip implements an extension to the bayesian search and classification and can search for pleiotropic relationships in which snps are simultaneosly associated with two or more distinct phenotypes. these relationships can be used to generate connected bayesian classifiers to predict the phenotype of interest either using genetic data alone or in combination with the secondary phenotype(s).a naive bayesian classifier (nbc) is a simple, efficient and robust tool that can be used to capture the complex genetic basis of a multigenic trait and can predict a subject phenotype based on the posterior probability of the trait given the individuals genetic profile . such classifier can be built using a large number of genetic variants, each with a relatively small contribution to the total genetic risk. however, the use of nbcs and similar bayesian methods are relatively uncommon in genetics, and although general-use software does exist that is capable of performing bayesian modeling and prediction , many of these software utilities are not well-suited to the high-dimensionality of genome-wide data . we have developed a stable, easy-to-use software package capable of performing these analyses efficiently and accurately using exact bayesian computations.in addition, although methods are available to identify associations between genetic loci and individual phenotypes, few methods can detect pleiotropic associations in which loci are simultaneously associated with multiple phenotypes and use the pleiotropic associations to improve genetic risk prediction. in, we showed that pleiotropic associations can be modelled via the construction of simple bayesian networks, and that these models can be applied to produce single or ensembles of bayesian classifiers that leverage pleiotropy to improve genetic risk prediction. testing with simulated and real data has shown that these models may improve genetic risk prediction under certain circumstances. our software package, pleiogrip is capable of both pleiotropic genetic risk prediction, as well as prediction using nbcs. bayes factor that do not pass a user-assigned significance threshold (default threshold e) are dropped. for each snp that passes this threshold and hence is associated with at least one phenotype, the simultaneous association of the snp with additional phenotypes is scored by the bayes factor and accepted if the bayes factor increases. snps are ranked by the bayes factor of the selected associations, and nested classifiers ae 1 ,. .. ,ae r are constructed such that ae 1 uses only the top ranked snp, ae 2 uses the top two snps and so forth.pleiogrip is stable, computationally efficient and offers a flexible new tool to gwas investigators interested in bayesian genetic risk prediction analyses, either with or without pleiotropy.  
