polyester: simulating rna-seq datasets with differential transcript expression motivation: statistical methods development for differential expression analysis of rna sequenc-ing (rna-seq) requires software tools to assess accuracy and error rate control. since true differential expression status is often unknown in experimental datasets, artificially constructed datasets must be utilized, either by generating costly spike-in experiments or by simulating rna-seq data. results: polyester is an r package designed to simulate rna-seq data, beginning with an experimental design and ending with collections of rna-seq reads. its main advantage is the ability to simulate reads indicating isoform-level differential expression across biological replicates for a variety of experimental designs. data generated by polyester is a reasonable approximation to real rna-seq data and standard differential expression workflows can recover differential expression set in the simulation by the user. availability and implementation: polyester is freely available from bioconductor (http:// bioconductor.org/).rna sequencing (rna-seq) experiments have become increasingly popular as a means to study gene expression. there are a range of statistical methods for differential expression analysis of rna-seq data . the developers of statistical methodology for rna-seq need to test whether their tools are performing correctly. often, accuracy tests cannot be performed on real datasets because true gene expression levels and expression differences between populations are usually unknown, and spike-in experiments are costly in terms of both time and money. instead, researchers often use computational simulations to create datasets with a known signal and noise structure. typically, simulated expression measurements used to evaluate differential expression tools are generated as gene counts from a statistical model like those used in common differential expression tools . but these simulated scenarios do not account for variability in expression measurements that arises during upstream steps in rna-seq data analysis, such as read alignment or read counting. polyester is a new r package for simulating rna-seq reads. polyester s main advantage is that users can simulate sequencing reads with specified differential expression signal for either genes or isoforms. this allows users to investigate sources of variability at multiple points in rna-seq pipelines. existing rna-seq simulators that generate sequencing reads are not designed for simulating experiments with biological replicates and specified differential expression signal. for example, the rsemsimulate-reads utility shipped with rsem requires a time-consuming first step of aligning real sequencing reads to develop a sequencing model before reads can be simulated, and differential expression simulation is not built-in. neitherfluxsimulator nor benchmarker for evaluating the effectiveness of rna-seq (beers) have a built-in mechanism for inducing differential expression. these simulators also do not provide methods for defining a model for biological variability across replicates or specifying the exact expression level of specific transcripts. tuxsim has been used to simulate rna-seq datasets with differential expression , but it is not publicly available. polyester was created to fulfill the need for a tool to simulate rna-seq reads for an experiment with replicates and well-defined differential expression. users can easily simulate small experiments from a few genes or a single chromosome. this can reduce computational time in simulation studies when computationally intensive steps such as read alignment must be performed as part of the simulation. polyester is open-source, cross-platform and freely available for download from bioconductor at http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/ bioc/html/polyester.html.  
