polymarker: a fast polyploid primer design pipeline the design of genetic markers is of particular relevance in crop breeding programs. despite many economically important crops being polyploid organisms, the current primer design tools are tailored for diploid species. bread wheat, for instance, is a hexaploid comprising of three related genomes and the performance of genetic markers is diminished if the primers are not gen-ome specific. polymarker is a pipeline that generates snp markers by selecting candidate primers for a specified genome using local alignments and standard primer design tools to test the viability of the primers. a command line tool and a web interface are available to the community. availability and implementation: polymarker is available as a ruby biogem: bio-polyploid-tools. web interface: http://polymarker.tgac.ac.uk.breeding programs rely on dense genetic maps with markers (e.g. snps) that can be used to identify the presence or absence of specific alleles in homozygous or heterozygous state. standard primer design tools are designed to work in diploids, where genome duplications are rare. wheat is a polyploid composed of three genomes (a, b and d; referred to as homoeologues) that are related (between 96 and 98 sequence identity), yet distinct. this creates a problem for the design of pcr primers specific to an individual homoeologue. a common approach to circumvent this issue is to manually design primers with a genome specific variant at the 3 0 of the primer to increase specificity. we introduce polymarker, a tool to automate the design of genome specific primers, thereby reducing the time invested in this process. to make polymarker accessible to scientists and breeders, we developed a web server where custom snps can be submitted for the design of genome specific assays. genotyping (lgc), that comprises a common primer and two allele-specific primers. since the allele-specific primers are restricted in position, the common primer is used to incorporate the chromosome specific variants when possible. to test if the primer candidates are viable primer3 (rozen and) is invoked using the genomic reference of the target chromosome. the starting positions of the primers to distinguish between alleles is selected with the sequence_force_left_end option of primer3. to design the common primer the option sequence_force_right_end is used on two runs of primer3, for the chromosome specific and semi-specific primers. a final run of primer3 is executed without the sequence_force_right_end option to find viable primers. after the primers are tested with primer3, polymarker selects a primer pair with the highest specificity. polymarker is a pipeline written as a biogem , extending bioruby to extract regions from fasta files and to support operations on nucleotide sequences with iupac ambiguity codes .  
