an integrative approach to predicting the functional effects of non-coding and coding sequence variation motivation: technological advances have enabled the identification of an increasingly large spectrum of single nucleotide variants within the human genome, many of which may be associated with monogenic disease or complex traits. here, we propose an integrative approach, named fathmm-mkl, to predict the functional consequences of both coding and non-coding sequence variants. our method utilizes various genomic annotations, which have recently become available, and learns to weight the significance of each component annotation source. results: we show that our method outperforms current state-of-the-art algorithms, cadd and gwava, when predicting the functional consequences of non-coding variants. in addition, fathmm-mkl is comparable to the best of these algorithms when predicting the impact of coding variants. the method includes a confidence measure to rank order predictions. availability and implementation: the fathmm-mkl webserver is available at: http://fathmm.rapid technological advances and the falling costs of next-generation sequencing technologies have accelerated the identification of single nucleotide variants (snvs) in the human genome . ascertaining which of these are functional, against a background of neutral snvs, promises to improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underpinning disease and complex traits. there is a plethora of computational algorithms capable of predicting whether snvs are deleterious . however, these algorithms are typically restricted to snvs falling within protein-coding regions of the genome, with a particular focus on non-synonymous snvs (nssnvs). they are therefore incapable of assessing the consequences of a significant proportion of snvs, given that the vast majority of snv-trait associations fall within intergenic or intronic regions of the genome . in this article, we propose a method for predicting the functional impact of both coding and non-coding snvs. existing protein-based prediction algorithms tend to exploit evolutionary conservation when determining whether or not variants are functional. however, other potential sources for functional annotation v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.the method we have outlined outperformed both gwava and cadd when predicting the functional consequences of non-coding sequence variants (and supplementary). in this case, better performance was achieved using a smaller number of feature groups (in), as opposed to a broader range of feature groups (in supplementary). we also achieved good performance when predicting the functional impact of nssnvs . for coding sequence variants, better performance was achieved using all the feature groups (in) instead of a smaller subset of feature groups (e.g.in supplementary). this out-performance was achieved despite the fact that the 10 feature group model used only 36 of the training examples available to the four feature group model. this suggests that a broad range of data sources are informative for classifying variants in coding regions. for predicting the functional impact of variants in non-coding regions, the opposite is suggested, with fewer types of data being truly informative. in both cases, the most informative indicator is whether or not the variant falls within regions which are highly conserved across species. one advantage of our method is that it highlights the relative informative-ness of the different sources of data (e.g. supplementary). furthermore, the addition of a confidence measure also allows for the isolation of a smaller set of variants that have a higher confidence of correct functional impact assignment. this provides an intuitive way to rank predictions for subsequent analysis when discovering novel deleterious variants, as one may be able to survey only a small set of the most compelling variants. however, as noted in section 3.3.2, incomplete data may restrict the feature groups we can use to make a prediction. currently, we rescale kernel weights to accommodate these cases, but as our experiments with coding examples reveal, rescaling may not adequately compensate for missing features. we anticipate that rapidly growing data resources will mitigate this issue eventually, but immediate improvements in test accuracy are possible. for example, provided the number of feature groups remains small, we could learn sets of kernel weights specific to all possible combinations of feature groups. feature groups had between 8 and 443 component features, with the strongestperforming group having the fewest features (46-way and 100-way conservation). it may be possible to improve performance using feature selection within these groups. in addition, rather than integrating component feature groups at the level of the data, via a composite kernel, it would be possible to integrate classifiers (each handling one feature group), via ensemble learning. additional improvements are possible. for example, for non-coding regions, we could further exploit the sequence context of a variant to identify a possible functional element (e.g. a non-coding rna site) and use this information to improve predictive accuracy. in future projects, we shall investigate these potential improvements in addition to devising bespoke predictors for labelling variants in specific disease contexts, such as cancer. for prediction using coding variants, there are further sources of data that could be relevant to enhancing prediction performance. we will also experiment with these to establish if the proposed mkl method could be improved further, leading to out-performance over cadd.an integrative approach to predicting functional effects  
