structural bioinformatics accelerated protein structure comparison using tm-score-gpu motivation: accurate comparisons of different protein structures play important roles in structural biology, structure prediction and functional annotation. the root-mean-square-deviation (rmsd) after optimal superposition is the predominant measure of similarity due to the ease and speed of computation. however, global rmsd is dependent on the length of the protein and can be dominated by divergent loops that can obscure local regions of similarity. a more sophisticated measure of structure similarity, template modeling (tm)-score, avoids these problems, and it is one of the measures used by the community-wide experiments of critical assessment of protein structure prediction to compare predicted models with experimental structures. tm-score calculations are, however, much slower than rmsd calculations. we have therefore implemented a very fast version of tm-score for graphical processing units (tm-score-gpu), using a new and novel hybrid kabsch/quaternion method for calculating the optimal superposition and rmsd that is designed for parallel applications. this acceleration in speed allows tm-score to be used efficiently in computationally intensive applications such as for clustering of protein models and genome-wide comparisons of structure. results: tm-score-gpu was applied to six sets of models from nutritious rice for the world for a total of 3 million comparisons. tm-score-gpu is 68 times faster on an ati 5870 gpu, on average, than the original cpu single-threaded implementation on an amd phenom ii 810 quad-core processor. availability and implementation: the complete source, including the gpu code and the hybrid rmsd subroutine, can be downloaded and used without restriction atfor protein structure comparisons, the simplest method is to calculate a transformation that superimposes corresponding atoms from one structure onto a second structure and minimizes the rootmean-square-deviation (rmsd) between the coordinates of the superimposed structures. this can be obtained from the single value decomposition of the covariance matrix or from the solution of the eigenvalue equation of a quaternion to whom correspondence should be addressed. derived matrix . although rmsd is a fast and easily calculated metric of structural similarity, a globally optimal transformation that minimizes the distances between all superimposed atom pairs can be dominated by a small set of divergent atoms in loop regions. furthermore, rmsd is not only dependent on the overall goodness of fit but also dependent on the length of the proteins. tm-score uses a variant of the levittgerstein (lg) metric that provides a length independent measure and limits the impact of divergent pairs of atoms in superimposed structures, an implementation of tm-score using qcprot (red) and the cpu and gpu versions of our implementation (green and yellow). tm-score-gpu is on average 68 3 times faster than the original implementation run on an amd phenom ii 810 quad-core processor. when comparing single-threaded cpu implementations, our hybrid rmsd algorithm gives rise to a 45 0.4 speedup over the original code and 58 1 speedup over an implementation using qcprot rotations in the kabsch method and avoids the iterative methods used to solve for the eigenvalues of the s matrix used in quaternion methods. the resulting algorithm has a non-divergent code path, has no iteration and is significantly faster. the single-threaded tm-score implementation using the hybrid method is 45 faster than the original kabsch-based implementation and 58 faster than qcprot (see).  
