data and text mining ponderosa, an automated 3d-noesy peak picking program, enables automated protein structure determination ponderosa (peak-picking of noe data enabled by restriction of shift assignments) accepts input information consisting of a protein sequence, backbone and sidechain nmr resonance assignments, and 3d-noesy (13 c-edited and/or 15 n-edited) spectra, and returns assignments of noesy crosspeaks, distance and angle constraints, and a reliable nmr structure represented by a family of conformers. ponderosa incorporates and integrates external software packages (talos+, stride and cyana) to carry out different steps in the structure determination. ponderosa implements internal functions that identify and validate noesy peak assignments and assess the quality of the calculated three-dimensional structure of the protein. the robustness of the analysis results from ponderosas hierarchical processing steps that involve iterative interaction among the internal and external modules. ponderosa supports a variety of input formats: sparky assignment table (.shifts) and spectrum file formats (.ucsf), xeasy proton file format (.prot), and nmr-star format (.star). to demonstrate the utility of ponderosa, we used the package to determine 3d structures of two proteins: human ubiquitin and escherichia coli iron-sulfur scaffold protein variant iscu(d39a). the automatically generated structural constraints and ensembles of conformers were as good as or better than those determined previously by much less automated means. availability: the program, in the form of binary code along with tutorials and reference manuals, is available ata major challenge of structural biology is to close the gap between known sequences of proteins [ 110 8 in genbank (and their 3d structures ( 110 5 in pdb;). automation now plays a key role in speeding up the determination of protein structures by x-ray crystallography. however, the determination of protein structures by nmr spectroscopy includes a larger number of steps that present greater challenges for automation. the steps basically arepage: 1728 17271728  
