genome analysis pooled assembly of marine metagenomic datasets: enriching annotation through chimerism motivation: despite advances in high-throughput sequencing, marine metagenomic samples remain largely opaque. a typical sample contains billions of microbial organisms from thousands of genomes and quadrillions of dna base pairs. its derived metagenomic dataset underrepresents this complexity by orders of magnitude because of the sparseness and shortness of sequencing reads. read shortness and sequencing errors pose a major challenge to accurate species and functional annotation. this includes distinguishing known from novel species. often the majority of reads cannot be annotated and thus cannot help our interpretation of the sample. results: here, we demonstrate quantitatively how careful assembly of marine metagenomic reads within, but also across, datasets can alleviate this problem. for 10 simulated datasets, each with species complexity modeled on a real counterpart, chimerism remained within the same species for most contigs (97). for 42 real pyrosequencing (454) datasets, assembly increased the proportion of annotated reads, and even more so when datasets were pooled, by on average 1.6 (max 6.6) for species, 9.0 (max 28.7) for pfam protein domains and 9.4 (max 22.9) for panther gene families. our results outline exciting prospects for data sharing in the metagenomics community. while chimeric sequences should be avoided in other areas of metagenomics (e.g. biodiversity analyses), conservative pooled assembly is advantageous for annotation specificity and sensitivity. intriguingly, our experiment also found potential prospects for (low-cost) discovery of new species in old data.high-throughput dna sequencing of microbial communities (metagenomics) has greatly expanded our knowledge (reviewed broadly in). for example, new marine biology, a better understanding of biogeochemical cycles and more are keenly anticipated from this (currently still main) option for characterizing unculturable species at the molecular level . in marine metagenomics (and for samples derived from other habitats), full realization of the potential of next-generation sequencing (ngs) relies on high-quality species and functional annotation of the now hundreds of datasets available to the scientific community . however, metagenome annotation is confounded by (i) the shortness of ngs reads (review this challenge and others), which merely characterize small fragments of genes, and (ii) by the small fraction of known microbes represented in sequence databases, often described as the culturable 1 . in traditional genomics, assembling reads into contigs is common practice. by contrast, metagenomes are primarily released to the community as reads, predominantly from sanger or pyrosequencing (454) to date, and even some gold standard annotation pipelines are optimized for unassembled data. concern over chimeric contigs may explain the reluctance to assemble. for example, only 3 of the 42 datasets in this work were assembled according to the publications in which they first appeared. this may seem justified to an extent by pyrosequencing read lengths, which typically range from around 100600 nt in publically available sets, depending on how recently the data were obtained. while some annotation can be derived from individual reads in this range , it is plausible that assembly should add value to the data by improving annotation. however, the potential benefits for annotation have not been quantified rigorously. previous smaller-scale work with simulated assemblies already suggests that chimeric contigs may not be as common as feared. for example,reported that 8595 of contigs from assemblies of the most species rich set of their simulated sanger-sequencing data did not mix genomes. neither did the majority of contigs assembled from simulated pyrosequencing reads in other work by the moya group [94 in; 6897 in v azquez. below, we give this question a deeper look, but we also take a step further to ask: is it advisable for deriving species and function annotation, to cautiously consider not only data from one sample, but also from others? by allowing limited chimerism within and across samples we may strike a balance between information gain and precision (with respect to an individual cells genome) that is beneficial if used strictly for annotation. for example, a contig identified as trichodesmium erythraeum is informative even if the contig mixes strains of this bacterium, whereas refusal to call the species because a contig fails to match precisely a known strain tells us nothing. to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2014. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com  
