popgev: a web-based large-scale population genome browser motivation: the development of high-throughput sequencing technology has made it possible for more and more researchers to use population sequencing data to mine genes associated with specific traits. however, the massive amounts of sequencing data have also brought new challenges to the researchers. the question of how to browse population genomic data in an easy and intuitive manner must be addressed. web-based genome browsers allow user to conveniently view the results of genomic analyses, but heavy usage can reduce the response speed of the webpage, which limits its usefulness in the display of large-scale genome data. indexeddb technology is a good solution to this problem; it supports web browsers and so creates local databases. in this way, data can be read from the local storage, achieving a smooth display of population genomic data. results: popgev has the following characteristics. first, it uses a new encoding method for compression of population snp and indel data. indexeddb technology is used to download the results to local storage so that users can browse the results smoothly even when the network traffic is heavy. second, popgev identify similar genomic regions between two individuals based on snp data. population diversity indexes are calculated when comparing two populations. third, user defined annotation information can be integrated for user-friendly mining of gene functions. simulation shows that popgev can smoothly display analysis results of population genome containing over 500 individuals with 2 millions snp data.the development of high-throughput sequencing technology has decreased the cost of sequencing sharply, and more and more researchers are using population resequencing technology to study gene function and the evolution of species. increases in the quantity of data collected in genomic studies have also posed great challenges to biomedical researchers. first, powerful computing resources and efficient algorithms are needed to extract meaningful results from population sequencing data. second, user-friendly visualization tools for the results of genomic analysis would be of great use to biology researchers. currently, several different genome visualization tools have been developed to address different specific needs, such as stand-alone program . as the quantity of genomic data collected in studies increases, population genome analysis tools are becoming more and more important. considering the computation capacity, more and more users have chosen to perform data analysis on the cloud server, and the results of analysis can be returned in html format. this suggests web-based visualization tools may become even more popular in the future. when using web-based browsers to display the results of population genome analyses, two issues must be resolved. first, the large amount of data transmitted will produce corresponding delays; second, web browsers are not as flexible as stand-alone programs in terms of user interaction. here, html5 technology was used to develop a visualization tools for population genome analysis. canvas and svg (scalable vector graphics) are used as the primary display technology, svg is a way to achieve vector image display, making the visualization clearer than ever and improving the interactive performance. the indexeddb local database technology reduces the number of interactions between the webpage and the server, so that the users can smoothly browse the analysis results. simulation shows that this software can display genomic variants of more than 500 soybean genomes smoothly. in terms of software features, in addition to basic functions such as displaying the snp and indel variation in each individual, popgev also identify recombination sites within the population and analyze the genetic relationships between individuals. population diversity indexes such as fst, tajimas d are calculated, and these can be used to show difference between two populations.the rapid growth of the amount of sequencing data produced by genomic studies has raised challenges for data analysis and visualization techniques. popgev uses the html5 indexdb technology to store data locally. in this way, it exploits the convenience of a web browser and prevents frequent network communications, producing a smooth display of massive quantities of genetic data. this software  
