systems biology population length variability and nucleoid numbers in escherichia coli motivation: cell sizes and shapes are a fundamental defining characteristic of all cellular life. in bacteria like escherichia coli, the machinery that determines cell length is complex and interconnected, spanning extracellular cues, biosynthesis and cell division. few tools exist to study cell lengths in a population. we have developed and tested three automated image analysis routines on growing e.coli cultures to simultaneously measure cell lengths and nucleoid numbers in populations of bacteria. we find population profiles changing with culture densityhigher density of culture leads to fewer long cells. additionally, lab strains mutant for reca show a correlation between the number of nucleoids and cell length.cell shape, size and its regulation are a fundamental property of cellular organisms. escherichia coli is a rod-shaped bacterium and multiple genetic factors have been isolated over the years that affect its shape and size (reviewed in). cell size in e.coli can be characterized as cell length and width. while width has been observed to be more or less constant, length of the bacteria has been shown to vary even in cells in the same environment and of the same age . for instance, the proportion of long cells has been shown to decrease with increasing cell density . decreasing temperature caused increased cell volume while more recently cell lengths were observed to decrease at 22c compared with 37c . the filamentous phenotype corresponding to elongated e.coli cells has been generated by inhibition, mutation or deletion of penicillin binding proteins, cell scaffolding proteins mre and mbl, cell division proteins ftsz and mincde and nucleoid occlusion (reviewed in). however, the population variability in such length measurements has been lacking. thus, reproducible quantification of cell sizes and subcellular structures is important to address combinations of effects of genetic and environmental factors on cell phenotype. recent studies examining bacterial cell lengths have used cell sorters and particle analyzers to measure bacterial cell size and cell to whom correspondence should be addressed. cycle stage . however, these methods lack spatial information about the cells or their subcellular structures. microscopy and image analysis appear to be the optimal solution.have estimated the accuracy of cell division in e.coli to be 2.9 by measuring the sd in the pinch position as a fraction of cell length in phase contrast images. using green fluorescent protein (gfp) expressing cells, the sd of cell width was estimated as 6.6 . more recently, a high-content image analysis tool has been applied to measuring the e.coli cell length variability and mind oscillations . the methods used works well on phase contrast and fluorescence images, but not on differential interference contrast (dic) images. bacterial genomic dna that is compacted in the cell is referred to as the nucleoid, distinguishing it from the membrane-bound nucleus found in eukaryotes. nucleoids form an important part of the cell division machinery, as has been seen recently seen in their role in determining the positioning of the ftsz ring necessary for equational division in e.coli . in bacillus, incomplete dna replication causes filamentation of cells by nucleoid occlusion, i.e. the steric hindrance of the cell division machinery by nucleoids. we have developed an algorithm to detect cell lengths in dic microscopy images of populations of e.coli laboratory strains grown in liquid batch culture. we combined this with automated detection of nucleoids in fluorescence images. we confirmed with previous findings that the proportion of long cells decreases with increasing culture density. additionally, the lab strain dh5 with attenuated recombinase activity shows a linear correlation between cell length and nucleoid numbers. we hypothesize that a higher rate of replication fork stalling in such strains results in the inhibition of cell division, while cell elongation continues leading to longer cells. the algorithm presented here demonstrates our ability to detect and quantify cell length variability in e.coli and relate it to the variability in nucleoid numbers. changing properties like nutrient availability per cell appears to affect this population variability, in a manner consistent across strains.the image analysis algorithm presented here detects cell lengths and nucleoids in rod-shaped and filamentous bacterial populations.shows a linear trend (linear fit r 2 = 0.8) with slope 2.2 (please refer online for colour figures).  
