sequence analysis pore: an r package for the visualization and analysis of nanopore sequencing data motivation: the oxford nanopore minion device represents a unique sequencing technology. as a mobile sequencing device powered by the usb port of a laptop, the minion has huge potential applications. to enable these applications, the bioinformatics community will need to design and build a suite of tools specifically for minion data. results: here we present pore, a package for r that enables users to manipulate, organize, summarize and visualize minion nanopore sequ-encing data. as a package for r, pore has been tested on windows , linux and macosx. crucially, the windows version allows users to analyse minion data on the windows laptop attached to the device. availability and implementation: pore is released as a package for r at http://sourceforge.net/projects/rpore/. a tutorial and further information are available at https://sourceforge.relative to first-and second-generation sequencing technologies, single-molecule sequencing is a new science, with only helicos , pacific biosciences and oxford nanopore (ont) being widely available. even within the field of single-molecule sequencing, onts nanopore sequencing technology represents a new paradigm; while both helicos and pacific biosciences sequencing technologies measure incorporation events into a second strand, onts minion and gridion systems measure a single molecule of dna as it passes through a protein nanopore. in addition, the minion is the worlds first mobile dna sequencer; it is powered by a laptops usb port and measures 4 inches in length. recently, ont opened up the minion access programme, enabling researchers to use the device for the first time. the ultra-low-cost and mobile nature of the minion device opens up a huge number of applications. however, users of the device are faced with a number of informatics challenges. users of the minion must buy a high-specification windows laptop, and thus there is a need for windows-based software to handle the data. the minion outputs binary files in the hdf5 format (http://www.hdfgroup.org/hdf5/). these contain raw data from the sequencer, which are then processed by a cloud-based base caller called metrichor. the subsequent called sequence files are also in hdf5 format (with the extension .fast5). it is not uncommon for users to be presented with 3050 000 hdf5 files (.fast5), with no software with which to access the data. furthermore, data from all runs are stored in a single directory, with no subdirectories, and users find themselves needing to manipulate thousands of files manually, which takes time and is error prone. we have developed pore, a package for the statistical package r (http://www.r-project.org/; r core), which enables users to manipulate minion fast5 files into run folders, extract fastq, gather statistics on each run and plot a number of key graphs, such as read-length histograms and yield-over-time. crucially, as a package for r, pore is crossplatform and has been tested on windows, linux and macosx. the windows version enables users to run pore on the minion laptop itself, rather than copying the data to a linux server to process with perl or python. this key feature brings users closer to true mobile dna sequencing.we have written pore, an r package that enables users to more easily manipulate, summarize and visualize minion nanopore sequencing data. as a package for r, pore is available for both windows and linux, and crucially the windows version will allow data analysis on the mandatory windows laptop on which the minion depends. in addition, r is now a popular statistical package among biologists, who may feel comfortable using pore through the r user interface. pore is one of the first bioinformatics packages to offer this necessary functionality. poretools , a toolkit written in python, offers similar functionality, although each software has a different set of (overlapping) functions. a table comparing feature sets is available in the supplementary information. the cross-platform nature of pore, its ease of installation and pores ability to organize folders of fast5 files make pore an important tool for users of the minion device.. an example output from the plot.squiggle function. plotted are the events data extracted from a single read. the y-axis is the mean electronic signal reported for the pore, and the x-axis is time in seconds  
