sequence analysis poretools: a toolkit for analyzing nanopore sequence data motivation: nanopore sequencing may be the next disruptive technology in genomics, owing to its ability to detect single dna molecules without prior amplification, lack of reliance on expensive optical components , and the ability to sequence long fragments. the minion tm from oxford nanopore technologies (ont) is the first nanopore se-quencer to be commercialized and is now available to early-access users. the minion tm is a usb-connected, portable nanopore sequen-cer that permits real-time analysis of streaming event data. currently, the research community lacks a standardized toolkit for the analysis of nanopore datasets. results: we introduce poretools, a flexible toolkit for exploring data-sets generated by nanopore sequencing devices from minion tm for the purposes of quality control and downstream analysis. poretools operates directly on the native fast5 (an application of the hdf5 standard) file format produced by ont and provides a wealth of format conversion utilities and data exploration and visualization tools. availability and implementation: poretools is an open-source software and is written in python as both a suite of command line utilities and a python application programming interface.dna sequencing with biological nanopores was proposed almost 20 years ago . this approach relies on the direct electrical detection of single dna strands in contact with an individual pore. single molecule detection and the absence of a prior amplification step means that extremely long fragments can be sequenced without any loss in quality. in may 2014, oxford nanopore technologies released minion tm , the first commercially available nanopore dna sequencing device. minion tm is noteworthy for its portability, size (around the same length as an iphone tm ) and usb 3.0 connectivity, meaning it can be run on a standard internet-connected laptop. research groups throughout the world are actively evaluating this device for a broad range of applications. sequencing with the minion yields raw signals reflecting modulation of the ionic current at each pore by a dna molecule. the resulting time-series of nanopore translocation, events, are base-called by proprietary software running as a cloud service. the resulting files for each sequenced read are stored in fast5 format, an application of the hdf5 format. however, at present, no specific software is available to facilitate downstream analyses starting with this file format.the poretools software helps solve pressing requirements for analysis of nanopore sequencing data. by focusing on the python development environment and adopting expected interface conventions as popularized by other popular bioinformatics tools such as samtools and bedtools , we expect that users will be able to rapidly exploit the functionality offered by this software. we anticipate that other toolkits will become available written in other programming languages. further efforts are required for downstream analysis for common tasks including alignment and de novo assembly of both event and base-called sequence data from this platform.  
