structural bioinformatics porter, paleale 4.0: high-accuracy prediction of protein secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility protein secondary structure and solvent accessibility predictions are a fundamental intermediate step towards protein structure and function prediction. we present new systems for the ab initio prediction of protein secondary structure and solvent accessibility, porter 4.0 and paleale 4.0. porter 4.0 predicts secondary structure correctly for 82.2 of residues. paleale 4.0s accuracy is 80.0 for prediction in two classes with a 25 accessibility threshold. we show that the increasing training set sizes that come with the continuing growth of the protein data bank keep yielding prediction quality improvements and examine the impact of protein resolution on prediction performances. availability: porter 4.0 and paleale 4.0 are freely available for academic users at http://distillf.ucd.ie/porterpaleale/. up to 64 kb of input in fasta format can be processed in a single submission, with predictions now being returned to the user within a single web page and, optionally, a singleas the critical assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction enters its third decade of life after casp10, one-dimensional protein structural features such as secondary structure (ss) and relative solvent accessibility (rsa) still remain a fundamental stage towards structure prediction, as they are indispensable for remote homology detection , contribute to contact map predictions , help the selection of local structural fragments for model reconstruction and, ultimately, when known, considerably reduce the degrees of freedom available to a protein. ss and sa, alongside other structural features, have also proven useful in many other tasks, e.g. the prediction of protein subcellular localization , intrinsic disorder , bioactive peptides within proteins and proteinprotein interactions . reflecting the usefulness of ss and rsa, our public predictors of these features, porter and paleale have served a combined 275 000 queries to date from 40 000 distinct users, and porters ss predictions are used for fragment selection within the protein structure prediction package rosetta . we have trained larger, more expressive ensembles of cascaded bidirectional recurrent neural networks (brnn) on recent redundancy-reduced subsets of the protein data bank to predict ss and rsa. the new systems, porter 4.0 and paleale 4.0, outperform our older public web servers porter and paleale, with ss now at 482 correct prediction and 2-class (25 threshold) rsa predictions 80 correct. the new systems, porter 4.0 and paleale 4.0, are freely available for academic users through a new public web server.  
