positive-unlabeled ensemble learning for kinase substrate prediction from dynamic phosphoproteomics data downloaded from motivation: protein phosphorylation is a post-translational modification that underlines various aspects of cellular signaling. a key step to reconstructing signaling networks involves identification of the set of all kinases and their substrates. experimental characterization of kinase substrates is both expensive and time-consuming. to expedite the discovery of novel substrates, computational approaches based on kinase recognition sequence (motifs) from known substrates, protein structure , interaction and co-localization have been proposed. however, rarely do these methods take into account the dynamic responses of signaling cascades measured from in vivo cellular systems. given that recent advances in mass spectrometry-based technologies make it possible to quantify phosphorylation on a proteome-wide scale, computational approaches that can integrate static features with dynamic phosphoproteome data would greatly facilitate the prediction of biologically relevant kinase-specific substrates. results: here, we propose a positive-unlabeled ensemble learning approach that integrates dynamic phosphoproteomics data with static kinase recognition motifs to predict novel substrates for kinases of interest. we extended a positive-unlabeled learning technique for an ensemble model, which significantly improves prediction sensitivity on novel substrates of kinases while retaining high specificity. we evaluated the performance of the proposed model using simulation studies and subsequently applied it to predict novel substrates of key kinases relevant to insulin signaling. our analyses show that static sequence motifs and dynamic phosphoproteomics data are complementary and that the proposed integrated model performs better than methods relying only on static information for accurate prediction of kinase-specific substrates. availability and implementation: executable gui tool, source code and documentation are freely available at https://github.comphosphorylation is an essential protein post-translational modification characterized by the precise and reversible addition of a phosphate group, by proteins called kinases, to their targets, called substrates . the signaling networks established by protein phosphorylation govern numerous cellular functions such as metabolic homeostasis, cell proliferation, survival and apoptosis , and the identification of substrates often reveals new mechanisms by which the cell regulates these processes. the identification of new kinase substrates (i.e. the phosphorylation site on a given protein) is therefore of great biological interest. experimental validation of kinase substrates is an expensive and time-consuming process and must therefore be prioritized and performed for only a limited number of candidates. to select appropriate candidates for experimental characterization, in silico approaches are widely used to predict candidate substrates of a kinase or family of kinases of interest. to this end, a number of computational approaches have been developed for de novo substrate prediction . these range from simple motifbased approaches to sophisticated machine learning algorithms. a list of available methods is reviewed and categorized by trost and kusalik (2011) according to the techniques employed for substrate prediction. for example, methods based on sequence motif either contain precompiled regular expression patterns or rely on calculating position-specific scoring matrices (pssms) from known kinase substrates extracted from the literature or in vitro experiments. while motif-based methods are able to sensitively identify substrates that have a similar sequence composition to those used to compile the motif , they generally extend poorly to more diverse substrates. as increasingly more phosphorylation sites are deposited in public databases such as phospho.elm and phosphositeplus , machine learning approaches that generalize well to diverse substrates are becoming increasingly necessary. in this category, methods differ in the learning algorithms that have been employed for modeling , the amount of sequence information utilized and the integration of additional information such as protein structure , colocalization or interaction . while these static features (e.g. protein sequence, structure, co-localization and interaction) are informative, methods based on static features do not account for the dynamic spatiotemporal kinetics that may help accurately define the architecture of cell signaling networks. recent advances in liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry has enabled high-throughput protein phosphorylation profiling in time course studies . coupled with labeling techniques such as isobaric tagging (e.g. tmt) or stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (e.g. silac) and increasingly label-free-based approaches , tens of thousands of phosphorylation sites can be identified and quantified with high precision on a proteome-wide scale . computational approaches that integrate static features with dynamic phosphoproteome will enable kinase-specific substrate prediction in the context of dynamic cellular systems. here, we propose a positive-unlabeled ensemble learning algorithm to integrate kinase recognition motifs with dynamic phosphoproteomics data to predict novel substrates of relevant kinases of interest. extending on our previous model , the proposed algorithm addresses several key computational challenges faced in model training when using phosphoproteomics data by using a positive-unlabeled learning technique for an ensemble classification algorithm. first, the class distribution of the phosphoproteomics data is highly imbalanced due to the fact that experimentally verified substrates are sparse, resulting in vastly more negative training instances compared with positive instances. we address this by using repeated sampling from the phosphoproteomics data and creating an ensemble of classifiers each trained on a balanced training subset. second, the model training requires a set of negative instances to be provided. however, defining a true negative set is difficult because unannotated phosphorylation sites comprise a mix of negative and unidentified positive substrates. to overcome this problem, a positive-unlabeled learning procedure is implemented in the ensemble model for improving prediction sensitivity while retaining specificity by correcting for the prediction bias. we studied the behavior of the proposed positive-unlabeled ensemble approach using simulation on synthetic datasets and subsequently applied it to predict substrates of kinases akt and mtor (mammalian target of rapamycin) using a time-course phosphorylation dataset generated from insulin-stimulated profiling of cultured adipocytes. our results indicate that the proposed approach is highly accurate, based on an array of evaluation metrics, and is able to take advantage of both static information from amino acid sequences as well as dynamic information from phosphoproteomic data to predict kinase substrates.in this study, we developed a positive-unlabeled ensemble learning approach that enables the accurate prediction of kinase-specific substrates by integrating motif information derived from amino acid sequences surrounding the phosphorylation recognition sites with dynamic phosphorylation patterns quantified in large-scale time-series phosphoproteomics studies. we extended the positive-unlabeled learning techniques for ensemble learning and illustrated how such an application can improve the prediction sensitivity while retaining high specificity for kinase-substrate prediction. finally, we demonstrated the complementary nature of the static features extracted from sequence motif and the dynamic features extracted from phosphoproteomics data. compared with traditional sequence motif-centric methods, our study suggests an alternative approach for predicting kinase-specific substrates that incorporates and exploits the wealth of physiological information captured by large-scale phosphoproteomics studies. with the recent development of high-throughput methods promising to streamline the generation of large-scale phosphoproteomics data , we anticipate that the methods described here will become an increasingly valuable approach for enabling prediction of kinase substrates, while preserving the dynamic and cellular context of the biological system being studied.  
