power analysis and sample size estimation for sequence-based association studies motivation: statistical methods have been developed to test for complex trait rare variant (rv) associations, in which variants are aggre-gated across a region, which is typically a gene. power analysis and sample size estimation for sequence-based rv association studies are challenging because of the necessity to realistically model the underlying allelic architecture of complex diseases within a suitable analytical framework to assess the performance of a variety of rv association methods in an unbiased manner. summary: we developed seqpower, a software package to perform statistical power analysis for sequence-based association data under a variety of genetic variant and disease phenotype models. it aids epidemiologists in determining the best study design, sample size and statistical tests for sequence-based association studies. it also provides biostatisticians with a platform to fairly compare rv association methods and to validate and assess novel association tests. availability and implementation: the seqpower program, source code, multi-platform executables, documentation, list of association tests, examples and tutorials are available at http://bioinformatics.org/ spower.power analysis is one of the most crucial steps in designing complex trait genetic association studies. the aim is to determine the power to detect an association for a specified sample size or to estimate the sample size for a given power for a variety of genetic models and statistical methods. over the past decade, genomewide association studies using single nucleotide polymorphism markers have been highly successful in the study of complex diseases, with power analysis aided by software packages such as genetic power calculator and cats . currently, there is growing interest in detecting complex trait rare variant (rv) associations using next-generation sequencing (ngs) data. many sequence-based rv association methods have been developed to jointly analyze multiple snvs by aggregating them across a region, e.g. a gene.complexities arise, making power and sample size estimations for these rv association methods challenging. the allelic architecture of rvs is dependent on population genetic parameters, which are difficult to realistically model. additionally, within a region, the genetic effect sizes of variants are not uniform and non-causal variants as well as variants with bidirectional effects, e.g. protective and detrimental, can be present. also there can be genotyping error and missing data. this genetic complexity makes estimation of sample size and power for rv association studies challenging. owing to mathematical intractability, application of theoretical power analysis is limited. empirical power studies are also hindered by a lack of consistent implementation of many existing rv association methods. to perform power analysis, seqpower uses sequence data generated via advanced genetic simulation technique as well as data derived from real-world ngs studies. it generates qualitative and quantitative trait (qt) data based on observed variants in the simulated genetic region. analytic and empirical power analysis can be performed using a large variety of rv association methods.seqpower is a practical tool for investigators to design adequately powered rv association studies. although the true underlying genetic model is unknown, using a range of models, gene sizes, allelic architectures, effect sizes, etc., an investigator can determine whether a study has adequate power to at least detect associations with some of the genes involved in disease etiology. it is also an important tool to benchmark and comprehensively evaluate rv association tests, and also aid in the development of new statistical methodologies.  
