genome analysis power and sample-size estimation for microbiome studies using pairwise distances and permanova motivation: the variation in community composition between microbiome samples, termed beta diversity, can be measured by pairwise distance based on either presenceabsence or quantitative species abundance data. permanova, a permutation-based extension of multivariate analysis of variance to a matrix of pairwise distances, partitions within-group and between-group distances to permit assessment of the effect of an exposure or intervention (grouping factor) upon the sampled microbiome. within-group distance and exposure/intervention effect size must be accurately mod-eled to estimate statistical power for a microbiome study that will be analyzed with pairwise distances and permanova. results: we present a framework for permanova power estimation tailored to marker-gene microbiome studies that will be analyzed by pairwise distances, which includes: (i) a novel method for distance matrix simulation that permits modeling of within-group pairwise distances according to pre-specified population parameters; (ii) a method to incorporate effects of different sizes within the simulated distance matrix; (iii) a simulation-based method for estimating permanova power from simulated distance matrices; and (iv) an r statistical software package that implements the above. matrices of pairwise distances can be efficiently simulated to satisfy the triangle inequality and incorporate group-level effects, which are quantified by the adjusted coefficient of determination , omega-squared (x 2). from simulated distance matrices, available permanova power or necessary sample size can be estimated for a planned microbiome study. availability and implementation: http://github.com/brendankelly/micropower. contact:microbiome studies often compare groups of microbial communities with different environmental exposures, or to which different interventions have been applied. for example, a study may evaluate the difference between the respiratory tract microbial communities of human subjects with exposure to different antibiotic treatments.the fundamental measure in such a study is the count of community members (species or operational taxonomic unitsotus), typically accomplished via sequencing a marker gene such as the 16s ribosomal rna gene for bacteria. pairwise distance metrics facilitate standardized comparison of community membership between individual study subjects by addressing the problems of differential). the design of microbiome studies demands consideration of statistical poweran adequate number of subjects must be recruited to ensure that the effect expected from the exposure or intervention of interest can be detected. here, we focus on the power of 16s tag sequencing studies that are analyzed using pairwise distances (specifically, unifrac and jaccard distances) and permanova. unifrac is a distance metric based upon the unique fraction of branch length in a phylogenetic tree built from two sets of taxa. comparison of microbiome samples can be performed via unweighted unifrac, which considers strictly the presence or absence of taxa, or weighted unifrac, which also considers relative abundance . jaccard distance, a non-phylogenetic measure of difference between two sample sets, is calculated as one minus the ratio of the intersection to the union; it can also be calculated in unweighted (binary) or abundanceweighted fashion . the power of permanova, like the power of traditional analysis of variance, depends on the number of exposure or intervention groups (degrees of freedom), the number of subjects per group (residual degrees of freedom), the within-group distances (within-group sum of squares) and the size of the effect (the difference between the between-group sum of squares and within-group sum of squares). type ii error increases and statistical power decreases with more groups, fewer subjects, greater within-group distance and lesser effects . however, the pseudo-f ratio is not distributed like fishers f-ratio under the null hypothesis, so standard methods of power estimation for parametric anova do not apply to the studies analyzed by permanova . furthermore, the relationship between microbiome community structure and within-group distances is often obscure, and the effect size to be expected from anticipated exposures or planned interventions upon the microbiome is often uncertain. here, we present a framework for permanova power and sample size estimation tailored to marker-gene microbiome studies that will be analyzed with pairwise distances. we first describe a novel method for distance matrix simulation that permits modeling within-group pairwise distances according to pre-specified population parameters. we then demonstrate how to incorporate effects of different sizes within the simulated distance matrix. building on the capacity to accurately model within-and between-group distances, we present a simulation-based method for estimating permanova power. finally, we outline an r statistical software package (the r foundation for statistical computing, www.r-proj ect.orgr core) that implements the above, and provide examples of its use.the accurate estimation of statistical power for planned microbiome studies demands a detailed accounting of the steps involved in data analysis. we focused on the 16s rrna gene sequencing studies that are analyzed using pairwise distances (specifically, unifrac and jaccard distances) and permanova. to ensure adequate statistical power for such studies, one must quantify the expected withingroup variance and the effect to be expected from the planned exposure or intervention. we built a framework for permanova power estimation that depends upon prior knowledge of these two essential parameters. the planned sampling site and chosen pairwise distance metric influence both within-group variance and range of possible effect sizes (as quantified with x 2 ). we analyzed datasets from the hmp and other published studies to provide references from which the within-group distance distribution and expected effect can be estimated. these tools, combined with the micropower r package described above, permit power estimation for planned microbiome studies. since the unifrac distances depend on the phylogenetic tree of the otus, we reviewed the phylogenetic trees generated from the hmp projects v1v3 and v3v5 16s rrna gene sequencing data, and we observed that the distribution of phylogenetic tree branchthe range of observed effect sizes differs according to the metric of pairwise distance chosen for analysis. hmp data are shown to demonstrate a large effect (the degree of difference between two different human microbiome sampling sites) and a negligible effect (the degree of difference between skin sampling in the left versus right retroauricular crease) lengths was approximately log-normal. to simulate a phylogenetic tree for a set of simulated otu tables (the simtreelist function in the micropower package), we first extract all otu names from the simulated otu tables, set each otu name as a tip of the tree and finally generate random branch lengths to connect the tips, with the branch lengths specified according a log-normal distribution. the final step of random tree generation makes use of the ape packages rtree command (paradis, 2012). we explored other distributions of branch lengths. the distribution of the branch lengths in the simulated phylogenetic tree does impact the distribution of phylogenetic (e.g. unifrac) distances calculated from the simulated otu table. for example, simulating branch lengths according to a normal distribution inflates the distance variance. but we found that all distributions of phylogenetic tree branch lengths preserve the observed relationship between level of otu subsampling and mean distance, as well as the observed relationship between number of otus subsampled and distance standard deviation. la rosa et al. (2012) recently proposed another method for the detection of significant between-group differences in microbiome data based on parametric testing of overdispersed taxonomic data against the dirichlet-multinomial (dm) distribution and implemented their method as an r package, hmp. hmp allows the estimation of power or necessary sample size for studies with microbiome outcome measures, based on the framework of hypothesis testing at the level of the otu vectors themselves. however, the dm distribution must be specified, via parameters representing the degree of overdispersion, the number of taxa and the expected composition of taxonomic frequencies in both groups, in order to detect a significant difference. under the dm model, the effect size is defined by how far apart the vector of taxa frequencies are from each other. specifying the taxonomic frequencies is often difficult, especially when many such taxa are considered. in addition, one has to specify the number of reads, which can also be quite variable from sample to sample. the micropower package, in contrast, uses the distribution of pairwise distances to be expected from the chosen distance metric and planned sampling site, and provides data on empirical distributions for comparison (e.g.and). by using permanova, our method is non-parametric; by allowing for the use of different distance metrics, our method allows incorporation of phylogenetic relationships among the taxa in power calculation. we have demonstrated that the choice of distance metric may significantly influence the observed effect, and that the withingroup variance depends upon both the chosen distance metric and planned sampling site. by focusing on 16s rrna sequencing studies analyzed by pairwise distances and permanova significance testing, we have limited the application to power estimation for global measures of community structure. in some cases, there are advantages to modeling otu vectors themselves, rather than analyzing community structure via beta diversityparticularly in cases where categorical community types and transitions between community types may match observed biological phenomena . nevertheless, we believe that the presented method will prove useful given the utility of pairwise distances to the analysis of microbiome data and the intuitive appeal of an anova-type test in studies with categorical exposures/interventions and microbiome outcome measures. one limitation of our method and that of lais that these methods can only perform power calculation for categorical covariates. for a continuous covariate such as age or body mass index, one can test its association with microbiome composition using kernel-based regression , where the kernel matrix can be defined based on the pairwise distances. we can then perform power analysis using simulations or analytical calculation based on score test. alternatively, for the purpose of power calculation, one can discretize the data into categories and apply our proposed method, which should provide a conservative estimate of power. funding b.j.k. was supported by two national institutes of health t32 training grants (t32 ai055435 and t32 hl758627). r.g., r.g.c. and f.d.b. were supported by the penn center for aids research (5p30ai045008-15). r.g.c. and f.d.b. were supported by national institutes of health (u01 hl098957). j.d.l. was supported by national institutes of health (k24dk078228 and uh3-dk083981). h.l. was supported by national institutes of health (gm097505 and ca127334). the funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. conflict of interest: none declared.  
