ppdms—a resource for mapping small molecule bioactivities from chembl to pfam-a protein domains ppdms is a resource that maps small molecule bioactivities to protein domains from the pfam-a collection of protein families. small molecule bioactivities mapped to protein domains add important precision to approaches that use protein sequence searches alignments to assist applications in computational drug discovery and systems and chemical biology. we have previously proposed a mapping heuristic for a subset of bioactivities stored in chembl with the pfam-a domain most likely to mediate small molecule binding. we have since refined this mapping using a manual procedure. here, we present a resource that provides up-to-date mappings and the possibility to review assigned mappings as well as to participate in their assignment and curation. we also describe how mappings provided through the ppdms resource are made accessible through the main schema of the chembl database. availability and implementation: the ppdms resource and curation interface is available at https://systematic analyses of bioactive small molecules and their molecular targets and homologues form the basis of a number of novel applications in computational drug discovery and systems and chemical biology, including methods of target prediction , and for the establishment of functional relationships between proteins . to add precision to these methods, we have previously proposed a simple mapping heuristic of small molecule bioactivities to protein domains . here, we present a full implementation of the mapping to a relevant subset of biological assays stored in the current version of the chembl database . this implementation also accommodates edge cases that were unaddressed in the original implementationspecifically cases where more than one pfam-a domain could mediate small molecule binding. in the refined implementation, such cases were resolved manually. the ppdms server provides a platform to review and contribute manual assignments. previous computational approaches exist that link small molecule binding to specific protein domains, but these approaches use information extracted from crystal structures of protein-ligand complexes to transfer binding annotations between homologous proteins v c the author 2014. published by oxford university press.  
