an integrative somatic mutation analysis to identify pathways linked with survival outcomes across 19 cancer types motivation: identification of altered pathways that are clinically relevant across human cancers is a key challenge in cancer genomics. precise identification and understanding of these altered pathways may provide novel insights into patient stratification, therapeutic strategies and the development of new drugs. however, a challenge remains in accurately identifying pathways altered by somatic mutations across human cancers, due to the diverse mutation spectrum. we developed an innovative approach to integrate somatic mutation data with gene networks and pathways, in order to identify pathways altered by somatic mutations across cancers. results: we applied our approach to the cancer genome atlas (tcga) dataset of somatic mutations in 4790 cancer patients with 19 different types of tumors. our analysis identified cancer-type-specific altered pathways enriched with known cancer-relevant genes and targets of currently available drugs. to investigate the clinical significance of these altered pathways, we performed consensus clustering for patient stratification using member genes in the altered pathways coupled with gene expression datasets from 4870 patients from tcga, and multiple independent cohorts confirmed that the altered pathways could be used to stratify patients into subgroups with significantly different clinical outcomes. of particular significance, certain patient subpopulations within the last few years, studies using high-throughput technologies have highlighted the fact that the development and progression of cancer hinges on somatic alterations. these somatic alterations may disrupt gene functions, such as activating oncogenes or inactivating tumor suppressor genes, and thus dysregulate critical pathways contributing to tumorigenesis. therefore, precise identification and understanding of disrupted pathways may provide insights into therapeutic strategies and the development of novel agents. many large-scale cancer genomics studies, such as the cancer genome atlas (tcga) and the international cancer genome consortium (icgc), have performed integrated analyses to draft an overview of somatic alterations in the cancer genome . many of these studies have reported novel candidate cancer genes mutated at high and intermediate frequencies in specific cancers as well as across many cancer types . however, it is still a challenge to translate somatic mutations in tumors into the pathway model for clinical use . recently, in order to improve the clinical relevance and utility of somatic mutation analyses,proposed integrating somatic mutation data with molecular interaction networks for patient stratification. they demonstrated that inclusion of prior knowledge, captured in molecular interaction networks, could improve identification of patient subgroups with significantly different histological, pathological or clinical outcomes and discover novel cancer-related pathways or subnetworks. in a similar manner, other network-based methods have demonstrated that incorporating molecular networks and/or biological pathways can improve accuracy in identifying cancer-related pathways . one limitation of these network-based methods is that they are not designed to fully utilize large-scale somatic mutation data from multiple cancer types to determine which particular pathways are altered by somatic mutations across a range of human cancers. in addition, due to the incomplete knowledge of existing gene sets and/ or pathway databases, these methods are limited in detecting pathways based on a number of altered genes annotated in existing gene set and pathway databases. alternatively, the methods that build pathways de novo without incorporating biological prior knowledge can be applicable to detecting altered pathways, but these methods were also not designed to detect cancer-type specific or commonly altered pathways. to address these, we developed an algorithm named ntripath (network regularized sparse non-negative tri matrix factorization for pathway identification) to integrate somatic mutation, genegene interaction networks and gene set or pathway databases to discover pathways altered by somatic mutations in 4790 cancer patients with 19 different types of cancers. incorporating existing gene set or pathway databases enables ntripath to report a list of altered pathways across cancers, and make it easy to determine/compare which particular pathways are altered in a particular cancer type(s). in particular, the use of the large-scale genome-wide somatic mutations from 4790 cancer patients enables ntripath to explore modular structures of mutational data within a cancer type and/or across multiple cancer types (using matrix factorization) to identify cancer-type-specific or commonly altered pathways. in addition, the use of genegene interaction networks with somatic mutation and pathway databases enables ntripath to classify genes, which were not annotated in existing pathway databases, as new member genes of the identified altered pathways based on connectivity in the genegene interaction networks. the questions that we investigate here are: 1. whether large-scale integrative somatic mutation analysis that integrates somatic mutations across many cancer types with the genegene interaction networks and pathway database can reliably identify cancer-type-specific or common pathways altered by somatic mutations across cancers; 2. whether the identified pathways can be used as a prognostic biomarker for patient stratificationwith the assumption that the altered pathways contribute to cancer development and progression and, thus, impact survival.in these experiments, we demonstrated that the cancer-type-specific and commonly altered pathways identified by ntripath are biologically relevant to the corresponding cancer type and are associated with patient survival outcomes. we also showed that cancerspecific altered pathways are enriched with many known cancerrelevant genes and targets of available drugs, including those already fda-approved. these results imply that the cancer-specific altered pathways can guide therapeutic strategy to target the altered pathways that are pivotal in each cancer type.we conducted simulation experiments using synthetic datasets to investigate the performance of ntripath to discover cancer-typespecific altered pathways and identify new member genes in the pathways. then we performed experiments with tcga mutation profiles to identify cancer-type-specific altered pathways across cancers. in the experiments using tcga datasets, we first ran ntripath to identify cancer-type-specific altered pathways across cancers. to investigate the clinical relevance of the identified cancer-type-specific pathways, we collected gene expression data from tcga and independent datasets and performed consensus clustering using the member genes in the identified cancer-type specific pathways for patient stratification.  
