gene expression prada: pipeline for rna sequencing data analysis technological advances in high-throughput sequencing necessitate improved computational tools for processing and analyzing large-scale datasets in a systematic automated manner. for that purpose, we have developed prada (pipeline for rna-sequencing data analysis), a flexible, modular and highly scalable software platform that provides many different types of information available by multifaceted analysis starting from raw paired-end rna-seq data: gene expression levels, quality metrics, detection of unsupervised and supervised fusion transcripts, detection of intragenic fusion variants , homology scores and fusion frame classification. prada uses a dual-mapping strategy that increases sensitivity and refines the analytical endpoints. prada has been used extensively and successfully in the glioblastoma and renal clear cell projects of the cancer genome atlas program. availability and implementation: http://sourceforge.net/projects/ prada/transcriptome sequencing provides insights into the quantity, structure and composition of rna molecules in a biological sample. analytical tools for analysis of rna sequencing data are available , but those tools generally focus on single end points, such as quantitation of expression levels or identification of fusion transcripts. as the technology becomes more accessible, there is an increased need for computational pipelines that can process large numbers of raw rna-sequencing datasets quickly, accurately and comprehensively. for that purpose, we have developed prada (pipeline for rna-sequencing data analysis). prada was designed to be modular in the functional sense that different modules output different types of information on the transcripts. it implements resource management structures such as lsf and pbs, allowing quick scale-up for processing of thousands of rna-seq samples.the power of prada is based on (i) its scalability, (ii) its mapping to both transcriptomic and genome, a distinctive feature of prada in comparison with other rna analysis tools such as tophat-fusion and defuse, which rely on alignments of partial reads to identify gene fusions, (iii) its modularity and (iv) its comprehensive repertoire of output information from the incorporated modules. it enables the user to compute multiple analytical metrics using one software package and to do so for large numbers of samples at once in a fully automated fashion. it has been tested on thousands of rna-seq samples from a wide variety of tumor types and normal tissues in tcga. prada is designed to be run out of the box with little configuration, and is compatible with pbs and lsf compute clusters. a single prada tarball, including binaries of the packages it relies on, a comprehensive and detailed manual, and test fastq/bam files, are freely available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/prada/ and through galaxy at http://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/view/ siyuan/prada. funding: the content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent nci/nih. supported in part by nci grant number ca143883/chapman foundation/dell foundation.  
