structural bioinformatics pre-calculated protein structure alignments at the rcsb pdb website with the continuous growth of the rcsb protein data bank (pdb), providing an up-to-date systematic structure comparison of all protein structures poses an ever growing challenge. here, we present a comparison tool for calculating both 1d protein sequence and 3d protein structure alignments. this tool supports various applications at the rcsb pdb website. first, a structure alignment web service calculates pairwise alignments. second, a stand-alone application runs alignments locally and visualizes the results. third, pre-calculated 3d structure comparisons for the whole pdb are provided and updated on a weekly basis. these three applications allow users to discover novel relationships between proteins available either at the rcsb pdb or provided by the user. availability and implementation: a web user interface is available at http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/workbench/workbench.do. the source code is available under the lgpl license from http://www.biojava.org. a source bundle, prepared for local execution, is available fromat its core, the rcsb pdb protein comparison tool contains a new implementation of the two structure alignment algorithms combinatorial extension (ce) and fatcat (both rigid body and flexible versions) . both the ce and fatcat algorithms detect aligned fragment pairs (afps) during the alignment process. these afps are based on similarities in local geometry. there is a difference in how initial afps are combined in order to calculate an optimal alignment. ce applies the process of combinatorial extension to find possible continuous alignment paths leading to an optimal alignment. the resulting alignment is a rigid-body based alignment. in contrast to this, fatcat allows the introduction of twists into the alignment to whom correspondence should be addressed.with the consequence that different regions of a protein structures can undergo different geometric transformations. this is required in order to be able to deal with protein flexibility. a protein that undergoes significant domain re-arrangement during iron binding is transferrin. it consists of two domains that can move relative to each other. fatcat in its flexible mode can easily detect an alignment between the apo and holo forms that covers 95 of both protein chains. (e.g. pdb id 1iej chain a and pdb id 1btj chain a). however, using rigid body superposition only a partial alignment is possible (both ce and fatcat using the rigid mode only). one drawback of the flexible mode is that if distantly related proteins are being aligned, sometimes twists between unrelated regions can be introduced (e.g. alignment of pdb id 1cdg chain a and pdb id 1tim chain a), in which case it is better to run the alignments in rigid mode. a limitation of both ce and fatcat in their original versions is that they compute sequence order-dependent alignments. a number of difficult to detect relationships between proteins have been published, some of which require sequence order independence for a correct alignment . an algorithm that can detect such order-independet alignments is triangle match . dali in its early versions also could detect permutated proteins; however, this feature seems to have been lost in its recent implementations, . we have recently improved ce to be able to detect circularly permutated alignments (. this implementation is available as an option of the rcsb protein comparison tool.the rcsb pdb website now provides a state of the art protein comparison tool that can be used as a web service and for local access. further, pre-calculated all-against-all comparisons of sequences and 3d protein structures, respectively, are provided on a weekly basis. currently, the calculations are done on a whole-chain basis. we are working on another set of comparisons using domainbased comparisons of all chains with an enhanced version of jce that includes handling of circular permutations. an alternative is to use tops++fatcat , which provides a 10-fold speed up as compared to fatcat. the domain assignment problem is non-trivial, and for newly released protein structures page: 2985 29832985  
