systems biology predicting drug–target interactions from chemical and genomic kernels using bayesian matrix factorization motivation: identifying interactions between drug compounds and target proteins has a great practical importance in the drug discovery process for known diseases. existing databases contain very few experimentally validated drugtarget interactions and formulating successful computational methods for predicting interactions remains challenging. results: in this study, we consider four different drugtarget interaction networks from humans involving enzymes, ion channels, g-protein-coupled receptors and nuclear receptors. we then propose a novel bayesian formulation that combines dimensionality reduction, matrix factorization and binary classification for predicting drugtarget interaction networks using only chemical similarity between drug compounds and genomic similarity between target proteins. the novelty of our approach comes from the joint bayesian formulation of projecting drug compounds and target proteins into a unified subspace using the similarities and estimating the interaction network in that subspace. we propose using a variational approximation in order to obtain an efficient inference scheme and give its detailed derivations. finally, we demonstrate the performance of our proposed method in three different scenarios: (i) exploratory data analysis using low-dimensional projections, (ii) predicting interactions for the out-of-sample drug compounds and (iii) predicting unknown interactions of the given network. availability: software and supplementary material are available atthe functions of pharmaceutically useful target protein families such as enzymes, ion channels, g-protein-coupled receptors (gpcrs) and nuclear receptors can be modulated by interacting them with drug compounds. our knowledge about the genomic space of target proteins and the chemical space of drug compounds is piling up as a result of high-throughput experimental projects that analyze the genome and high-throughput chemical compound screening with biological assays. unfortunately, our knowledge about the relationship between these two spaces remains quite limited to whom correspondence should be addressed. due to laborious and costly experimental procedures. existing databases such as chembl , drugbank , kegg drug and supertarget contain information about a small number of experimentally validated interactions. hence, successful computational methods for identifying interactions between drug compounds and target proteins make genomic drug discovery significantly efficient and effective. computational approaches can be used to guide experimentalists towards new predictions and to provide supporting evidence for their experimental results. traditional computational methods can be grouped into three categories: (i) docking simulations , (ii) ligand-based approaches and (iii) literature text mining . docking simulations require structural information of target proteins, which is not mostly available for some protein families such as gpcrs. ligand-based approaches compare a candidate ligand with the known ligands of a target protein and may not perform well for target proteins with a small number of known ligands. literature text mining based on keyword search cannot be used to detect unknown interactions and suffers from the redundancy due to non-standard naming practice for drug compounds and target proteins. recently, there are many machine learning algorithms proposed for predicting drugtarget interactions using the chemical properties of drug compounds, the genomic properties of target proteins and the known interaction network . the main assumption of these studies is that similar drug compounds are likely to interact with similar target proteins. these similarities between drug compounds and target proteins are often encoded using kernel functions designed specifically for chemical compounds and protein sequences, respectively . the most basic statistical approach is to formulate the interaction network inference problem as a binary classification task between drugtarget pairs using pairwise kernel functions . however, this approach can be computationally quite heavy due to the high number of drugtarget pairs. supervised bipartite graph inference maps drug compounds and target points into a unified space (i.e. pharmacological space) using the chemical and genomic similarities and tries to estimate the interaction network using a distance-based procedure in that subspace . local models are also used to predict drugtarget interaction networks after their successful applications for proteinprotein interaction networks, metabolicin order to illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed method, called kernelized bayesian matrix factorization with twin kernels (kbmf2k), we present the results of three experimental scenarios:(i) exploratory data analysis using low-dimensional projections, (ii) predicting interactions for the out-of-sample drug compounds and (iii) predicting unknown interactions of the given network.in this study, we consider four different drugtarget interaction networks from humans involving enzymes, ion channels, gpcrs and nuclear receptors. we then propose a novel bayesian formulation that combines kernel-based nonlinear dimensionality reduction , matrix factorization and binary classification for predicting drugtarget interaction networks using only chemical similarity between drug compounds and genomic similarity between target proteins. the novelty of our approach comes from the joint bayesian formulation of projecting drug compounds and target proteins into a unified subspace using the similarities and estimating the interaction  
