predicting giant transmembrane β-barrel architecture motivation: the -barrel is a ubiquitous fold that is deployed to accomplish a wide variety of biological functions including membrane-embedded pores. key influences of -barrel lumen diameter include the number of -strands (n) and the degree of shear (s), the latter value measuring the extent to which the -sheet is tilted within the -barrel. notably, it has previously been reported that the shear value for small antiparallel -barrels (n 24) typically ranges between n and 2n. conversely, it has been suggested that the -strands in giant antiparallel -barrels, such as those formed by pore forming cholesterol-dependent cytolysins (cdc), are parallel relative to the axis of the -barrel, i.e. s = 0. the s = 0 arrangement, however, has never been observed in crystal structures of small -barrels. therefore, the structural basis for how cdcs form a -barrel and span a membrane remains to be understood. results: through comparison of molecular models with experimental data, we are able to identify how giant cdc -barrels utilize a near parallel arrangement of -strands where s = n/2. furthermore, we show how side-chain packing within the -barrel lumen is an important limiting factor with respect to the possible shear values for small -barrels (n 24 -strands). in contrast, our models reveal no such limitation restricts the shear value of giant -barrels (n 24 -strands). giant -barrels can thus access a different architecture compared with smaller -barrels.the -barrel structure is central to a large number of functionally diverse proteins. -barrels are deployed as enzymes [e.g. the outer membrane protease, ompt ], as water-soluble transport proteins [e.g. lipocalins (, as fluorescent proteins [e.g. green fluorescent protein (] and as membrane-embedded channels [e.g. porins (. the properties of small -barrels have been well-characterized. in particular, the shear value (s) of the -barrel describes the stagger of individual -strands. for a given number of -strands (n), the to whom correspondence should be addressed. greater the shear value, the greater the slope each -strand is relative to the axis of the -barrel lumen. conversely, the lower the s-value, the closer to parallel the -strand is relative to the axis of the barrel lumen (supplementary). (a shear value of 0 results in -strands that lie parallel to the barrel lumen.) most importantly, when the number of -strands and the shear value is known for a barrel, the diameter can be calculated for cylindrical -barrels with a high degree of accuracy . for small -barrels (n 24) that are structurally characterized, the s-value of these structures lies between n and 2n . to date, the structures of over 190 transmembrane -barrels have been determined ; analysis of these data reveal that membrane -barrels obey the same structural rules observed for their soluble counterparts. a subset of transmembrane -barrels includes structures that are formed by homo-oligomerization. examples of such -barrels include tolc and -pore forming toxins such as -haemolysin . although membrane -barrels have contributed to our understanding of small -pore forming toxins, less is known about the giant homo-oligomeric -barrel pores formed by members of the cholesterol-dependent cytolysins (cdc)/membrane attack complex/perforin (macpf) superfamily . this superfamily includes key bacterial virulence factors produced by gram positive bacteria as well as the major immune effectors of mammals . no crystal structure of a macpf or cdc pore has been determined to date, however, the 28 resolution cryo-electron microscopy (em) structure of pneumolysin reveals that this cdc forms a giant 240 diameter -barrel that contains 38 monomers . to make this -barrel, each pneumolysin monomer contributes two amphipathic -hairpins, i.e. four antiparallel -strands . initial models presented through em studies of the cdc, pneumolysin, suggested that the -strands are parallel to the lumen in order to reach and fully span the lipid bilayer as a -barrel . however, such an arrangement would not be consistent with a shear value between n and 2n as observed in the known crystal structures of transmembrane -barrels . here, using molecular models, we show that the optimal shear value of these giant -barrel structures is s = n/2, i.e. arranged in a near parallel fashion with respect to the -barrel lumen. we further demonstrate that -barrels with 24 -strands are unable to readily access such architecture as a consequence of luminal side-chain packing constraints.  
