predicting physiologically relevant sh3 domain mediated protein–protein interactions in yeast motivation: many intracellular signaling processes are mediated by interactions involving peptide recognition modules such as sh3 domains. these domains bind to small, linear protein sequence motifs which can be identified using high-throughput experimental screens such as phage display. binding motif patterns can then be used to computationally predict protein interactions mediated by these domains. while many proteinprotein interaction prediction methods exist, most do not work with peptide recognition module mediated interactions or do not consider many of the known constraints governing physiologically relevant interactions between two proteins. results: a novel method for predicting physiologically relevant sh3 domain-peptide mediated proteinprotein interactions in s. cerevisae using phage display data is presented. like some previous similar methods, this method uses position weight matrix models of protein linear motif preference for individual sh3 domains to scan the proteome for potential hits and then filters these hits using a range of evidence sources related to sequence-based and cellular constraints on protein interactions. the novelty of this approach is the large number of evidence sources used and the method of combination of sequence based and protein pair based evidence sources. by combining different peptide and protein features using multiple bayesian models we are able to predict high confidence interactions with an overall accuracy of 0.97. availability and implementation: domain-motif mediated interaction prediction (domo-pred) command line tool and all relevant datasets are available under gnu lgpl license for download from http://www.baderlab.org/software/domo-pred. the domo-pred command line tool is implemented using python 2.7 and c .proteinprotein interactions (ppis) are physical associations between protein pairs in a specific biological context. their knowledge provides important insights into the functioning of a cell. previously, experimental detection of ppis was limited to labor intensive techniques such as co-immunoprecipitation or affinity chromatography . though the detected ppis are largely accurate, these techniques are difficult to apply to whole proteome analysis. this led to the development of various high-throughput ppi detection protocols such as mass-spectrometry combined with affinity-purification, yeast twohybrid and next-generation sequencing to detect ppis at whole genome level . however, genome-scale methods are also highly resource intensive and single projects and techniques do not cover all known protein interactions. further, they only cover interactions in one organism at a time. computational approaches designed to predict reliable and novel ppis based on experimental interaction datasets have the advantages that they are inexpensive to apply to genomes, including those that are v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.we developed a novel method for predicting physiologically relevant ppis in yeast. this method combines diverse binding site (peptide) features, including presence in a disordered region of the protein, surface accessibility, conservation across different yeast species, and structural contact with the sh3 domain, as well as protein features such as cellular proximity, shared biological process, similar molecular function, correlated gene expression and sequence signature. two separate bayesian models are used to combine peptide and protein features. their respective posterior probabilities are further combined using bayes rule for predicting high confidence interactions. the combination of peptide and protein models achieved a higher accuracy of 0.97 compared to individual models on a curated benchmark dataset from. disordered region and surface accessibility data from the peptide feature set and biological process, cellular location and sequence signature information from the protein feature set are able to separate positive from negative interactions significantly better than other features. the method presented is generic and modular in nature. given binding peptide and feature data, we expect it can be used to predict other prm mediated ppis in yeast and other organisms. additional features such as network topology, protein expression and text mining derived protein relationships can be added to our framework. future development includes testing this method on other prms in different organisms, especially human.  
