sequence analysis predicting post-translational lysine acetylation using support vector machines motivation: lysine acetylation is a post-translational protein modification and a primary regulatory mechanism that controls many cell signaling processes. lysine acetylation sites are recognized by acetyltransferases and deacetylases through sequence patterns (motifs). recently, we used high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify 3600 lysine acetylation sites on 1750 human proteins covering most of the previously annotated sites and providing the most comprehensive acetylome so far. this dataset should provide an excellent source to train support vector machines (svms) allowing the high accuracy in silico prediction of acetylated lysine residues. results: we developed a svm to predict acetylated residues. the precision of our acetylation site predictor is 78 at 78 recall on input data containing equal numbers of modified and non-modified residues. availability: the online predictor is available atpost-translational protein modification (ptm) is a fundamental regulatory mechanism that controls many cell signaling processes . lysine acetylation is a reversible ptm with a well known role in regulating gene expression through the modification of core histone tails. individual reports have shown that lysine acetylation is also involved in other diverse biological processes suggesting a broader regulatory function. however, technological limitations have prevented a global analysis of lysine acetylation until recently. our study on the human in vivo acetylome provided a global picture of lysine acetylation . we used highresolution mass spectrometry to identify 3600 lysine acetylation sites on 1750 proteins and found that lysine acetylation targets large macromolecular complexes that are involved in diverse cellular processes predominantly in the nucleus but also in the cytoplasm. consensus sequence analysis revealed stringent constraints on the to whom correspondence should be addressed. local sequence context around the acetylation sites. for example, amino acids with a bulky side chain were enriched in the 2 and +1 positions, which is in agreement with the frequent occurrence of acetylated lysines in ordered regions of proteins. in contrast, positively charged amino acids were almost completely excluded from the 1 position. these observations suggest that such patterns in the primary sequence may allow the differentiation between acetylated and non-acetylated lysines as a basis for in silico prediction. various algorithms have already been applied to the prediction of other post-translational modifications. for example, for the prediction of phosphorylation events netphos uses neural networks , whereas scansite employs a profile method . in previous studies, we constructed speciesspecific phosphorylation site predictors on the basis of support vector machines (svm) . these svm-based predictors are part of the analysis toolkit of the phosida database . the basic idea of svms is to transform observed features of a given instance into a vector-based feature space . each dimension of this feature space reflects a certain attribute. after the transformation of positive (e.g. acetylated lysines) and negative instances (e.g. non-acetylated lysines) into the vector space, a maximum margin hyperplane that separates the two datasets is created. here, the feature space is the sequence context of the acetylation site. for the classification of a new instancein this case the sequence to be analyzed for possible acetylationit has to be transformed into the feature space and categorized depending on the vector localization relating to the separating hyperplane. we took advantage of the large number of in vivo acetylation sites from our human dataset to create the first high-accuracy acetylation site predictor and make it publicly available via phosida.  
