structural bioinformatics predicting protein residue–residue contacts using deep networks and boosting motivation: protein residueresidue contacts continue to play a larger and larger role in protein tertiary structure modeling and evaluation. yet, while the importance of contact information increases, the performance of sequence-based contact predictors has improved slowly. new approaches and methods are needed to spur further development and progress in the field. results: here we present dncon, a new sequence-based residue residue contact predictor using deep networks and boosting techniques. making use of graphical processing units and cuda parallel computing technology, we are able to train large boosted ensembles of residueresidue contact predictors achieving state-of-the-art performance. availability: the web server of the prediction method (dncon) isthe prediction of protein residueresidue contacts is seen by many as an important intermediate step for gaining traction on the challenging task of tertiary structure prediction. this idea has been spurred further recently by encouraging results that demonstrate that predicted contact information can indeed be used to improve tertiary structure prediction and effectively transform some unfolded structures into their folded counterpart . the addition of a contact guided structure modeling category in the critical assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction (casp) on a rolling basis has also aided in sparking interesting in residueresidue contact prediction. beyond the scope of tertiary structure prediction, protein residueresidue contacts have been used in drug design , model evaluation and model ranking and selection . existing methods for residueresidue contact prediction can be broadly categorized as sequence based or template/structure based. sequence-based methods attempt to predict contacts from the primary sequence or information that can be derived directly from the sequence. a number of these sequence-based methods use various machine learning methods such as support vector machines , neural networks , hidden markov models , markov logic networks , random forests and deep architectures to make residueresidue contact predictions. other sequence-based approaches have used evolutionary information contained in multiple sequence alignments (msas) to identify possible contacts . methods using msas were among the first sequence-based approaches tried but suffered from low accuracies caused by indirect or transitive correlations. more recent developments byusing large msas and sparse covariance matrices have been better able to identify contacting residues from the alignments and resulted in significant improvements in accuracy. template-/structurebased methods operate by extracting contact information from structural data. for template-based methods, this structural data comes in the form of templates (i.e. homologous proteins with known structure). once templates have been found and aligned, residueresidue contacts are predicted using the contacts found in the structures . given the relatively high quality of the tertiary structure models generated by template-based techniques, residueresidue contact data is most useful when dealing with hard targets (i.e. those for which a structural template does not exists or hard to identify by sequence alone). for hard targets, the conformational search is much larger and overall model quality is usually much lower. thus, there is great interest in high quality sequence-based residueresidue contact predictors that do not rely on template data. such contact predictors would be able to provide additional information when generating models for hard targets. unfortunately, recent assessments of state-ofthe-art sequence-based contact predictors routinely report average accuracies in the 2030 range, indicating a need for further development and new methods and ideas . here we present a new sequence-based residueresidue contact predictor using deep networks (dns) and boosting. our method differs from other implementations of deep architectures owing to its boosted nature, overall network architecture and training procedure. more specifically, for training, we initially use an unsupervised approach to learn patterns in the data and initialize to whom correspondence should be addressed. parameters and then fine tune them with back propagation. furthermore, by using the computational power of graphical processing units (gpus) and cuda, we were able to train large boosted ensembles of dn classifiers achieving state-ofthe-art performance.in this work, we have presented dncon, a new method for protein residueresidue prediction. the approach is based on two concepts, boosted ensembles and dns, which are novel in. accuracy of the top l and l/5 long-range contact predictions for a boosted ensemble (13-win). the graph plots accuracy as a function of the number of rounds of boostingshort ( 1) 0.789 0.657 0.532 medium ( 1) 0.648 0.552 0.463 medium ( 2) 0.749 0.678 0.607 long ( 1) 0.550 0.476 0.415 long ( 2) 0.638 0.578 0.552 the context of residueresidue contact prediction. when compared with the current state-of-the-art, dncon performs favorably, achieving state-of-the-art performance in the critical area of accuracy on top medium and long range contact predictions. when allowing for less than residue level precision, the performance of dncon is even more impressive. given the strong contact signal present for short-and medium-range contacts and the fast flexible architecture of dns, in the future, we plan on modifying the dns such that they can incorporate and propagate predicted short-to medium-range contacts when making longer range predictions. we also plan on refining the parameters and network architecture used to increase performance. the method is available as a web service at http://iris.rnet.missouri.edu/ dncon/.  
