structural bioinformatics predicting protein b-sheet contacts using a maximum entropy-based correlated mutation measure motivation: the problem of ab initio protein folding is one of the most difficult in modern computational biology. the prediction of residue contacts within a protein provides a more tractable immediate step. recently introduced maximum entropy-based correlated mutation measures (cmms), such as direct information, have been successful in predicting residue contacts. however, most correlated mutation studies focus on proteins that have large good-quality multiple sequence alignments (msa) because the power of correlated mutation analysis falls as the size of the msa decreases. however, even with small autogenerated msas, maximum entropy-based cmms contain information. to make use of this information, in this article, we focus not on general residue contacts but contacts between residues in-sheets. the strong constraints and prior knowledge associated with-contacts are ideally suited for prediction using a method that incorporates an often noisy cmm. results: using contrastive divergence, a statistical machine learning technique, we have calculated a maximum entropy-based cmm. we have integrated this measure with a new probabilistic model for-contact prediction, which is used to predict both residue-and strand-level contacts. using our model on a standard non-redundant dataset, we significantly outperform a 2d recurrent neural network architecture, achieving a 5 improvement in true positives at the 5 false-positive rate at the residue level. at the strand level, our approach is competitive with the state-of-the-art single methods achieving precision of 61.0 and recall of 55.4, while not requiring residue solvent accessibility as an input. availability:the problem of ab initio protein folding is one of the most difficult in modern computational biology. the prediction of residue contacts within a protein provides a more tractable immediate step, and these contacts can be used as a guide to generate the tertiary structure of the protein. correlated mutation (cm) methods, first pioneered by valencia and colleagues , take a multiple sequence alignment (msa) profile of evolutionarily related proteins and attempt to predict residues that have co-evolved. if residues have co-evolved, this may imply proximity in the native structure. for example, if a small residue increases in size by mutating, a proximal residue may have to reduce in size to retain the viability of the fold. many cm methods have been developed using pearson correlation coefficients , adaptions of mutual information , perturbation methods and dynamic bayesian networks . a recently developed correlated mutation measure (cmm), the direct information , is a global measure that is derived from modelling the entire msa, specifically defining the probability of each sequence being a member of the msa. this distribution shares the same low-order moments as the msa, and the maximum entropy principle is used to fully specify the distribution.have used this measure to successfully aid the folding of a diverse range of proteins. however, like the majority of cm studies, these authors focused on a small number of proteins for which there is a large high-quality msa because all cmms suffer as the size of the msa decreases . a key distinction of this work is that we focus on a wide selection of proteins that have a variety of sizes of msas. we also automate the generation of msas and do not rely on a large high-quality msa being available. in an attempt to improve the power of cm methods, the dynamic bayesian network of burger and van nimwegen (2010) incorporates primary-sequence distance into an informative prior for the model. the incorporation of this knowledge substantially improves the results. inspired by this, we have chosen to predict the lateral pairs of residues in interacting-strands,-contacts, using a cmm.-contacts are associated with strong constraints, for example, sequential pairs of residues form-contacts and residues can only be in-contact with up to two other residues. these constraints mean-contacts are ideally suited for prediction using a cmmthe noise associated with the cmm is compensated for by incorporating the strong-contact constraints. the prediction of-contacts can be used to aid tertiary structure prediction , explore energy landscapes , in designing proteins and understanding protein folding pathways . to whom correspondence should be addressed.we highlight betapro, the work of, which uses a three-stage method to predict-topologies and was the first method to take into account the global nature of-topologies. firstly, a 2d recurrent neural network is used to generate a residue-level pairing map. secondly, a dynamic programming algorithm is applied to this map to derive strand-level pseudo binding energies and finally, a graph matching algorithm is used to predict strand contacts. there are a variety of other existing methods for-contact prediction. they include the use of statistical potentials , information theoretic approaches , integer linear optimization , hybrid neural network-probabilistic models and markov logic networks (mlns;). in this article, we have developed a global probabilistic model for-contact prediction, inspired by the secondary structure models of schmidler (2002), which can be used to predict both residue-and strand-level interactions. we have integrated this model with a cmm, similar in nature to direct information, and using this model on a standard dataset, significantly outperform the recurrent neural network of betapro and are competitive with the best single methods currently available. unlike these methods, our approach does not require additional information such as residue solvent accessibility to be entered as an input to the model. in common with other methods, we assume the native secondary structure is known. however, our framework can be easily extended to predict both secondary structure and-contacts simultaneously, and this is the focus of our current work.  
