annocript: a flexible pipeline for the annotation of transcriptomes able to identify putative long noncoding rnas the eukaryotic transcriptome is composed of thousands of coding and long non-coding rnas (lncrnas). however, we lack a software platform to identify both rna classes in a given tran-scriptome. here we introduce annocript, a pipeline that combines the annotation of protein coding transcripts with the prediction of putative lncrnas in whole transcriptomes. it downloads and indexes the needed databases, runs the analysis and produces human readable and standard outputs together with summary statistics of the whole analysis.rna-seq has effectively portrayed the transcriptional complexity in eukaryotes demonstrating the widespread transcription of lncrnas in a diverse group of organisms. however, annotation of de novo generated transcriptomes, remains a complex task requiring efficient management of large datasets. current tools for annotation identify coding sequences by similarity searches while lncrnas are typically predicted relying on sequence composition, lack of conservation and lack of orfs . to fulfill the need of a single platform, we developed annocript, a pipeline linking together these processes. it uses multiple programs to annotate sequences based on similarity and composition. it is capable of assigning protein names, domains, metabolic pathways , enzyme classes , go terms and other annotations. further, it can identify putative lncrnas based upon lack of any protein/domain similarity, lack of long orfs and high non-coding potential. by default, a transcript is classified as lncrna if it satisfies all the following conditions: (i) length 200 nucleotides, (ii) lack of similarity with any protein, domain and other short ncrna from rfam and rrnas, (iii) longest open reading frame (orf) 100 amino acids and (iv) non-coding potential score 0.95.annocript is a pipeline for the annotation of transcriptomes. the pipeline is optimized to run quickly without bargaining on accuracy. it is the first platform with the ability to annotate coding genes along with the prediction of putative lncrnas without the need for a reference genome or comparative supporting data.  
