structural bioinformatics prediction and analysis of nucleotide-binding residues using sequence and sequence-derived structural descriptors motivation: nucleotides are multifunctional molecules that are essential for numerous biological processes. they serve as sources for chemical energy, participate in the cellular signaling and they are involved in the enzymatic reactions. the knowledge of the nucleotideprotein interactions helps with annotation of protein functions and finds applications in drug design. results: we propose a novel ensemble of accurate high-throughput predictors of binding residues from the protein sequence for atp, adp, amp, gtp and gdp. empirical tests show that our nsitepred method significantly outperforms existing predictors and approaches based on sequence alignment and residue conservation scoring. the nsitepred accurately finds more binding residues and binding sites and it performs particularly well for the sites with residues that are clustered close together in the sequence. the high predictive quality stems from the usage of novel, comprehensive and custom-designed inputs that utilize information extracted from the sequence, evolutionary profiles, several sequence-predicted structural descriptors and sequence alignment. analysis of the predictive model reveals several sequence-derived hallmarks of nucleotide-binding residues; they are usually conserved and flanked by less conserved residues, and they are associated with certain arrangements of secondary structures and amino acid pairs in the specific neighboring positions in the sequence.nucleotides are multifunctional molecules that are essential for numerous biological processes. the nucleotides are structural units of nucleic acid chains, and they serve as sources for chemical energy, participate in the cellular signaling and they are involved in the enzymatic reactions. as of june 2010, 5293 proteins in the protein data bank (pdb) are annotated as nucleotide binding, and nucleotides constitute 15 of biologically relevant ligands included in this database . to whom correspondence should be addressed. this demonstrates the ubiquity and the substantial interest in the proteinnucleotide interactions. past two decades observed a substantial effort in identification and characterization of the nucleotide-binding sites. most of these approaches are based on the analysis of known nucleotidebinding sequences and structures, which were used to identify conserved motifs in protein sequences and structures. for instance the walker a and b sequence motifs were identified for the adenine nucleotide-binding proteins . a fuzzy recognition template was proposed for the characterization of the adenylateprotein interactions . the johnson motif was reported to cover one-third of the adenine mononucleotide-binding proteins .proposed a motif that interacts with the adenine and is shared by five different protein folds . thorntons group applied structural motifs in identification and prediction of adenine-binding sites for functionally uncharacterized proteins . moreover, an empirical scoring function was developed for prediction of the nucleotide-binding sites in protein structures . the above methods characterize the sequence motifs for a relatively narrow range of the nucleotide protein interactions, usually only for a selected interaction mode for a single nucleotide type, or they require tertiary protein structure as the input, which substantially limits their utility. the large number of protein chains with unknown structure motivates the development of computational tools for high-throughput sequence-based annotation of the nucleotide-binding residues for a wide range of the nucleotides. currently, there is only one method for the prediction of binding sites/residues from the protein sequence for a comprehensive set of nucleotides . two other methods predict the atp-and gtp-binding residues, respectively . these two methods input information extracted from the sequence and the corresponding sequence profile using a window centered on the predicted residue into a machine learning classifier that predicts propensity of this residue to interact with the atp or gdp. we propose an ensemble of predictors of binding residues for five common nucleotides in the pdb including atp, adp, amp, gtp and gdp. each of these nucleotides binds to at least 50 diverse proteins, i.e. their chains share pairwise sequence similarity at 40, which means that they cannot be easily annotated using the sequence alignment. at the same time, availability of 50 chains provides sufficient amount of annotated interactions to build a well-performing predictor. although the interaction modes for some  
