prediction of conserved long-range rna-rna interactions in full viral genomes motivation: long-range rna-rna interactions (lris) play an important role in viral replication, however, only a few of these interactions are known and only for a small number of viral species. up to now, it has been impossible to screen a full viral genome for lris experimentally or in silico. most known lris are cross-reacting structures (pseudoknots) undetectable by most bioinformatical tools. results: we present lriscan, a tool for the lri prediction in full viral genomes based on a multiple genome alignment. we confirmed 14 out of 16 experimentally known and evolutionary conserved lris in genome alignments of hcv, tombusviruses, flaviviruses and hiv-1. we provide several promising new interactions, which include compensatory mutations and are highly conserved in all considered viral sequences. furthermore, we provide reactivity plots highlighting the hot spots of predicted lris. availability: source code and binaries of lriscan freely available for download atlong-range rna-rna interactions (lris) have been marginally reported in various positive strand rna viruses like tombusvirus (8 in cirv and tbsv), hepacivirus (5 in hcv), coronavirus (1 in tgev), flavivirus (3 in denv and wnv), luteovirus (2 in bydv), apthovirus (2 in fmdv), pestivirus (1 in csfv) and human immunodeficiency virus (5 in hiv-1) . according to their definition, a long-range interaction spans distances between a few hundred and several thousands of nucleotides (26 kb in tgev). lris are often located in loop regions or internal bulges of local rna structures (known as cis-acting regulatory elements) and therefore build pseudoknot-like structures. various programs have been developed for general rna-rna interaction prediction, which can be classified into five groups : the first group neglects intra-molecular base-pairs, to whom correspondence should be addressed based on the hybrids minimum free energy (mfe). members of this group are rnaduplex and rnaplex or rnahybrid . the second category includes rnacofold and pairfold . these tools concatenate two interacting rna sequences and calculate the mfe of the joint rna sequences. the third group considers intra-molecular and inter-molecular rna-rna interactions in separated steps, however only one binding site is predicted. members of this group are intarna or rnaup . the fourth group considers more complex rna-rna interactions and allows also more than one binding site. this group includes tools like ractip , interna or inrnas . the final group contains e.g. petcofold , rnaaliduplex , irbis , ripalign and simulfold . these tools consider not only a pair of single sequences, like the tools mentioned above, they use multiple sequence alignments as input. with this comparative method, it is possible to reduce the false-positive rate by incorporating evolutionary conserved information. all of these programs have different properties, unsuitable for viral genomes. for example, rnaaliduplex is unable to predict pseudoknots and neglects intra-molecular rna foldings. petcofold considers both, intra-and inter-molecular interactions as well as pseudoknots, but returns per default only a single secondary structure, which makes the detection of multiple functional binding sites impossible. ripaligns running time makes the program not applicable to viral sequences and irbis is only applicable for predictions of rna interactions related to rna splice sites. up to now, we are aware of a single program that is designed for lri prediction, called covarna . this tool detects long-range nucleotide covariation from multiple sequence alignments of eukaryotic genomes using an index-based algorithm to find clusters of covarying base-pairs. the extended function covstat determines the statistical significance of observed covariation cluster. covarna has very strict filter criteria and is therefore very conservative in predicting lris. for short genomes, such as viral genomes, this leads to almost no predicted interactions. here, we present lriscan for detecting long-range rna-rna interactions in complete viral genome alignments without prior knowledge. sparse alignment interaction dotplots in combination  
