sequence analysis prediction of indel flanking regions in protein sequences using a variable-order markov model motivation: insertion/deletion (indel) and amino acid substitution are two common events that lead to the evolution of and variations in protein sequences. further, many of the human diseases and functional divergence between homologous proteins are more related to indel mutations, even though they occur less often than the substitution mutations do. a reliable identification of indels and their flanking regions is a major challenge in research related to protein evolution, structures and functions. results: in this article, we propose a novel scheme to predict indel flanking regions in a protein sequence for a given protein fold, based on a variable-order markov model. the proposed indel flanking region (indelfr) predictors are designed based on prediction by partial match (ppm) and probabilistic suffix tree (pst), which are referred to as the ppm indelfr and pst indelfr predictors, respectively. the overall performance evaluation results show that the proposed predictors are able to predict indelfrs in the protein sequences with a high accuracy and f 1 measure. in addition, the results show that if one is interested only in predicting indelfrs in protein sequences, it would be preferable to use the proposed predictors instead of hmmer 3.0 in view of the substantially superior performance of the former. contact:as new protein sequences are discovered on an everyday basis and protein databases continue to grow exponentially with time, analysis of protein families, understanding their evolutionary trends and detection of remote homologues have become extremely important. the proteins that evolve from the same ancestor protein are called homologous proteins. a protein molecule is created in a cell as a chain of amino acids, called the polypeptide chain. a polypeptide chain can be represented as a string of characters by using the letter code of each amino acid. this string of characters is called the primary structure of a protein. in addition to the primary structure, a protein has secondary and tertiary structures . secondary structure of a protein refers to well-determined local sequence elements, such as an alpha helix, a beta strand or any other local sequence element that is neither a helix nor a strand. these other local sequences, usually called loops or coils, may have a large variety of shapes. these secondary structure elements of a protein can be combined together to create a motif, which is a simple combination of a few consecutive secondary structure elements with a specific geometric arrangement, such as helix-loop-helix or strand-loop-helix. some, but not all, motifs are associated with specific biological functions. the tertiary structure of a protein refers to the 3-dimensional structure of the protein, where the secondary structure elements form the physical core of the 3-dimensional structure, and loops are located on the surface of the tertiary structure. a domain refers to a combination of several secondary elements and motifs, which may not necessarily be contiguous and which are usually packed in a compact structure. a protein may contain a single domain or several different domains, or several copies of the same domain. normally, the proteins are classified into families based on the existence of a specific motif or domain in their structure, where the existence of such a motif or domain has a major indication about the biological role of the protein. the structural classification of proteins (scop) database is a comprehensive ordering of all the proteins of the known structures, according to their evolutionary and structural relationships , where the fundamental unit of this classification is a domain. in this database, the proteins have been classified into families, superfamilies, common fold and, finally, into classes at the top level of the structural hierarchy. it is known that new proteins have evolved mainly through indel mutations . indel mutations have been found to occur more often in the loop regions , and mainly in essential proteins and in those proteins that interact highly with others . the functional divergence between homologous proteins may also be caused by indel mutations that occur in the regions between secondary structures of a protein . further, it has been found that differences among species, as well as many of the human diseases, are related to indel mutations, which occur less often than substitution mutations do . sequence alignment is one of the most commonly performed tasks in bioinformatics, and has been used in many applications, including sequence annotation, phylogenetic tree estimation, evolutionary analysis, secondary structure prediction and database search . in recent years, considerable effort has been devoted to the development of protein alignment algorithms that can efficiently detect mutations, and infer structural and functional relationships among the aligned protein sequences. by using position-variant probability to score indel mutations, the profile hidden markov model (phmm;) is able to use the fact that indel mutations occur more frequently in some parts of a protein more than other parts (e.g. in the loop regions) . several software packages, such as hmmer and sam , have implemented the phmmbased alignment algorithms. among these packages, hmmer is the most-used software package in protein database search and comparison. a collection of phmms covering many protein families have been generated using hmmer, and they are available in the pfam database . the disadvantage of using phmm-based alignments for detecting mutations would be that the corresponding alignment algorithms assume the occurrence of mutations in the protein sequence to follow a fixed first-order markov chain. when a pair of protein sequences has been aligned, an indel region is defined as a gap in any of the two sequences. segments of protein sequence immediately before and after an indel region are called flanking regions (see supplementary). the database called indelfr (indel flanking region) database contains sequence and structure information of 2 925 017 indels with their flanking regions, including their positions, length, amino acid composition and secondary structure . in the indelfr database, the structure-based sequence alignment program pdbefold has been used to align homologous non-redundant proteins obtained from the astral95 database , which in turn has used the non-redundant protein domains from the scop database that have similarity levels as high as 95. it has been found that there exists a strong relationship between indels and their flanking regions . the objective of this article is, therefore, to propose a novel scheme to predict indel flanking regions in a protein sequence, based on a variable-order markov model (vomm) of the flanking regions. we propose two indel flanking region (indelfr) predictors: one predictor using prediction by partial match (ppm) and other using probabilistic suffix tree (pst) .in conclusion, the results show that if one is interested only in predicting the indel flanking regions in protein sequences, then it would be preferable to use the proposed predictors instead of using hmmer 3.0 in view of the substantially superior. average accuracy and f 1 measure values for the proposed ppm and pst predictors with d = 4 and that obtained using hmmer 3.0 over all the protein sequences contained in the selected 11, 14 and 18 protein folds from the all-protein, all-protein and and protein (a/b) classes, respectively, for (a) indelfr database, (b) sabmark-superfamily set and (c) sabmark-twilight setperformance of the former. it should be noted that if hmmer 3.0 is used for prediction, one would need as many phmms as the number of families in a given fold, while only one proposed predictor is needed for a given fold. moreover, it should be noted that the proposed indelfr predictors are built in a fully automated manner without using any prior assumption about the occurrence of mutations in the protein sequences, as in the case of scoring schemes. we anticipate that our study will not only enable future studies on the modeling of indel mutations, but will also open up new avenues for research concerning protein evolution, structures and functions.  
