gene expression annotare—a tool for annotating high-throughput biomedical investigations and resulting data computational methods in molecular biology will increasingly depend on standards-based annotations that describe biological experiments in an unambiguous manner. annotare is a software tool that enables biologists to easily annotate their high-throughput experiments, biomaterials and data in a standards-compliant way that facilitates meaningful search and analysis. availability and implementation: annotare is available frommeta-data describing high-throughput investigations enable unambiguous interpretation of experiments, experiment reproducibility and meaningful searching and analysis of the resulting data. the microarray community has developed mage-tab , an annotation format for microarray data. mage-tab allows laboratories to manage, exchange and publish wellannotated biomedical data using a spreadsheet-based paradigm. several public repositories and analysis tools for microarray data such as arrayexpress , stanford microarray database (smd) , mev , bioconductor and caarray support microarray data submissions with mage-tab annotations, and open source tools are available for conversion of legacy formats into mage-tab . in order to improve the volume, quality and granularity of annotations, there is a compelling need for software that enables biologists to easily annotate such data. we describe annotare, a tool that facilitates annotation of gene expression data in mage-tab format. annotare is available under the terms of the mit license at http://code.google.com/p/annotare/. to whom correspondence should be addressed.annotare is a collaborative open-source software development effort involving many institutions. the tool is freely available from annotares project web site http://code.google.com/p/annotare/. updates and improvements are planned in response to current usability studies. a web-based version of annotare is also under development. not only will a web-based version be able to take advantage of finding key ontology terms or publications via the internet, but it will be configurable so that it can be directly connected to a software package or database. both arrayexpress and smd will provide access to the web-based annotare tool to construct and view high-throughput experimental annotations. in addition to the web-based version of annotare, future work will provide support for the mage-tab version 1.1 as well as rna-seq data. in particular, annotare will be extended to allow researchers to annotate their rna-seq or chip-seq experiments to satisfy the minseqe data sharing requirements for high-throughput sequence data (a.submitted for publication).  
