prediction of individualized therapeutic vulnerabilities in cancer from genomic profiles motivation: somatic homozygous deletions of chromosomal regions in cancer, while not necessarily oncogenic, may lead to therapeutic vulnerabilities specific to cancer cells compared with normal cells. a recently reported example is the loss of one of the two isoenzymes in glioblastoma cancer cells such that the use of a specific inhibitor selectively inhibited growth of the cancer cells, which had become fully dependent on the second isoenzyme. we have now made use of the unprecedented conjunction of large-scale cancer genomics profiling of tumor samples in the cancer genome atlas (tcga) and of tumor-derived cell lines in the cancer cell line encyclopedia, as well as the availability of integrated pathway information systems, such as pathway commons, to systematically search for a comprehensive set of such epistatic vulnerabilities. results: based on homozygous deletions affecting metabolic enzymes in 16 tcga cancer studies and 972 cancer cell lines, we identified 4104 candidate metabolic vulnerabilities present in 1019 tumor samples and 482 cell lines. up to 44 of these vulnerabilities can be targeted with at least one food and drug administration-approved drug. we suggest focused experiments to test these vulnerabilities and clinical trials based on personalized genomic profiles of those that pass preclinical filters. we conclude that genomic profiling will in the future provide a promising basis for network pharmacology of epistatic vulnerabilities as a promising therapeutic strategy. availability and implementation: a web-based tool for exploring all vulnerabilities and their details is available at http://cbio.mskcc. org/cancergenomics/statius/ along with supplemental data files.comprehensive cancer profiling studies, such as the cancer genome atlas (tcga) and other studies by the international cancer genome consortium, have helped identify many genomic alterations in cancer genomes, including homozygous deletions that often result from genomic instability. deletions that confer a proliferative advantage, such as the homozygous deletion of a tumor-suppressor gene, are selected in cancer cells via clonal expansion . other deletions with relatively little effect on the tumors proliferative capabilities can be seen at low frequencies when they are, by chance, co-selected with other oncogenic events. both types of deletions, however, result in the loss of a locus that often contains multiple genes. such a deletion may not be lethal to a cell if one or more unaffected partner genes (e.g. an isoenzyme) can sufficiently carry the load of the deleted partner, but the loss of these passenger genes may create therapeutic vulnerabilities . on loss of an initial gene, interference with the function of its partner gene(s) may result in cell death, a phenomenon known as synthetic lethality.recently published a case study for synthetic lethality for glioblastoma. enolase performs an essential function in cells, catalyzing the conversion of 2-phosphoglycerate and phosphoenolpyruvate in the glycolytic pathway. at least three known genes encode enolase isoenzymes: eno1, eno2 and eno3. eno1 has been shown to be homozygously deleted in certain glioblastomas, probably as a passenger event to the deletion of erffi1, but the tumor cells are able to survive because of the activity of other enolase encoding genes, in particular eno2. although the loss of eno1 alone may not be lethal, cancer cells lacking eno1 are selectively vulnerable to the loss of eno2 (i.e. synthetic lethality), whereas non-cancer cells with intact eno1 can tolerate a loss of eno2. most of the cancer genomics research focuses on identifying driver alterations by frequency or occurrence pattern and exploiting them to treat cancer . however, there is an opportunity to exploit synthetic lethalities specific to particular populations of cancer cells created by the homozygous loss of genes responsible for core cellular functions. these are rare patient-specific events, and there are no existing tools for identifying these vulnerabilities for a given patient. a system that can efficiently analyze genomic data from biological samples to identify particular therapeutic vulnerabilities in cancer cells specific to those samples based on potential synthetic lethal partner genes can identify personalized treatments to inhibit or kill those cancer cells. here, we describe a computational method, statius (named after the roman poet, publius papinius statius, who is known for his famous poems achilleid and thebaid), to systematically predict metabolic vulnerabilities in tumor samples from genomic profiles. we present results obtained from the analysis of 16 publicly available cancer studies . integrating data, in an automated manner, from multiple data resourcesincluding several pathway databases, drugtarget annotation resources and cancer genomics utilitieswe were able to predict sample-specific metabolic vulnerabilities, which result from a homozygous deletion event in the corresponding sample, and list drugs that can help exploit each particular vulnerability. the complete list of the predicted vulnerabilities can be found at http://cbio.mskcc.org/ cancergenomics/statius.  
