prediction of microrna targets in caenorhabditis elegans using a self-organizing map motivation: micrornas (mirnas) are small non-coding rnas that regulate transcriptional processes via binding to the target gene mrna. in animals, this binding is imperfect, which makes the computational prediction of animal mirna targets a challenging task. the accuracy of mirna target prediction can be improved with the use of machine learning methods. previous work has described methods using supervised learning, but they suffer from the lack of adequate training examples, a common problem in mirna target identification, which often leads to deficient generalization ability. results: in this work, we introduce mirsom, a mirna target prediction tool based on clustering of short 3-untranslated region (3-utr) substrings with self-organizing map (som). as our method uses unsupervised learning and a large set of verified caenorhabditis elegans 3-utrs, we did not need to resort to training using a known set of targets. our method outperforms seven other methods in predicting the experimentally verified c.elegans true and false mirna targets. availability: mirsom mirna target predictions are available atmicrornas (mirnas) are an abundant class of small, noncoding rnas found in diverse organisms . mirnas direct the post-transcriptional repression and degradation of mrnas by binding to their sequence with partially complementary sites and thus impact a variety of biological functions, including cell differentiation, organism growth, development and tumor suppression . while the amount of published mirnas is increasing and a large number of genes is predicted to be regulated by mirnas, only a small fraction of mirnatarget genes are experimentally verified. for example, there are now 175 caenorhabditis elegans mirnas annotated in mirbase database , but only 15 entries for six of these mirnas in the latest release of tarbase . as experimental identification to whom correspondence should be addressed. of mirna targets is difficult, the computational prediction of the target genes is a valuable tool to investigate mirna functions and in guiding related wetlab experiments. occurrence of perfect seed matches (seed = the nucleotides 18 of the mirna 5-end) from the 3-untranslated region (3-utr) of the mrna, evolutionary conservation of the mirnatarget relationship and the free energy g of the mirna:mrna duplex are the most often used determinants in mirna target recognition . however, in animals, mirna binding to the mrna is imperfect, and a perfect seed matching site is neither necessary nor sufficient for downregulation . thus, the importance of mirna 3 base pairing to compensate for weak seed pairing has become another factor in identifying potential mirna targets . also the sequence context of the mirna target site and the amount of sites in a 3-utr are suggested to have effect on the mirna binding efficacy . in all, the predictions given by different tools are diverse, and the amount of overlapping mirna:target gene predictions is small . the use of machine learning methods can improve the accuracy of mirna target prediction . however, the performance of these methods is dependent on the quantity and quality of the dataset used in the training. the number of experimentally validated mirna true and false targets is small, and while we have some knowledge about mirna binding to the target site, our knowledge regarding false target sites is limited. this problem can be avoided by using unsupervised learning. in this work, we show how the selforganizing map (som) can be used to identify potential mirna target sites from c.elegans 3-utr sequences. the som is a neural network algorithm widely used to categorize large, high-dimensional datasets by mapping the data into a smaller dimension, typically into a 2d lattice of interconnected neurons. each neuron of the som contains a reference model, which represents a local domain in the input space. in bioinformatics, som is applied to problems like gene expression data analysis , study of codon usage , clustering of protein sequences , gene finding and identification of transcription factor binding sites . we trained the som using short substrings of c.elegans 3-utr sequences so that the putative target sites for each mirna were clustered in one or in two adjacent neurons in the lattice. as the clustering is based on theoverall similarity of the training strings, the som captures not only those verified mirna target sites with perfect 7mer and 8mer seed matches, but also those sites with more imperfect matches. the som contains the whole repertoire of putative mirna target sites ordered according to similar seed complementarity, so it likely includes also the target predictions for currently unknown mirnas.we have here introduced a new machine learning-based method, mirsom, for mirna target finding. our method is founded on the basic knowledge about mirna target sites: these sites have imperfect complementarity with the mirna sequence, where the most crucial part is the mirna seed, these sites are preferentially located in the 3-utr of the transcript and they are accessible to mirna binding. this means that a chunk of short substrings of the 3-utrs are mirna target sites. we sought these sites by clustering short 3-utr substrings with the som. the training data consisted of all possible 22-nt long substrings extracted from verified c.elegans 3-utrs, and the trained som contains, besides the information about the target sites of mirnas known today, also a view of the mutual similarity of mirna sequences. the fact that 90 of the mirna clusters reside in a single neuron of the lattice implies that the som is well organized, and it is quite probable that also the clusters for mirnas yet to be found from c.elegans are located in one or two nearby neurons of the map. once trained, the som can be applied, not only to find putative targets for new c.elegans mirnas, but also to find the targets for the orthologous mirnas in other worms thus enabling the study of target conservation. as mirsom uses only the filtering by site accessibility to post-process the initial target sites obtained from the som, it opens up a simplification to the mirna target prediction, but still works well in finding the verified mirna target sites, while keeping the number of predictions moderate. a common problem in mirna target finding is the small number of experimentally verified mirnatarget genes, which has hindered efforts to develop machine learning methods for target prediction tasks. in particular, this makes it hard to build a supervised model whose performance is highly dependent on the quantity and quality of the positive and negative training datasets used. the unsupervised learning algorithm used by mirsom clusters the putative target sites for each mirna objectively, using no knowledge about the verified true and false targets until the optimal total free energy threshold for the site accessibility is defined. when compared with nbmirtar, a method using supervised machine learning, mirsom finds 18 of the 20 experimentally verified targets while nbmirtar predicts 16 of 20. these are the two best results in the comparison (tables 1 and 2). since both of these tools are also very specific in their predictions, it suggests that mirna target prediction truly can be improved by the use of machine learning methods. the standard som algorithm has some limitations, like the non-adaptable fixed architecture, which is relative to the expected number and structure of the clusters. instead of using an algorithm that would adaptively determine the number of clusters , we searched experimentally for such size and weighting schema for the standard som that would work best in this particular problem. as the solution does not necessarily need a more sophisticated architecture, we decided to keep the original som algorithm which is well known and easy to understand. mirsom finds well those verified mirna targets which include a perfect 7mer or 8mer seed match, and also most of those target genes with a shorter or otherwise imperfect mirna seed match. it also successfully rejects the sites from known false target genes with a perfect seed match by using the total energy filter to the initial prediction set. the energy threshold used, which relies on just a few verified mirnatarget gene interactions presently available, should be adjusted as more mirnatarget genes in c.elegans are verified. also, the som used in the initial target site finding step is trained with verified 3-utr data, so it may be not suitable for finding mirna target sites from other sequence data, for example from 5-utrs and the coding region. this is because the sequence characteristics, like nucleotide composition and functional elements, of these regions of mrna differ from the 3-utrs, and the clustering result using these sequences would likely be different. we demonstrate here that mirsom can identify targets in nematodes and it should be possible to construct soms for other species. future studies will be aimed at verifying targets in more complex organisms such as human and mice.  
