prediction of novel pre-micrornas with high accuracy through boosting and svm high-throughput deep-sequencing technology has generated an unprecedented number of expressed short sequence reads, presenting not only an opportunity but also a challenge for prediction of novel micrornas. to verify the existence of candidate micrornas, we have to show that these short sequences can be processed from candidate pre-micrornas. however, it is laborious and time consuming to verify these using existing experimental techniques. therefore, here, we describe a new method, mird, which is constructed using two feature selection strategies based on support vector machines (svms) and boosting method. it is a high-efficiency tool for novel pre-microrna prediction with accuracy up to 94.0 among different species. availability: mird is implemented in php/perl+mysql+r and can be freely accessed atmicrornas, short rnas (2025 nt) that perform their functions by guiding mrna transcriptional degradation or translational suppression , have various functions in organ development. for example, they mediate switching of chromatin remodeling complexes in neural development and participate in transcriptional circuits that control skeletal muscle gene expression and embryonic development . increasingly, evidencepage: 1437 14361437mird has two applications in pre-microrna prediction: (i) giving the probability of a candidate pre-microrna to be a real one; and (ii) extracting the probable pre-micrornas from deep-sequencing data. to demonstrate how to use the mird web server, we submitted a sample data in fasta format as an example . the default parameters for feature selecting strategy, minimal free energy of the secondary structure and paired nucleic acid number were selected . as shown in, the prediction results contain the probabilities of submitted candidate sequence to be real pre-microrna, information such as the secondary structure and the minimum free energy. users can also submit files containing shortread sequences or information of read locations on the genome . the candidate pre-mirna sequences will be extracted from the submitted data. mird will then analyze these candidate pre-mirna sequences and return results as shown in.  
