prediction of nuclear export signals using weighted regular expressions (wregex) motivation: leucine-rich nuclear export signals (ness) are short amino acid motifs that mediate binding of cargo proteins to the nuclear export receptor crm1, and thus contribute to regulate the localization and function of many cellular proteins. computational prediction of nes motifs is of great interest, but remains a significant challenge. results: we have developed a novel approach for amino acid motif searching that can be used for nes prediction. this approach, termed wregex (weighted regular expression), combines regular expressions with a position-specific scoring matrix (pssm), and has been implemented in a web-based, freely available, software tool. by making use of a pssm, wregex provides a score to prioritize candidates for experimental testing. key features of wregex include its flexibility, which makes it useful for searching other types of protein motifs, and its fast execution time, which makes it suitable for large-scale analysis. in comparative tests with previously available prediction tools, wregex is shown to offer a good rate of true-positive motifs, while keeping a smaller number of potential candidates. availability: wregex is free, open-source software available fromcomputational prediction of protein features is being increasingly applied to investigate several aspects of protein function and regulation, such as proteinprotein interactions , post-translational modifications and subcellular localization . in eukaryotic cells, dynamic transport between the nucleus and the cytoplasm is an important regulatory mechanism for many cellular proteins. active nuclear import and export is carried out by soluble receptors termed importins and exportins, respectively, which escort their cargo proteins through the nuclear pore complex (gorlich). importins and exportins recognize and bind specific amino acid motifs in their cargo proteins, which function as nuclear localization signals (nlss) or nuclear export signals (ness). one of the best-studied types of nuclear transport signal is the leucine-rich nes that mediates binding of cargo proteins to the nuclear export receptor crm1 . a leucine-rich ness typically consists of a short stretch of amino acids containing several hydrophobic residues (not necessarily leucine) with a characteristic pattern. initial studies of a limited number of ness led to propose a consensus nes pattern, with four conserved hydrophobic residues represented by 14 separated by a variable number of intervening residues (represented by x). this consensus pattern has been progressively expanded and refined through the analysis of a larger number of experimentally confirmed ness . these studies, mostly based on sequence alignment, suggested that residues at positions other than the conserved 14 may also contribute to nes activity. for example, acidic residues glu, asp were found to be overrepresented in functional ness . further insight into nes features has been recently obtained through structural analyses of the crm1nes-binding interface . the crystal structures of crm1nes complexes showed that ness fit into a rigid hydrophobic groove on the surface of the receptor, and that a fifth hydrophobic residue 0 in the nes, amino-terminal to 1 , may increase the affinity of the nes/crm1 interaction . these structural analyses also revealed that acidic residues in certain positions may contribute to nes affinity by interacting with a basic surface flanking crm1 hydrophobic groove , thus providing a biological explanation to the previously noted overrepresentation of acidic amino acids in ness. altogether, these previous studies have unveiled the remarkable complexity of the crm1-dependent nes. in addition to the complex nature of the signal, the identification of physiologically relevant ness is further hampered by the fact that amino acid motifs that conform to the nes pattern may be found in hydrophobic protein cores, where they would be unavailable for crm1 binding. a valid strategy for nes identification may begin by mapping amino acid segments with crm1-dependent export activity (active nes motifs) in the protein of interest. if the 3d structure of the protein is known, the solvent accessibility of these motifs may then be evaluated and finally, their physiological relevance can be validated by mutagenesis. in the first step of this strategy, the use of efficient computer-based nes prediction tools may play an important role. several nes-prediction tools have been developed to date. these include programs that apply regular expressions derived from the nes consensus pattern, such as elm as well as machine-learning-based programs, such as netnes and nessential . we have recently compared the performance of elm and netnes using these programs to predict candidate nes motifs in human deubiquitinases (dubs) . the more recent nessential program was not available at the time this comparison was carried out. predicted candidates were subsequently tested using an in vivo nuclear export assay . in our hands, the ability of elm to identify amino acid motifs with nuclear export activity was superior to that of netnes, although the estimated positive predictive value (26.6 for netnes and 38.0 for elm) was relatively low for both programs . we have devised and tested a novel approach, termed weighted regular expressions (wregex) that can be applied to the prediction of functional amino acid motifs, including ness. wregex combines the use of a regular expression with a position-specific scoring matrix (pssm). in the case of nes prediction, the pssm takes into account the potential contribution of each nes residue (not those at the conserved hydrophobic positions) to nes activity. in this study, we submit wregex to a series of comparisons with nessential and elm, and progressively optimize its regular expression and training pssm. the features of wregex in comparison to these existing tools, as well as the potential application of wregex to the identification of other functional motifs in proteins besides ness are discussed. we have implemented wregex as a web interface accessible to any researcher.we have developed and tested a novel approach for motif searching consisting on the combination of both a regular expression and a pssm. this approach, termed wregex, can be regarded as an evolution of the eukaryote linear motif (elm) resource . importantly, the introduction of a pssm provides a score that may help prioritizing candidates for experimental testing. our initial motivation to develop wregex was the prediction of nes motifs. in this regard, wregex compares well with the most recently developed nes predictor, nessential , being faster, and offering a better compromise between the number of potential candidates to test and the number of true positives. although we have focused here on nes motif searching, wregex is a generic tool that can be used for searching other functional protein motifs. thanks to the novel use of groups in the regular expression, the pssm can be computed based on patterns rather than on strict positions. as a consequence, there is no need to make use of the artificial concept of alignment gaps, which has no utility when considering the physical conformation of the protein motif. wregex also offers the possibility of considering input motif weight when building the pssm. this is useful when the motif has a quantifiable activity rather than a yes/no effect. if this is the case, scores derived from an activity assay can be used for building the pssm. another important feature of wregex is its fast execution, which make this tool useful for large-scale database search.. results of nes prediction using wregex e. graphs show the score assigned by wregex e to each predicted nes motif versus the activity score experimentally assigned to each motif using a nuclear export assay. green circles to the right and the left of the threshold indicate true positives and true negatives, respectively. red circles to the right and the left of the threshold indicate false positives and false negatives, respectively. black circles represent nt candidates  
