structural bioinformatics prediction of peptides binding to the pka riiα subunit using a hierarchical strategy motivation: favorable interaction between the regulatory subunit of the camp-dependent protein kinase (pka) and a peptide in a-kinase anchoring proteins (akaps) is critical for translocating pka to the subcellular sites where the enzyme phosphorylates its substrates. it is very hard to identify akaps peptides binding to pka due to the high sequence diversity of akaps. results: we propose a hierarchical and efficient approach, which combines molecular dynamics (md) simulations, free energy calculations, virtual mutagenesis (vm) and bioinformatics analyses, to predict peptides binding to the pka rii regulatory subunit in the human proteome systematically. our approach successfully retrieved 15 out of 18 documented rii-binding peptides. literature curation supported that many newly predicted peptides might be true akaps. here, we present the first systematic search for akap peptides in the human proteome, which is useful to further experimental identification of akaps and functional analysis of their biological roles. contact:it is critical to understand how the functions of kinases are regulated. a classic kinase is camp-dependent protein kinase, also known as protein kinase a (pka) . pka is a heterotetramer composed of two catalytic (c) subunits and two regulatory (r) subunits. the regulatory subunit (r) has four isoforms, ri, ri, rii and rii. each r subunit contains an n-terminal dimerization/docking (d/d) domain followed by an inhibitor site and two tandem camp binding domains. the d/d domain is a four anti-parallel helix bundle, which provides a stable and hydrophobic surface for peptides in a-kinase anchoring proteins (akaps). the proteinprotein interaction between the pka r subunit dimer and akap makes the enzyme locate at the subcellular sites where it phosphorylates the substrates to initiate downstream signal transduction (; to whom correspondence should be addressed.). it is no doubt that the identification of akaps is critical for understanding the functional roles of pka. akaps share similar functional properties but have quite diverse sequences and structures , which makes it extremely difficult to identify akap proteins solely based on sequence or structural similarity . consequently, only a limited number of akaps have been identified so far in human . numerous computational approaches have been developed to predict the binding peptides of modular domains, such as sh2, sh3, ww and pdz . the success of these approaches on various systems demonstrated the efficiency of the computational methods to predict the transient and weak binding between protein domains and peptides. since there are not many known akap peptides and no sequence motif for akap peptides has been detected, it is not straightforward to apply these methods to identify pkaakap interactions. here, we developed a hierarchical approach by integrating information of binding free energy calculation, secondary structure prediction, transmembrane (tm) prediction and sequence conservation analyses of candidate peptides to predict putative akaps in the human genome. since only crystal structure between akap peptide and pka rii is available, here we focused on predicting akaps specific for rii. our approach is readily applicable to identify the binding partners of other regulatory subunit isoforms of pka as well. our approach includes the following steps: (i) the swissprot database was screened to find potential akap peptides using a position specific scoring matrix (pssm) derived from the virtual mutagenesis (vm;, b) results and prior knowledge; (ii) secondary structure for each candidate peptide was predicted and the peptides without helices were removed (17 of the 18 known akap peptides were predicted to form helices); (iii) tm domain for each candidate peptide was predicted and the peptides located within tm regions were removed (all known akap peptides were predicted outside tm regions); and (iv) conservation analysis across seven vertebrate species was conducted on each remaining peptide and the nonconserved ones were removed (all known akap peptides are conserved). the top 500 putative akap peptides predicted from the human proteome included the 14 known ones. literature curation also suggested that our predictions are able to identify new akap peptides. we believe that this systematic prediction of akap peptides from the  
