sequence analysis prediction of transporter targets using efficient rbf networks with pssm profiles and biochemical properties transporters are proteins that are involved in the movement of ions or molecules across biological membranes. currently, our knowledge about the functions of transporters is limited due to the paucity of their 3d structures. hence, computational techniques are necessary to annotate the functions of transporters. in this work, we focused on an important functional aspect of transporters, namely annotation of targets for transport proteins. we have systematically analyzed four major classes of transporters with different transporter targets: (i) electron, (ii) protein/mrna, (iii) ion and (iv) others, using amino acid properties. we have developed a radial basis function network-based method for predicting transport targets with amino acid properties and position specific scoring matrix profiles. our method showed a 10-fold cross-validation accuracy of 90.1, 80.1, 70.3 and 82.3 for electron transporters, protein/mrna transporters, ion transporters and others, respectively, in a dataset of 543 transporters. we have also evaluated the performance of the method with an independent dataset of 108 proteins and we obtained similar accuracy. we suggest that our method could be an effective tool for functional annotation of transport proteins.membrane proteins play a vital role in living organisms, such as transport of ions and molecules across membranes, binding to small molecules within extracellular space, recognition processes in immune system, energy transduction, and so on. transporters are one of the major classes of membrane proteins, spanning cell membranes and forming an intricate system of pumps and channels. they are different in their membrane topologies, energy coupling mechanisms and the specifics of their substrates . transporters are generally classified into channels/pores, electrochemical and active transporters, group to whom correspondence should be addressed. translocators, electron carriers, as well as factors involved in transport systems . the transport primarily involves ions, proteins, mrna and electrons. the classification of transporters based on different families as well as their targets remains an important problem for the advancement of structural and functional genomics. recently, few methods have been proposed for discriminating transport proteins based on their functions. gromiha andanalyzed the amino acid composition of transporters and developed a neural network-based method for classifying them into channels/pores, electrochemical and active transporters.) utilized nearest neighbor and hidden markov model methods, which integrate sequence similarity search and topological analysis into a machine-learning framework for categorizing transporters. in our previous work , we have systematically analyzed the amino acid composition, residue pair preference and amino acid properties in six different families of transporters. utilizing the information, we have developed a radial basis function (rbf) network method based on profiles obtained with position-specific scoring matrices (pssms) for discriminating transporters belonging to three different classes and six families. in this work, we focused on another important aspect of functional annotation of transporters, i.e. the prediction of transporter targets. first, we constructed a transporter database with target information from the latest version of uniprot database . the database was then divided into four major classes of transporters based on their transport targets. the four classes are electron transporters, protein/mrna transporters, ion transporters and other transporters. we have systematically analyzed the characteristic features of amino acid residues and developed a radial basis network for discriminating transporter targets using amino acid properties and pssm profiles. our method showed a 10-fold cross-validation accuracy of 90.1, 80.1, 70.3 and 82.3 for electron transporters, protein/mrna transporters, ion transporters and others. we evaluated the performance of this method with an independent dataset of 108 proteins and obtained an accuracy of 92.6, 77.8, 69.4 and 80.6 for electron transporters, protein/mrna transporters, ion transporters and others, respectively. a web server has been developed for discriminating transporters based on different targets and it is available online for the users. finally, we developed a protocol to analyze newly discovered genomic sequences to annotate putative transporters and their transport targets. we propose that our method could be an effective tool in the annotation of transporters in genomic sequences.  
