sequence analysis predna: accurate prediction of dna-binding sites in proteins by integrating sequence and geometric structure information motivation: proteindna interactions often take part in various crucial processes, which are essential for cellular function. the identification of dna-binding sites in proteins is important for understanding the molecular mechanisms of proteindna interaction. thus, we have developed an improved method to predict dna-binding sites by integrating structural alignment algorithm and support vector machinebased methods. results: evaluated on a new non-redundant protein set with 224 chains, the method has 80.7 sensitivity and 82.9 specificity in the 5-fold cross-validation test. in addition, it predicts dna-binding sites with 85.1 sensitivity and 85.3 specificity when tested on a dataset with 62 proteindna complexes. compared with a recently published method, bindn, our method predicts dna-binding sites with a 7 better area under the receiver operating characteristic curve value when tested on the same dataset. many important problems in cell biology require the dense non-linear interactions between functional modules be considered. thus, our prediction method will be useful in detecting such complex interactions.proteindna interactions play essential roles in a variety of vital biological processes, such as dna replication, transcription, packaging . for example, the interactions between dna and transcription factors are important for modulating the process of gene replication and transcription . the interactions of dna and histones are involved in chromosome packaging in the cell nucleus . moreover,have shown that mutations of dna-binding residues, such as those on the tumor repressor protein p53, may predispose individuals to cancer. thus, the accurate identification of dna-binding sites in proteins is not only important for understanding the mechanisms of these biological processes but also helpful for annotating the function of proteins. proteindna interaction sites can be detected by using biochemical techniques, such as dnase i foot-printing , gel retardation in vivo foot-printing in vitro binding assay and methylation . however, traditional biochemical methods are time-consuming and laborious to carry out for the rapidly increasing number of proteindna complexes. therefore, developing an objective and effective computational approach to precisely predict dna-binding sites would be necessary. several computational methods have been developed to identify dna-binding sites in proteins based mainly on protein sequence or protein structure. the sequence-based method can be further divided into two classes. the first class is based on the following: side chain pka value, hydrophobicity index and molecular mass of the amino acid residues and dna-binding residues predicted by support vector machine (svm) and random forests classifier . the second class uses evolutionary and other sequence information to identify dna-binding sites in proteins . structure-based methods are further classified into a structural alignment-based method and a structural alignment-free method. for the structural alignment-based method, the dna-binding sites are recognized from a structural alignment between the query sequence and a template known to bind dna . in the structural alignment-free method, dna-binding sites are predicted using electrostatic potentials and the shape of the molecular surface . with the rapid increase in the number of high-quality protein structures in the protein data bank (pdb), developing new and efficient techniques for predicting dna-binding sites using geometric structures has become feasible. in this article, we introduce a two-stage machine-learning strategy to predict dna-binding sites. in the first stage, dna-binding sites are predicted by a structural alignment algorithm using the geometric structure. in the second stage, dna-binding sites are predicted by svm using evolutionary information, torsion angles (present in the backbone structure and solvent accessibility. the final results are obtained by a consensus of svm predictions and geometric structure-based predictions. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
