structural bioinformatics preferential use of protein domain pairs as interaction mediators: order and transitivity motivation: many proteinprotein interactions (ppis) are mediated by protein domains. the structural data of multi-domain ppis reveal the domain pair (or pairs) that mediate a ppi, and implicitly also the domain pairs that are not involved in the interaction. by analyzing such data, preference relations between domain pairs as interaction mediators may be revealed. results: here, we analyze the differential use of domain pairs as mediators of stable interactions based on structurally solved multi-domain protein complexes. our analysis revealed domain pairs that are preferentially used as interaction mediators and domain pairs that rarely or never mediate interaction, independent of the proteins context. between these extremes, there are domain pairs that mediate protein interaction in some protein contexts, while in other contexts different domain pairs predominate over them. by describing the preference relations between domain pairs as a network, we uncovered partial order and transitivity in these relations, which we further exploited for predicting interaction-mediating domains. the preferred domain pairs and the ones over which they predominate differ in several properties, but these differences cannot yet determine explicitly what underlies the differential use of domain pairs as interaction mediators. one property that stood up was the overabundance of homotypic interactions among the preferred domain pairs, supporting previous suggestions on the advantages in the use of domain self-interaction for mediating protein interactions. finally, we show a possible association between the preferred domain pairs and the function of the complex where they reside.domains are considered as the fundamental building blocks determining the structure and function of proteins. many domains were specialized to mediate the interaction of proteins with other molecules. for example, there are dna-binding domains, rnabinding domains and domains that mediate interactions between proteins. proteinprotein interaction (ppi) is usually achieved either via interactions between domains and short motifs (pawson to whom correspondence should be addressed), often in transient interactions, or by domaindomain interactions (ddis) , often in stable interactions. analyses of structurally solved ppis determined the domain pairs that are used as interaction mediators . further analysis of these ddis has revealed distinct domain pairs that are repeatedly used as interaction mediators in different protein contexts. moreover, it was shown that a statistically significant fraction of the interactome of various organisms can be attributed to these interacting domain pairs and that they are evolutionarily conserved . it is conceivable that protein domains that mediate interactions with other molecules were optimized through evolution to perform this function. therefore, while the domain repertoire of a proteome defines thousands of theoretically possible interacting domain pairs, only a fraction of these pairs seem to actually mediate protein interactions. furthermore, certain domain pairs mediate interactions in some protein contexts but not in others, in which there are other domain pairs opted for this task (as exemplified in). the data of multi-domain ppis solved by crystallography reveal many examples of such variability in the utilization of domain pairs as interaction mediators. for example, the self-interaction of the domain hpt (pfam accession pf01627,) is used for mediating the interaction in all solved complexes containing it, independent of other domains. on the other hand, the ghmp kinase n-terminal domain (pf00288) mediates dimerization by self-interaction in some protein contexts (e.g. mevalonate kinase), but not in others (e.g. galactokinase), where other domains mediate the dimerization. notably, the structural data of multi-domain ppis reveal the domain pair (or pairs) that mediate a ppi, and implicitly also the domain pairs that are not involved in the interaction, enabling a systematic analysis of such preference relations. here we carry out such an analysis, using reliable ddi and ppi data from solved structures of multi-domain protein complexes. we report on a partial order in the preferential use of domain pairs as interaction mediators, compare properties of the domains that may underlie this order and show by a few examples possible functional implications of our findings. we also demonstrate the utilization of this order for predicting the domains mediating experimentally determined ppis.the recent accumulation of a vast amount of ppi data has enabled the study of ppi networks [for review see ], as well as of the inter-relations between ppis and ddis (e.g.), where we employed network analysis tools to study the preference relations between domain pairs as interaction mediators. in this network, thepage: 2569 25642570). presented are rates of success in ddi prediction according to the number of possible domaindomain combinations in interacting protein pairs, in comparison to the expected random success rate (e.g. the random success rate in case of two domain pairs is 50). the shown data are based on interacting protein pairs with at most 10 possible domain pairs. we confirmed this approach by 3-fold and 5-fold cross-validation (shown here). when a domain pair in the test set does not occur in the network of domain pair relations (training set) the interaction cannot be predicted. success rates are therefore described for those domain pairs that appear in both the test and training sets. the random success rates were calculated according to the number of potential domain pairs in ppis, taking into consideration the number of domain pairs that actually mediate the interaction. nodes are domain pairs and edges point from domain pairs mediating the interaction to all possible domain pairs in the complex, over which they predominate. analysis of this network revealed an order between domain pairs, which was consistent across various protein pairs carrying the corresponding domains. of note, the relatively small number of solved complexes implies that the network of domain pair relations is of low connectivity, since many couples of domain pairs may never appear in the same complex, disenabling an edge between them. accordingly, this network is composed of many subnetworks of connected components, each showing a partial view of the domain pair relations. thus, the phenomenon that we have identified, of order of the domain pairs by their preferential use as interaction mediators, is re-discovered in many subnetworks of domain pair relation networks. however, in the context of the whole network, due to the missing edges, this order should be regarded as partial order. thus, our analysis shows that not only there are domain pairs that mediate ppis and others that do not, but also the ones capable of mediating interaction can be (partially) ordered by their suitability to this task. the main discovery of our study, that there is an order of domain pairs as interaction mediators, raises additional questions as to the domain pair properties that may underlie the revealed preferences. conceivably such preferences might develop through evolution, and therefore we asked whether the preferred pairs are more ancient than the ones over which they predominate and whether they show higher plasticity that allows them to accommodate in various protein contexts. these properties showed very modest differences between the compared domain pairs (although highly statistically significant), pointing to tendencies that might be further substantiated with accumulation of more data of interacting proteins. alternatively, as we found in our analysis of functional implications, it may be that the preference relations are the result of local solutions to the functional constraints of each protein complex. since these solutions differ between different complexes, specific properties might have implications in only subsets of the data, and therefore we observed only subtle tendencies when applying the analysis of the properties to the whole data. our prominent findingthat the preferred domain pairs show high abundance of homotypic interactionsis consistent with previous observations reporting that homotypic interactions are statistically significantly over-represented in the data of ddis, especially among ddis conserved in various organisms . furthermore, our finding that, when possible, homotypic interactions are preferred also for heterodimerization further supports the advantage suggested for homotypic interactions in stabilizing protein complexes . these advantages include a duplicated effect for stabilizing mutations and lower mean energy of the interfaces compared to that of heterotypic interactions . another hint at the advantage of homotypic interactions is the relative abundance of functional sites found at the interface of homodimers . in addition, it was demonstrated that early in evolution a bias towards very low energy complexes may have driven the selection of symmetrical structures . it is possible that following such considerations early in evolution certain domains adjusted themselves for self interaction. such domains could later recruit other domains to create multi-domain proteins whose interactions are mediated via the homotypic interactions . this conjecture is further supported by our finding that the same homotypic domain interactions mediating multi-domain ppis are also found in homodimers of single domain proteins (data not shown). the high abundance of homotypic interactions among the preferred domain pairs may raise the concern that the order that we have identified is simply a reflection of the advantage of homotypic interactions. to test this, we repeated the analysis including only heterodimers that do not contain domains capable of self-interaction (data not shown). this analysis again identified a consistent order between domain pairs, implying that it is not due to the preference of homotypic interactions. our analysis, while based on the currently available limited dataset of structurally derived ddis in multi-domain ppis, provides intriguing insights into the preference relations between domain pairs. the order that we identified is robust and is revealed when using datasets based on various systems of domain definitions , and when analyzing extensions or sub-sections of the datasets , suggesting that it will persist when more ddi data become available. at present, the order that we identified is partial because many parts of the network of domain pair relations are disconnected due to missing data. as more and more protein complexes of multiple domain combinations will be solved, the repertoire of domain pair relations will be enriched and the preference relation network might become more connected. this will enable improved prediction of ddis based on the network structure and a deeper understanding as to the molecular principles that make some domain pairs more suitable than others for mediating interactions.  
