gene expression annotation concept synthesis and enrichment analysis: a logic-based approach to the interpretation of high-throughput experiments motivation: annotation enrichment analysis (aea) is a widely used analytical approach to process data generated by high-throughput genomic and proteomic experiments such as gene expression microarrays. the analysis uncovers and summarizes discriminating background information (e.g. go annotations) for sets of genes identified by experiments (e.g. a set of differentially expressed genes, a cluster). the discovered information is utilized by human experts to find biological interpretations of the experiments. however, aea isolates and tests for overrepresentation only individual annotation terms or groups of similar terms and is limited in its ability to uncover complex phenomena involving relationship between multiple annotation terms from various knowledge bases. also, aea assumes that annotations describe the whole object of interest, which makes it difficult to apply it to sets of compound objects (e.g. sets of proteinprotein interactions) and to sets of objects having an internal structure (e.g. protein complexes). results: we propose a novel logic-based annotation concept synthesis and enrichment analysis (acsea) approach. acsea fuses inductive logic reasoning with statistical inference to uncover more complex phenomena captured by the experiments. we evaluate our approach on large-scale datasets from several microarray experiments and on a clustered genome-wide genetic interaction network using different biological knowledge bases. the discovered interpretations have lower p-values than the interpretations found by aea, are highly integrative in nature, and include analysis of quantitative and structured information present in the knowledge bases. the results suggest that acsea can boost effectiveness of the processing of high-throughput experiments.high-throughput methods, such as expression microarrays, promoter microarrays, genome-wide physical and genomic interaction screens, while allowing to monitor the behavior of the cell as a whole, are generating wealth of information that needs to be studied and interpreted. one of the main challenges of modernis a set of genes identified by an experiment (such as differentially expressed genes or one of the clusters). universe set is the set of all the genes that participated in the experiment or some other reference set of genes that the study set will be compared against. annotation database is a source of annotations attached to genes. result of the analysis is a set of annotations that are over-or underrepresented in the study set comparing to the universe set. bioinformatics is to develop methods and techniques that can help inferring knowledge from accumulated datasets and large-scale experimental data. high-throughput experimental techniques typically generate sets of genes that require further investigation. for example, such sets may be produced by clustering microarray data or by extracting differentially expressed genes. the sets usually contain dozens or hundreds of genes, and their biological interpretation poses significant challenge to biology experts. recently a number of algorithms have been developed to help experts interpreting experimental data. one of the most popular approaches is annotation enrichment analysis (aea) . aea uses the biological knowledge already accumulated in public databases to systematically examine large lists of genes trying to suggest biological interpretations of the experimental data. aea algorithms extract descriptive information (called gene annotations) characterizing each gene and compare the statistical distributions of gene annotations between the gene set of interest (known as study set) and the rest of the genome or the rest of the microarray (known as universe set).illustrates the approach. aea is agnostic to the way universe and study sets are constructed. it contrasts it with other approaches,such as reconstruction of formal temporal logic models which implicitly includes temportal annotations into analysis. a variety of algorithms and tools are based on the aea framework. they differ by the knowledge bases used as source for annotations (gene ontology: a controlled vocabulary of genes attributes, kegg: pathway information, bind: proteinprotein interactions, etc. , statistical hypothesis testing models ( 2 , fishers exact test, binomial distribution, hypergeometric distribution, etc.), types and organization of annotation terms, and sets of reference genes . the data representation model used in aea is bag-of-annotations . by analogy with a bag-of-words representation used in text mining, bag-of-annotations associates a set of annotation terms with each gene . while bag-of-annotations is a very popular and efficient model allowing natural application of statistical inference methods, it has a number of disadvantages. the main weakness of the model is the limitation in the types of annotation terms and relations that may be used as well as the types and the complexity of enriched phenomena that can be discovered and described. several research projects have proposed improvements to aea algorithms and statistical models to address the issues partially rooted in the bag-of-annotation model. for example, graph decorrelation methods modify statistical tests to consider the go graph; profcom method finds enriched combinations of annotation terms using and, or, not operators; gsea method compares the study set to curated sets; david tool partitions a set of genes based on the annotations; clean tool uses cluster analysis of annotations . however, these are solutions targeting specific databases or output structure. to overcome the analytical challenges posed by the bag-ofannotations model, we propose a new paradigm: annotation concept synthesis and enrichment analysis (acsea). acsea utilizes a logic-based data representation model and a fusion of inductive logic reasoning and statistical inference in the general framework of aea. the results of acseas evaluation suggest that it is a very potent technique capable of increasing the efficiency (i.e. the ease of data analysis by a human expert) and effectiveness (i.e. the quality and quantity of the obtained knowledge) of the processing of high-throughput experiments.we evaluated the performance of acsea 1 applied to two widely used experimental techniques: expression microarrays and genetic interaction screens. this section contains summary of the performed experiments.more detailed experimental logs and raw results are available at acsea home page (http://www.epiphan.com/zhilin/acsea).aea is becoming the dominant technique for the secondary processing of data generated by high-throughput experimental techniques. significant progress in aea algorithms has been obtained by improving the statistical models and by incorporating a variety of annotation databases into the analysis. in this article, we present a novel paradigm, acsea, which relies on a logic-based representation of annotations and employs a fusion of inductive logic inference and statistical inference. the methodological advantage of acsea is 5-fold. first, it is easier to represent complex, structural annotation information.lesser is better (better values are highlighted). the differences in performance are statistically significant with 99 (n = 5,10,15) confidence level.of the internal structure of object genetic interaction allows reasoning on and inferring statements dealing with the substructure of the object under analysis. particularly, in this experiment we were able to utilize quantifiers such as both, any, one to better understand relationship between go categories and the set of interacting genes.page: 2398 23912398  
