genome analysis premer-cg: inferring nucleotide level dna methylation values from methylcap-seq data motivation: dna methylation is an epigenetic change occurring in genomic cpg sequences that contribute to the regulation of gene transcription both in normal and malignant cells. next-generation sequencing has been used to characterize dna methylation status at the genome scale, but suffers from high sequencing cost in the case of whole-genome bisulfite sequencing, or from reduced resolution (inability to precisely define which of the cpgs are methylated) with capture-based techniques. results: here we present a computational method that computes nucleotide-resolution methylation values from capture-based data by incorporating fragment length profiles into a model of methylation analysis. we demonstrate that it compares favorably with nucleotide-resolution bisulfite sequencing and has better predictive power with respect to a reference than window-based methods, often used for enrichment data. the described method was used to produce the methylation data used in tandem with gene expression to produce a novel and clinically significant gene signature in acute myeloid leuke-mia. in addition, we introduce a complementary statistical method that uses this nucleotide-resolution methylation data for detection of differentially methylated features. availability: software in the form of python and r scripts is available at http://bioserv.mps.ohio-state.edu/premer and is free fordna methylation, the addition of a methyl group to cytosine residues in a cpg dinucleotide pair, is one of the best characterized epigenetic changes in eukaryotes and plays a pivotal role in silencing gene transcription in diverse biologic settings, including embryonic development, lyonization, autoimmunity and cancer . in the context of cancer, with the discovery that dna methylation status may carry prognostic information and with the advent of novel dna hypomethylating agents (i.e. aza-nucleosides), the study of the biologic, diagnostic, prognostic and pharmacodynamic role of dna methylation has immediate relevance in the design of novel treatment approaches. a variety of methods to determine dna methylation have been developed and can be broadly categorized on the basis of methylation readout (bisulfite converted versus capture-based techniques) and of sample or data throughput. throughput ranges from low-throughput analysis of a small number of loci [e.g. methylation profiling of 24 tumor-suppressor gene promoter cpg islands (to array-based methods with on the order of 480 000 probes in the case of the infinium humanmethylation450 beadchip, to next-generation sequencing (ngs)-based approaches that offer high-resolution broad genomic coverage at extremely high throughput. supplementary text and supplementaryfurther describe these techniques and categorize methylation analysis techniques in terms of readout and throughput. the gold standard for the characterization of genome-wide dna methylation status is whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (wgbs). with the current ngs platforms, data yields in excess of 300 gb per flow cell, the costs associated with data generation and analysis for this approach still remain out of reach, especially if a relatively large number of patient samples need to be evaluated at diagnosis and at sequential time points after treatment. genome complexity-reduction methods such as reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (rrbs) , double-enzyme rrbs , infinium arrays and goldengate methylation assay have been developed to make bisulfite-based approaches more suitable for large-scale studies. however, one notable drawback of these methods is the limited proportion of the genome and types of regions these assays interrogate . additionally, researchers should be aware that the bisulfite conversion process may occur with limited efficiency and cannot distinguish between the two alternative bases, 5-methylcytosine and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine , which are likely to have different biologic significance: in contrast to 5-methylcytosines to whom correspondence should be addressed.dna methylation is well established as an epigenetic regulator in a wide variety of biological processes , and recent years have seen tremendous progress in the laboratory and computational techniques of methylation analysis . bock et al. analyzed two pairs of samples using two enrichment). compared with medip-seq, methylcap-seq gave rise to peaks of methylated dna with higher dynamic range (higher peaks and lower baseline signals), and the authors noted that bisulfite-based methods generally confirmed the enrichmentbased methods. overall, when compared with rrbs, the methylcap-seq method had richer and more even coverage of the entire genome, including within-key features such as cpg islands and promoter regions, methylation of which is known to affect transcription. capture-based methods in combination with ngs offer the potential of cost-effective whole-genome methylation analysis, with the added benefit of the possibility to distinguish alternative cytosine modifications . many capture-based sequencing methods have been implemented with success, assessing methylation in genomic windows, typically 50 bp and larger. we have previously published a technique for the analysis of methylcap-seq data in which the genome is divided intoknowledge, we are the first group to use this highly available yet underused information in dna methylation analysis. using paired rrbs data from the same samples, we compared premer-cg with our prior 500 bp window-based method and demonstrated superior discriminatory power. in addition, we provide a non-parametric statistical method (methmage) for detecting changes in methylation within a defined genomic region (feature) and demonstrated its utility in identifying regions with methylation differences. we recognize there are limitations in the present method. first, these methylation calls are only inferences suitable for discovery and hypothesis generation; important findings must be validated by alternative techniques. second, in any pulldown experiment there is an inherent bias vis-a-vis the actual fragments pulled down: density and spatial arrangement of methylated cpgs are known to affect pulldown , and there may exist some other unknown factors that influence the affinity of the methyl-binding domain protein for the dna. finally, using rrbs as the standard for comparison in the generation of the roc curves may be complicated by the potential differences in methylation affinities assessed by the two methods (i.e. rrbs may report both 5-methylcytosine and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine, while methylcap may report only 5-methylcytosine). this confounding factor may explain the somewhat low reported auc values. as dna methylation analysis is increasingly important in the clinical arena, sample preparation is moving away from manual preparation to automation. in manual sample preparation, a gelbased approach is used for fragment selection. it produces a tight distribution of fragment sizes although ranges can still vary significantly from sample to sample as depicted in. with automation, fragment selection is performed by paramagnetic bead selection, which produces a broader size distribution (data not shown) and a longer fall from one to zero in the ccdf. this heightens the importance of a probabilistic method such as premer-cg to take into account library fragment size. an added incentive in using premer-cg is its accuracy in estimating the empirical distribution of fragment size in a sequencing library. we compared the premer-cg-derived fragment size to fragment size calculated from aligning paired-end reads to the genome and found excellent concordance of the distributions (supplementary). paired-end data from methylcap-seq libraries will allow assignment of the true length for each fragment rather than using our probabilistic approach. however, paired-end experiments are more costly. to that end, our method is the most cost-effective means to infer nucleotide-level methylation values for a large clinical trial. the power of this approach is well illustrated by the derivation of a prognostically significant signature by combining gene expression and methylation data in a cohort of 134 aml patients . in conclusion, we have presented an algorithm for inferring nucleotide-resolution methylation signal from a capture-based technique and a companion statistical test to detect dimefs using this nucleotide-level information. discriminatory power was demonstrated using biological samples (acute leukemia bm blasts), and our approach warrants further study in future experiments.  
