sequence analysis presto: a toolkit for processing high-throughput sequencing raw reads of lymphocyte receptor repertoires driven by dramatic technological improvements, large-scale characterization of lymphocyte receptor repertoires via high-throughput sequencing is now feasible. although promising, the high germline and somatic diversity, especially of b-cell immunoglobu-lin repertoires, presents challenges for analysis requiring the development of specialized computational pipelines. we developed the repertoire sequencing toolkit (presto) for processing reads from high-throughput lymphocyte receptor studies. presto processes raw sequences to produce error-corrected, sorted and annotated sequence sets, along with a wealth of metrics at each step. the toolkit supports multiplexed primer pools, single-or paired-end reads and emerging technologies that use single-molecule identifiers. presto has been tested on data generated from roche and illumina platforms. it has a built-in capacity to parallelize the work between available processors and is able to efficiently process millions of sequences generated by typical high-throughput projects. availability and implementation: presto is freely available for academic use. the software package and detailed tutorials may be down-loaded from http://clip.high-throughput sequencing technologies now enable large-scale characterization of lymphocyte receptor repertoires (rep-seq) . rep-seq studies have used a variety of next-generation sequencing platforms, including roches 454 and illuminas genome analyzer. researchers are now beginning to take advantage of newer platforms, such as the miseq offered by illumina, which can generate 410 million paired-end automatic file segregation into their workflow for distributed processing on cluster computing resources. a detailed description of each presto tool is provided in the supplementary material (summarized in supplementary table s1). example datasets with step-by-step tutorials covering the workflows illustrated incan be found on the presto website.  
