genome analysis prime: a method for characterization and evaluation of pleiotropic regions from multiple genome-wide association studies motivation: the concept of pleiotropy was proposed a century ago, though up to now there have been insufficient efforts to design robust statistics and software aimed at visualizing and evaluating pleiotropy at a regional level. the pleiotropic region identification method (prime) was developed to evaluate potentially pleiotropic loci based upon data from multiple genome-wide association studies (gwas). methods: we first provide a software tool to systematically identify and characterize genomic regions where low association p-values are observed with multiple traits. we use the term pleiotropy index to denote the number of traits with low association p-values at a particular genomic region. for gwas assumed to be uncorrelated, we adopted the binomial distribution to approximate the statistical significance of the pleiotropy index. for gwas conducted on traits with known correlation coefficients, simulations are performed to derive the statistical distribution of the pleiotropy index under the null hypothesis of no genotypephenotype association. for six hematologic and three blood pressure traits where full gwas results were available from the cohorts for heart and aging research in genomic epidemiology (charge) consortium, we estimated the trait correlations and applied the simulation approach to examine genomic regions with statistical evidence of pleiotropy. we then applied the approximation approach to explore gwas summarized in the national human genome research institute (nhgri) gwas catalog. results: by simulation, we identified pleiotropic regions including sh2b3 and brap (12q24.12) for hematologic and blood pressure traits. by approximation, we confirmed the genome-wide significant pleiotropy of these two regions based on the gwas catalog data, together with an exploration on other regions which highlights the fto, gckr and abo regions. availability and implementation: the perl and r scripts are available at http://www.framinghamheartstudy.org/research/gwas_ pleiotropictool.html.pleiotropy describes the effect of a single genetic region on multiple phenotypic traits. the concept of pleiotropy was first defined a century ago as one mutation resulting in multiple distinct phenotypes . among the proposed mechanisms, the genetic region may encode a product that is used by multiple cell types, or it may have a signaling function affecting multiple targets, or the traits under study may themselves be highly interrelated at a physiological level . pleiotropic genes have been shown in other species to affect environmental adaptation and tend to reside in central node positions in proteinprotein interaction networks . the identification and characterization of pleiotropic genes and regions offers a unique window into the complexities of biological molecular interaction networks, and may potentially indicate evidence for epistasis . the presence and impact of pleiotropy in genome data for normal human characteristics and human disease traits merits further investigation, but thus far the efforts at statistical development are insufficient. methods and software for analyzing multivariate phenotypes have been proposed . however, the available methods, such as those by, all require use of individual-level phenotype data and thus cannot be used to study pleiotropy using only existing summarized genome-wide association studies (gwas) results. the method ofcan be used on existing summarized gwas results; however this method only considers single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) level but not region-level pleiotropy. a novel analytic approach was recently demonstrated to examine pleiotropic genes in psychiatric phenotypes . the current abundance of gwas results provides an unprecedented opportunity to fully examine this phenomenon in a systematic manner. we previously analyzed results across 118 gwas articles published from 2005 through 2008, creating a comprehensive database of 56 411 snp-phenotype associations at a significance level of 0.001 . this study highlighted potential pleiotropic regions, presenting the 61 densest regions of associations from 118 gwas. polymorphisms associated with multiple traits in genes including apoe and the mhc region were identified, as well as novel candidates (pigu, rapgef1, col4a1/2 and oas1) that were subsequently replicated in otherpage: 1202 12011206prime does not rely on prespecified methods for genomic region grouping such as gene boundaries or physical position bins. instead, association p-values for individual snps and ld between snps are used to define genomic regions where multiple traits show significant association with snps. since pairwise ld (r) among snps is a key determinant of the width of a region; we used plink to precalculate ld based on the hapmap ii + iii samples from the ceu (utah residents with ancestry from northern and western europe) and tsi (toscans in italy) populations . we did not use the ld data downloadable from hapmap website, because it calculates ld only for snps up to 250 kb apart . to capture long-range haplotype blocks, we include ld for snps up to 1500 kb apart. of note, the ld threshold chosen by investigators will not only affect the physical boundaries of a putative pleiotropic region, but also the statistical significance of the estimated p t. for the sh2b3 and brap regions, if a ld threshold of r 2 0.5 rather than 0.8 is used, only one large region instead of two separate ones will be identified. this change of ld threshold will further complicate the choice of 510 8 as the threshold for evaluating genome-wide significance, since the total number of independent regions across the genome would be different when high ld is defined as r 2 0.5 instead of 0.8. furthermore, with a p s threshold of 110 3 instead of 110 5 prespecified, the same sh2b3 region is noted with a pleiotropy index of 6 but the simulated p t would not have reached a genome-wide significant threshold. from a statistical testing perspective, higher values of pleiotropy index under less stringent p s thresholds tend to result in a less significant p t. on the other hand, a highly stringent p s threshold will pose technical challenges for simulation. we performed 200 million simulations (i.e. 10/(510 8 )) in an attempt to simulate the distribution for p s up to 510 8. however, as supplementaryshows, despite the high number of simulations, we still did not observe a pleiotropy index 2 when p s thresholds of 110 7 and 510 8 were used. therefore, an exact p t could not be specified other than p t 1/(210 8 ) = 510 9. we suggest a p s of 110 5 , which corresponds to the significance threshold currently used by the gwas catalog. currently the direction of association effect is not considered for computing the pleiotropy index. studies have suggested there may be biologically plausible mechanisms for different effect directions even among closely related phenotypes . for the approximation approach, we make the assumption that traits are not correlated. when traits studied in separate gwas scans are not truly uncorrelated, the distribution of the pleiotropy index deviates from the binomial distribution, with higher proportions of correlated traits leading to greater deviations. as the correlation coefficient increases, the expected pleiotropy index increases and therefore is more likely (at any given significant p t ) to achieve larger values of the pleiotropy index (see supplementary). for the two charge gwas, five common cohorts contributed to a total of six cohorts for both gwas, with the degree of sample overlap for these two gwas being 80. however, a high degree of sample overlap alone does not imply that there will be high correlation for quantitative traits [e.g. 0.00 between mean corpuscular hemoglobin and systolic blood pressure for the charge traits , and 0.08 between hdl and ldl for the global lipids traits (supplementary)]. for dichotomous traits illustrated by the wtccc data, the use of a common control dataset generates an explicit overlap of phenotypic measurement, therefore leading to some degree of correlation among gwas results for the seven traits (from 0.29 to 0.43, supplementary). the highest correlation of 0.43 between type 1 diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis could also indicate common pathways for auto-immune diseases (supplementary). for both quantitative and qualitative traits, under the null hypothesis of no genotypephenotype association for each individual gwas, even identically ascertained phenotypes will not yield trait correlation given no sample overlap. the finding of the fto region highlights how care must be taken in interpretation of conclusions on pleiotropy, since the commonly associated traits for the fto region include many weight-related measures or for type 2 diabetes. although a few of the association signals in the gckr region are for similar serum lipids and glucose measures as well, there are distinct traits such as hematologic traits, serum uric acid and c-reactive protein. the significant test statistic in the case of fto may be flagging either pleiotropy or further independent replication for adiposity traits, while the case of gckr may reflect classic pleiotropy. for similar but not identical traits, suspected pleiotropy could be due to independent effects or through a chain of mediation. the identification of mediation can still provide useful biological information. a recent study on the genetics of fto provides the first direct evidence that increased fto expression causes obesity in mice. mice with increased fto expression on a high-fat diet develop glucose intolerance. the causal mechanism of fto on human phenotypes warrants further gene expression profiling studies . the null hypothesis of no genotypephenotype association for each individual gwas has been used as a basis for our simulation and approximation approaches, which could be invalid when traits with strong association with particular genomic regions have been well established and extensively replicated. deriving the distribution under the alternative will depend on many variables (number of associated loci, strength of association with each trait, etc.) and could require a markedly different approach. we compared the power between our method and that of ferreira and purcell (2009), and found that their method is slightly more powerful under scenarios with various association p-value thresholds and type i error. however, our tool and method can be rapidly applied to summary gwas results, together with other features including visualization. in summary, we have developed a computational tool and statistical method to systematically identify, characterize and evaluate pleiotropic regions. prime can be downloaded and run on local machines without uploading potentially sensitive gwas data to public servers. the scripts are designed in a user friendly manner so that all customizable parameters can be specified in an interface script, which calls subsequent scripts that require no user manipulation. the availability of prime may encourage sharing of more detailed gwas data in a secure manner within collaborating groups in order to conduct discovery of potential pleiotropic regions. we anticipate that fine-mapping and re-sequencing will enable a page: 1206 12011206  
