systems biology principle: a tool for associating genes with diseases via network propagation principle is a java application implemented as a cytoscape plug-in, based on a previously published algorithm, prince. given a query disease, it prioritizes disease-related genes based on their closeness in a proteinprotein interaction network to genes causing phenotypically similar disorders to the query disease. availability: implemented in java, principle runs over cytoscape 2.7 or newer versions. binaries, default input files and documentation are freely available atassociating diseases with their causal genes is a fundamental challenge in medical research with applications to diagnosis and therapy. recently, we introduced a novel method for prioritizing candidate disease-causing genes, named prince (prioritization and complex elucidation) . prince is motivated by the observation that genes causing similar diseases often lie close to one another in a proteinprotein interaction (ppi) network . given a query disease, prince: (i) identifies a set of phenotypically similar diseases (van); (ii) retrieves the known causal genes of these diseases to form a ranked prior vector y based on their similarity to the query and (iii) propagates the scores of the prior set of genes over a human ppi network to provide association scores for all genes. the final score assigned to each protein in the network combines the prior information with a network-based component. the latter ensures that the resulting scores are smooth over the network. formally, the score f(v) of a node v with a set of network neighbors n(v) is:where w is a normalized matrix representing the weighted ppi network and y (v) is the prior weight of the node. here is parameter to whom correspondence should be addressed. weighting the relative importance of the prior-based versus the network-based components of the score. prince leverages on a comprehensive set of weighted ppis compiled from multiple sources , the disease disease similarity measures computed by van, and on the diseasegene associations presented in the online mendelian inheritance in man (omim) knowledgebase . here we introduce principle (prince implementation) a cytoscape plug-in implementation of the prince algorithm. given a query disease, it provides a list of top ranking genes associated with it and an additional visualization of the subnetworks formed by these top ranking genes and their direct interacting neighbors.  
