data and text mining annotation of rule-based models with formal semantics to enable creation, analysis, reuse and visualization downloaded from motivation: biological systems are complex and challenging to model and therefore model reuse is highly desirable. to promote model reuse, models should include both information about the specifics of simulations and the underlying biology in the form of metadata. the availability of computationally tractable metadata is especially important for the effective automated interpretation and processing of models. metadata are typically represented as machine-readable annotations which enhance programmatic access to information about models. rule-based languages have emerged as a modelling framework to represent the complexity of biological systems. annotation approaches have been widely used for reaction-based formalisms such as sbml. however, rule-based languages still lack a rich annotation framework to add semantic information, such as machine-readable descriptions, to the components of a model. results: we present an annotation framework and guidelines for annotating rule-based models, encoded in the commonly used kappa and bionetgen languages. we adapt widely adopted annotation approaches to rule-based models. we initially propose a syntax to store machine-readable annotations and describe a mapping between rule-based modelling entities, such as agents and rules, and their annotations. we then describe an ontology to both annotate these models and capture the information contained therein, and demonstrate annotating these models using examples. finally, we present a proof of concept tool for extracting annotations from a model that can be queried and analyzed in a uniform way. the uniform representation of the annotations can be used to facilitate the creation, analysis, reuse and visualization of rule-based models. although examples are given, using specific implementations the proposed techniques can be applied to rule-based models in general. availability and implementation: the annotation ontology for rule-based models can be found atthe last decade has seen a rapid growth in the number of model repositories . creating models and populating these repositories is not a trivial task as it requires expert knowledge and integration of different types of biological data from multiple sources . classically, these data are used to derive the structure of, and parameters for, models. however, biological data can also be used to annotate models and their components. these annotations act as metadata to decorate a model with links to biologically relevant information . machine-readable annotations are also important to facilitate the automated exchange, reuse and composition of complex models from simpler ones. as the number and size of models increase, the availability of informative annotations becomes more important. annotation techniques can then be applied to rule-based models that can represent in a compact way the complexity inherent in biological systems . rule-based languages, such as kappa and bionetgen , have emerged as helpful tools for modelling biological systems . rule-based modelling is widely used to concisely represent the combinatorial explosion of the state space inherent in modelling biological systems. rule-based models comprise agents representing biological molecules and rules representing biological interactions between agents. these rules are sufficient to allow models to be simulated, but the biological meanings of the model entities are not directly accessible. these languages do have facilities for comments that are intended for unstructured documentation directed at the modeller or programmer. however, these comments are not computationally accessible. currently, there is no standardized syntax to store annotations within models written in rule-based languages. model annotation has already been widely applied in reactionbased models. for example, saint has been developed to enrich models by identifying and integrating biological information in some cases fruitfully leading to new discoveries . based on existing model annotations, this tool can suggest the addition of new entities to extend models. annotations can also be used to verify and merge models, and to check for inconsistencies . moreover, model repositories can be searched using commonly used annotation terms. biomodels is a repository of models and, at the time of writing, includes 1379 models, 583 of which are manually annotated (http://www.ebi. ac.uk/biomodels-main/). these annotations can be used by tools such as reactionfinder to search for reactions that can be reused as modular components of larger models. model annotation is an ongoing research topic in synthetic biology. the virtual parts repository is a repository of modular models of biological parts. models in this repository are defined with inputs and outputs, which are annotated semantically. these annotations make the models computationally composable and facilitate the model-driven design of biological systems. when these models are annotated with additional information such as nucleotide sequences and types of biological parts, the resulting composed models can act as blueprints to derive synthetic biological systems . annotations can also be used to aid in the computational conversion of models into a variety of other data formats. for example, pdf documents or visual graphs can be automatically generated from annotated models in order to aid human understanding. annotations can also help in the provision of the extra information necessary to convert between modelling formalisms .we present an extension of rule-based models to incorporate annotations and a set of standardized terms, together with annotation guidelines, that can constitute a general proposal for annotating rule-based models. these terms can be used in a complementary manner with existing metadata resources such as miriam annotations and uris, and existing controlled vocabularies and ontologies. such metadata is important for models that are computationally generated or served by model repositories, and opens up the possibility of using rule-based models in complex workflows. annotations can also be used to link to human readable descriptions of models. rules are modular and combined with annotations, can be reused in many applications. although, we have demonstrated the annotation of textual kappa and bionetgen files, our approach can be easily applied to other rule-based models. pysb already includes a list of miriam annotations at the model level, and can be extended to include the type of annotations presented here. moreover, sbmls multi (http://sbml.org/documents/specifica tions/sbml_level_3/packages/multi) package is being developed to standardize the exchange of rule-based models. the entities in this format inherit the annotation property from the standard sbml and can therefore include rdf annotations. such sbml models can thus be imported or exported by tools such as kasim or rulebender in the future, avoiding the loss of any biological information. extensions of rule-based models such as metakappa makes possible to define rules using abstract agents and allowing agent inheritance . modularity is especially important in synthetic biology to build complex models of intended biological systems from simple rules. the proposed schema can be easily extended in that framework. annotations are also useful for automated conversions between different formats. conversion between rules and reaction networks is already an ongoing research subject , and the availability of annotations can play an important role for reliable conversion and fine-tuning of models . as demonstrated above, annotations can be used to derive contact maps, which are commonly used to visualize rulebased models. chylek and co-workers have already defined a set of glyphs to represent different nodes and edges in these graphs . this mapping is carried out by creating model guides which have contact maps enriched with information, but this process is done manually. it is straightforward to use the framework presented and automatically map agents and rules to these glyphs orannotation of rule-based models with formal semanticsto convert models into other visual formats such as sbgn or genetic circuit diagrams . models annotated with sbol terms can be read for subsequent analyses, for example to produce genetic circuit diagrams using standard sbol visual icons. model annotations are designed for machine readability and ideally should be produced computationally, for example by model repositories. the authors are currently developing apis and tools to facilitate this process and in particular the access to a set of biological parts that will incorporate rule-based descriptions and will be annotated with the proposed schema. composing together models from these repositories requires further research, and the annotations described here can provide sufficient additional information to make the problem computationally tractable. in general, automatic annotation of models can be challenging where the meaning of modelling entities are not known to computational tools and only the names of entities can be used to infer their semantics. this issue is an ongoing research subject and tools such as saint and sybil could be extended to automate the annotation of rule-based models. the extensive information available in biological databases and the literature can thus be integrated and made available via rule-based models, taking advantage of the syntax and the framework presented in this work. enriching models through computationally tractable annotations has many benefits. the computational feasibility of the proposed annotation schema has been shown with the development of a simple tool that, exporting the embedded annotations, can be used to detect duplicate rules, inconsistencies and provide contact maps annotated with biological semantics. despite more work need to be done in this direction and challenge large biological models, these preliminary applications highlights that the proposed annotations could constitute an important step towards the automation of the modelbased design and analysis of biological systems, and hence to improve the utility of rule-based models in predictive biology. in summary, the annotation framework and guidelines presented here facilitates the annotation of rule-based models, and the development of future applications for rule-based modelling.  
