sequence analysis prism: pair-read informed split-read mapping for base-pair level detection of insertion, deletion and structural variants motivation: the development of high-throughput sequencing technologies has enabled novel methods for detecting structural variants (svs). current methods are typically based on depth of coverage or pair-end mapping clusters. however, most of these only report an approximate location for each sv, rather than exact breakpoints. results: we have developed pair-read informed split mapping (prism), a method that identifies svs and their precise breakpoints from whole-genome resequencing data. prism uses a split-alignment approach informed by the mapping of paired-end reads, hence enabling breakpoint identification of multiple sv types, including arbitrary-sized inversions, deletions and tandem duplications. comparisons to previous datasets and simulation experiments illustrate prisms high sensitivity, while pcr validations of prism results, including previously uncharacterized variants, indicate an overall precision of $90. availability: prism is freely available atthe development of high-throughput sequencing (hts) technologies has enabled novel methods for detecting structural variants (svs). current methods, which are usually based on depth of coverage , pair-end mapping clusters or a combination of these , have been successful in quantifying structural variation in individual genomes and populations . however, most of these only report an approximate location for each sv, rather than exact breakpoints. accurate mapping of split reads (reads that span across a breakpoint of an sv) is evidence for the linking relationship of the segments that are adjacent in the sequenced genome (donor) but not in the reference human genome. split-read based methods, such as pindel , splitread and svseq , while able to identify these breakpoints, have been limited in their ability to identify large-scale structural variants. these tools take the approach of aligning the split read only in the immediate vicinity of the reads pair and thus limit the maximum discoverable variant size. pindel and splitread take a user-specified maximum indel size as a parameter, while svseq uses a fixed constant. typically, the running times and accuracies of the programs heavily depend on this parameter, as alignment of a small portion of the read to a large segment of the human genome is computationally intensive and error-prone. several recent approaches combine the split-mapping signature with additional information: the depth of coverage and discordant paired ends, respectively. however, the nord et al. method can only be used with capture data rather than whole genomes, and the zhang et al. method (svseq2) only handles indels and not other svs. the recent crest method takes an alternative approach for assembling the unaligned clipped ends of reads and mapping these to the genome. we have developed pair-read informed split mapping (prism), a method that makes use of discordant pair-end clusters to direct split-read mapping. the use of discordant clusters allows us to substantially reduce the search space for split mapping, leading to faster run times and significantly higher accuracy at identifying large deletions and other structural variants. prism also uses a modification of the needleman-wunsch (nw) algorithm for the base-level alignment of the split read to enable high accuracy in the presence of snps, small indels and sequencing errors proximal to the sv.to evaluate our method, we conducted simulation experiments and analyzed two recently sequenced genomes.prism has several advantages over previous methods for detection of svs from hts data, including combining paired read analysis and split mapping for detection of the exact breakpoints for variants of arbitrary size. the sensitive-alignment algorithm used in prism accurately identifies breakpoints even proximal to other variants or sequencing errors. one such example is shown in, where a large deletion predicted by prism (and validated by pcr) is immediately followed by a small deletion, making the alignment of reads that span the deletion especially challenging. the pcr validations confirm not only the overall high accuracy of prism results but also its ability to identify novel variants inaccessible to previous methods.  
