data and text mining privacy-preserving microbiome analysis using secure computation motivation: developing targeted therapeutics and identifying biomarkers relies on large amounts of research participant data. beyond human dna, scientists now investigate the dna of microorganisms inhabiting the human body. recent work shows that an individuals collection of microbial dna consistently identifies that person and could be used to link a real-world identity to a sensitive attribute in a research dataset. unfortunately, the current suite of dna-specific privacy-preserving analysis tools does not meet the requirements for microbiome sequencing studies. results: to address privacy concerns around microbiome sequencing, we implement metage-nomic analyses using secure computation. our implementation allows comparative analysis over combined data without revealing the feature counts for any individual sample. we focus on three analyses and perform an evaluation on datasets currently used by the microbiome research community. we use our implementation to simulate sharing data between four policy-domains. additionally, we describe an application of our implementation for patients to combine data that allows drug developers to query against and compensate patients for the analysis. availability and implementation: the software is freely available for download at:microbiome sequencing seeks to characterize and classify the composition and structure of microbial communities from metagenomic dna samples. it is estimated that only 1 in 10 cells in and on a persons body contain that individuals dna , the remainder corresponding to microbial dna, most from organisms that cannot be cultured and studied in the laboratory. the human microbiome project (hmp) , the global enterics multi-center study (msd), the personal genome project and the american gut project aim to characterize the ecology of human microbiota and its impact on human health. potentially pathogenic or probiotic bacteria can be identified by detecting significant differences in their distribution across healthy and disease populations. while the biology has led to promising results, privacy concerns of microbiome research are now being identified with no secure analysis tools available. recent work byshows that microbiome data are an unique identifier across time points in a dataset and could be used to link a sensitive attribute to an individual. earlier work byshowed that it is possible to identify an object that v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.in this section, we describe related work and provide a context for our contribution. we also discuss a use case for our solution in building datasets and finally present conclusions we formed during the course of our work.  
