gene expression probabilistic analysis of gene expression measurements from heterogeneous tissues a web-application for motivation: tissue heterogeneity, arising from multiple cell types, is a major confounding factor in experiments that focus on studying cell types, e.g. their expression profiles, in isolation. although sample heterogeneity can be addressed by manual microdissection, prior to conducting experiments, computational treatment on heterogeneous measurements have become a reliable alternative to perform this microdissection in silico. favoring computation over manual purification has its advantages, such as time consumption, measuring responses of multiple cell types simultaneously, keeping samples intact of external perturbations and unaltered yield of molecular content. results: we formalize a probabilistic model, dsection, and show with simulations as well as with real microarray data that dsection attains increased modeling accuracy in terms of (i) estimating cell-type proportions of heterogeneous tissue samples, (ii) estimating replication variance and (iii) identifying differential expression across cell types under various experimental conditions. as our reference we use the corresponding linear regression model, which mirrors the performance of the majority of current non-probabilistic modeling approaches. availability and software: all codes are written in matlab, and are freely available upon request as well as at the project web pagefor being able to fully utilize capabilities of high-throughput measurement techniques that often have to deal with physically small but also heterogeneous tissue samples, attention should be paid as to how heterogeneity, the presence of multiple cell types in tissue, is addressed. in many studies the focus of interest hovers around identifying behavioral differences across cell types, and in such cases sample heterogeneity clearly has a confounding effect on downstream experiments and analysis. to whom correspondence should be addressed.although laser-capture microdissection (lcm;) offers a direct way to address tissue heterogeneity by allowing for isolation of morphologically distinguishable cell types, there are occasions when it is not feasible. yield of biological content (e.g. mrna) for conducting experiments becomes consequently lowered, which often needs to be compensated for with either more sensitive measurement devices or amplification of molecular quantities . however, amplification of mrna from small albeit pure cell samples has its shortcomings, most notably nonlinearity , obscuring the underlying profiles for distinct cell types. several authors have already studied performing computational microdissection for heterogeneous tissues, and proposed promising methods for microarray expression data. initial attempts stem from, who proposed a linear model for estimating both cell-type proportions and cell-type-specific gene expression profiles; the model assumes that, as prior information, there exist known, exclusively expressed genes for each cell-type. subsequent studies have then demonstrated that the linearity assumption and prior information on either gene expression profiles, cell-type proportions, or both, can yield meaningful interpretations for the constituents of heterogeneous tissues . in real experiments, conducted on the basis of heterogeneous tissue samples, having precise prior information is unrealistic, even though current models consistently rely on such information. we incorporate this missing functionality into the already-familiar linear regression framework through bayesian prior densities whose shapes reflect the uncertainties associated with the prior information, such as cell-type proportions or cell-type-specific expression profiles. for all model parameters, an efficient markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) sampler is proposed. in addition to existing microdissection models, we further assume that the heterogeneous tissues have been measured under various experimental conditions, having a possible impact on cell-type-specific expression profiles. as cell-type-specific profiles are assumed to be different across both cell types and experimental conditions, assessment of statistically significant differential expression is performed with the two-sample t-test, though other tests for differential expression can be used. we use simulated and real gene expression data for assessing the performance of the bayesian model in contrast to a linearpage: 2572 25712577in computing the forthcoming results with dsection, we used the following values for controlling parameters of our model. namely, we set peakedness around prior cell-type proportions to w 0 = 10, peakedness of transition kernel to w = 100, burnin period to b = 2000 iterations, and chain length to s = 500 iterations. along sampling, we also computed and visualized estimates of autocovariance functions of the sampled parameters, which indicated that our choice for the chain length was reasonable, i.e. covariance diminished relatively rapidly as lag was increased (data not shown) .  
