genome analysis anntools: a comprehensive and versatile annotation toolkit for genomic variants anntools is a versatile bioinformatics application designed for comprehensive annotation of a full spectrum of human genome variation: novel and known single-nucleotide substitutions (snp/snv), short insertions/deletions (indel) and structural variants/copy number variation (sv/cnv). the variants are interpreted by interrogating data compiled from 15 constantly updated sources. in addition to detailed functional characterization of the coding variants, anntools searches for overlaps with regulatory elements, disease/trait associated loci, known segmental duplications and artifact prone regions, thereby offering an integrated and comprehensive analysis of genomic data. the tool conveniently accepts user-provided tracks for custom annotation and offers flexibility in input data formats. the output is generated in the universal variant call format. high annotation speed makes anntools suitable for high-throughput sequencing facilities, while a low-memory footprint and modest cpu requirements allow it to operate on a personal computer. the application is freely available for public use; the package includes installation scripts and a set of helper tools. availability: http://anntools.sourceforge.net/increasing volumes of next-generation sequencing and microarray data demand efficient bioinformatics analysis tools capable of highthroughput processing and accurate interpretation of various types of detected changes. detailed annotation of the genomic variants with assessment of their possible functional or regulatory roles allows researchers to highlight potentially significant findings and prioritize candidates for further analyses. while there are a number of bioinformatics tools developed specifically for this purpose to the best of our knowledge, the majority of the published methods are limited to whom correspondence should be addressed. to interpretation of single nucleotide substitutions (snp/snv) and small insertions/deletions (indel) and do not currently offer an integrated analysis of the full spectrum of variants occurring in the coding and non-coding regions of the human genome. here we present anntools, a fast, versatile and user-friendly application designed for complete annotation of novel and publicly known snp/snv, indel and sv/cnv, called from next-generation sequencing and microarray data. the main advantages of our method are its integrative approach not limited by the specific type or genomic location of the variant, the ability to evaluate both functional and regulatory regions and incorporation of variant frequency data to highlight potentially significant variants. our application allows individual and batch query processing and offers flexibility in input data formats. the output is generated in the universal variant call format (vcf), as the current de facto community standard . complete documentation is available on the anntools website (http://anntools.sourceforge.net/). we provide installation scripts, demos and a set of helper tools to perform custom annotation and data transformation for future visualization and analysis.anntools was applied to three sets of next-generation sequencing data: snp calls generated at mount sinai school of medicine from whole-exome sequencing of the caucasian trios (hapmap ceu), and sets of indel and sv calls downloaded from the pilot project of the 1000 genomes consortium. since the available indel and sv calls were in the hg18 assembly of the human genome, we converted the coordinates to hg19 using the ucsc lift-over tool. out of a total of 31 782 snps, 30 932 (97) were previously reported in dbsnp and 850 (3) were novel. the results are summarized in supplementary table s2 (supplementary materials). examples of the anntools output are presented in supplementary table s3 (supplementary materials). comparison of the anntools promoter prediction with the regionminer and gene2promoter tools (both part of the popular commercial genomatix software suite, http://www.genomatix.de) demonstrated 98 concordance. genomatix localized 113 variants to putative promoter regions while anntools identified 115, including all 113 identified by the genomatix tools. annotation speed for each set was 500 lines/min on the x86_64 gnu/linux ubuntu 10.04.3 lts server. direct comparison with two popular annotation programs (annovar, http://www .openbioinformatics.org/annovar/ and variant effect predictor tool snpeff, http://snpeff.sourceforge.net) confirmed that our method is sufficiently fast while having the advantage of providing a more comprehensive annotation for the genomic variants (see performance testing in supplementary materials). to evaluate the impact of the expanding size of the database on annotation speed, we tested anntools performance under different conditions and determined that a 10-fold expansion of the database caused only a 2-fold increase in annotation time as a result of records being sorted and indexed (see performance testing in supplementary material). complete annotated vcf files for each dataset are available from the anntools website.in summary, we developed a fast and comprehensive tool capable of annotating multiple types of human genomic variants in a highthroughput setting. easily parallelized python source code allows for the simultaneous annotation of multiple call sets in highperformance computer cluster environments. on the other hand, a low-memory footprint and modest cpu requirements enable anntools to run on a personal computer. the tool is designed with clear separation of application logic from the user interface and data, permitting independent development, testing and maintenance.  
