probabilistic models of genetic variation in structured populations applied to global human studies motivation: modern population genetics studies typically involve genome-wide genotyping of individuals from a diverse network of ancestries. an important problem is how to formulate and estimate probabilistic models of observed genotypes that account for complex population structure. the most prominent work on this problem has focused on estimating a model of admixture proportions of ancestral populations for each individual. here, we instead focus on modeling variation of the genotypes without requiring a higher-level admixture interpretation. results: we formulate two general probabilistic models, and we propose computationally efficient algorithms to estimate them. first, we show how principal component analysis can be utilized to estimate a general model that includes the well-known pritchardstephensdonnelly admixture model as a special case. noting some drawbacks of this approach, we introduce a new logistic factor analysis framework that seeks to directly model the logit transformation of probabilities underlying observed genotypes in terms of latent variables that capture population structure. we demonstrate these advances on data from the human genome diversity panel and 1000 genomes project, where we are able to identify snps that are highly differentiated with respect to structure while making minimal modeling assumptions. availability and implementation: a bioconductor r package called lfa is available atone of the most important goals of modern human genetics is to accurately model genome-wide genetic variation among individuals, as it plays a fundamental role in disease gene mapping and characterizing the evolutionary history of human populations. in this article, we develop latent variable probabilistic models and estimation methods of genetic variation that provide allele frequency estimates of each individual/snp combination in the presence of arbitrarily complex population structure. accurate estimates of allele frequencies in this setting allow for improved tests of genetic associations with complex traits and other population genetic analyses which do not rely on overly restricted models of population structure. for example, the models and methods developed here provide the key estimation step in the implementation of a new framework for association testing in the presence of arbitrarily complex structure . other applications we explore here are to v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.we applied our methods to a comprehensive set of simulation studies and to the hgdp and tgp datasets.  
