gene expression probeselect: selecting differentially expressed probes in transcriptional profile data transcriptional profiling still remains one of the most popular techniques for identifying relevant biomarkers in patient samples. however, heterogeneity in the population leads to poor statistical evidence for selection of most relevant biomarkers to pursue. in particular , human transcriptional differences can be subtle, making it difficult to tease out real differentially expressed biomarkers from the variability inherent in the population. to address this issue, we propose a simple statistical technique that identifies differentially expressed probes in heterogeneous populations as compared with controls. availability and implementation: the algorithm has been implemented in java and available at www.sourceforge.net/projects/high-throughput gene expression, protein or metabolite profiling of patient samples has become a standard tool of biomarker discovery for disease subtypes and progression. irrespective of the particular technology platform, be it affymetrix chip, mirna profiles, mass spec proteomics, metabolomics or so on, the challenge of focusing analyses on the most informative markers is similar. for heterogeneous diseases, the first challenging step analyzing multidimensional data is identification of markers that distinguish disease and control groups. because of heterogeneity of the disease, grouping all disease samples for comparison against healthy controls may fail in identifying markers that could be specific to only a small percentage of disease samples. once such candidate markers are identified, unsupervised clustering methods are applied to uncover the disease substructure in the biomarker space. consider a hypothetical case of a marker that is 2-fold different (1 on the log2 scale) in just 10 of disease samples with zero variability and with 90 of disease samples the same as control group. the standard deviation in disease groups for this marker will be 0.1 and the log2-fold difference between cases and controls only 1.1. assuming zero variability in controls, such a marker would only have a z score of 1, thus not significant by either fold or p-value. nevertheless, this marker clearly distinguishes a disease subtype from control and the rest of the population. first approach to address this challenge has been proposed in the seminal paper bywhere breast cancer subtypes were identified using whole-genome expression profiling. in this article, probes with variability 410 in the cohort were selected for further unsupervised clustering, and this clustering successfully recapitulated major breast cancer molecular subtypes. this simple method has been applied in numerous subsequent publications and a variety of diseases and sample types. another method frequently used is comparison of disease and control samples and identification of probes significantly different between disease and control cohorts, e.g. as implemented in limma bioconductor package . often decisions determining significance thresholds and their stringency of probe selection are arbitrary. in this article, we propose a simple statistical formalism for selection of the probes that distinguish heterogeneous disease samples from healthy controls. the standard clustering approach considers all probes with a high coefficient of variation (cv410 typically) and subsequently clusters both controls and cases to discover a structure that may separate controls from cases. in comparison, our method considers only the probes that are significantly different from healthy controls in a subgroup of patients. we apply this method to the whole-blood profiles of secondary progressive multiple sclerosis (spms) patients and uncover distinct subgroups in the patient population that, when treated as a uniform group, are indistinguishable from the control-group profiles. that is, a standard limma approach to identification of genes differentially expressed between spms and control groups does not identify any significant differences. in addition, the method used by(410 cv) selects 6013 probes, 328 of which overlap with our methods selection. however, a standard principal component analysis (pca) or hierarchical clustering in the space of these probes does not separate out the controls from the cases (supplementary).  
