a non-biased framework for the annotation and classification of the non-mirna small rna transcriptome motivation: recent progress in high-throughput sequencing technologies has largely contributed to reveal a highly complex landscape of small non-coding rnas (srnas), including novel non-canonical srnas derived from long non-coding rna, repeated elements, transcription start sites and splicing site regions among others. the published frameworks for srna data analysis are focused on mirna detection and prediction, ignoring further information in the dataset. as a consequence, tools for the identification and classification of the srnas not belonging to mirna family are currently lacking. results: here, we present, seqcluster, an extension of the currently available seqbuster tool to identify and analyze at different levels the srnas not annotated or predicted as mirnas. this new module deals with sequences mapping onto multiple locations and permits a highly versatile and user-friendly interaction with the data in order to easily classify srna sequences with a putative functional importance. we were able to detect all known classes of srnas described to date using seqcluster with different srna datasets. availability: tool and video-tutorials are available atsmall silencing rnas are the best-known class of non-coding rnas (ncrnas) of 1830 nt in length, involved in gene silencing by association to the argonaute family of proteins . recent progress in high-throughput sequencing technologies has largely contributed to elucidate the remarkable landscape of srnas, revealing new species of srnas with unknown functions. these novel srnas are classified according to their position in the genome and putative functions. nowadays, five major groups of srnas have been detected: (i) tirnas, located at the transcription initiation site of coding genes ; (ii) spli-rnas, detected at splicing site of transcripts ; (iii) tasi-rnas, associated to gene termini; (iv) srnas derived from trna and(v) srnas from non-coding rna regions .in the first process the adapter is trimmed from the raw sequences, and subsequently sequences are mapped onto mirna and mirna precursor databases. after that, all sequences not annotated as mirnas or mirna precursors are clustered in clustering step. this step is performed according to two filters: (i) sequence similarity and (ii) genome location. in the classification step, usrnas are classified according to the genome context that will cover as many classes and subclasses as the users define. once usrnas are defined and located on the genome, all of them are classified according to the genome context that will cover as many classes as the users define, being the more common types: non-coding rnas, transposable elements (tes), and genes (see usrna classification in supplementary material).we have applied seqcluster extension to analyze small rna datasets of human brain samples sequenced by illumina 1g in our previous work and other public dataset from different species (see seqcluster application to real datasets in supplementary material). first, we detected mirna sequences using seqbuster with default parameters and the mirbase resource (release 15, ). we applied seqcluster extension to the rest of the data, resulting in a total of 8335, 12 366, 15 614, 44 265 and 82 985 sequences annotated as usrnas in human brain, human stem cells, mouse, fly and worm, respectively.  
