probonto: ontology and knowledge base of probability distributions motivation: probability distributions play a central role in mathematical and statistical modelling. the encoding, annotation and exchange of such models could be greatly simplified by a resource providing a common reference for the definition of probability distributions. although some resources exist, no suitably detailed and complex ontology exists nor any database allowing pro-grammatic access. results: probonto, is an ontology-based knowledge base of probability distributions, featuring more than 80 uni-and multivariate distributions with their defining functions, characteristics, relationships and re-parameterization formulas. it can be used for model annotation and facilitates the encoding of distribution-based models, related functions and quantities. availability and implementation:when encoding probabilistic uncertainties using a given parametric distribution, its name and parameters are usually sufficient to specify the intended distribution unambiguously, as in many cases such parameter set is unique. however, in multiple cases, two or more parameterizations exist and it becomes essential to specify correctly the parameters for the distribution in order to obtain the correct model. a well-structured, independent, standard reference would greatly facilitate the specification of a distribution and its declaration in a programming language or exchange format as is shown by interoperability issues between tools with distributions differing in their parameterizations . many resources are available online , as tools and in printed format but a comprehensive ontology which formalizes the theory of kinds and relations of probability distributions does not yet exist. some bioportal ontologies provide a simple classification and little information; in most cases parameters, defining functions, or quantities are not defined and information about the relationships between distributions is not available. such ontologies, because of their simplicity, are insufficient for our purposes and it is the same with existing databases of distributions.  
