promiscuous mrna splicing under the control of aire in medullary thymic epithelial cells motivation: the expression of tissue-restricted antigens (tras) in the thymus is required to ensure efficient negative selection of potentially auto-reactive t lymphocytes and avoid autoimmune disease. this promiscuous expression is under the control of the autoimmune regulator (aire), a transcription factor expressed in medullary thymic epithelial cells (mtecs). tissue-specific alternative splicing may also produce tras but the extent to which splice isoforms that are restricted to specific tissues are expressed in mtecs is yet to be investigated. results: we reanalyzed microarray and rna-seq datasets from mouse mtecs and other epithelial and non-epithelial cell types and found that the diversity of splice isoforms in mtecs was greater than in any of the other cell types or tissues studied. we identified tissue-specific isoforms from a panel of mouse tissues and found several examples of such isoforms that are expressed in mtecs. the number of isoforms with restricted expression found in mtecs was significantly higher than for comparable cell types. furthermore, we found evidence that aire influences the increased splicing diversity observed in mtecs as the genes for which tissue restricted isoforms are produced in mtecs were significantly more likely than other genes to be differentially spliced between aire knockout and wild-type samples. our results suggest that developing t lymphocytes are exposed to diverse tissue-restricted splice isoforms in the thymus and that aire has a direct or indirect role in this process, representing a novel aspect of its role in the maintenance of immune self-tolerance.t lymphocytes are cells of the adaptive immune system that are capable of recognizing and binding foreign peptides presented on the surface of other cells by major histocompatibility (mhc) class molecules. recognition is mediated by the t cell receptor (tcr), a surface bound receptor, generated by a stochastic process of generearrangement during t cell development in the thymus. this somatic rearrangement results in a diverse repertoire of t cells, each expressing a single tcr that is capable of recognizing a limited set of peptide-mhc complexes. however, given the stochastic process by which these tcrs are generated, the possibility arises that a tcr may show an affinity for self-peptide-mhc complexes, leading to an autoimmune response. to avoid this, t cells undergo a process of selection in the thymus, whereby the developing t cell is exposed to a range of self-peptide-mhc complexes. this process, referred to as negative selection, results in the deletion from the t cell repertoire of cells with high affinity for self-peptide-mhc complexes . the range of self-peptides to which the developing t cells are exposed includes a number of peptides that are normally only expressed in specific tissues outside the thymus. this ectopic expression of tissue-restricted antigens (tras), which helps to preventathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (apeced), an autoimmune disease which affects multiple endocrine organs . although aire has been shown to increase the level of spliced versus un-spliced mrnas , little is known about the impact of aire on alternative splicing, and the extent to which it can cause expression of alternative splice isoforms, resulting in isoform-specific tra expression in the thymus. previous work has shown that aire interacts with a number of proteins involved in pre-mrna processing and spliceosome binding , including splicing factors such as sc35, an sr protein involved in transcriptional elongation through the recruitment of the positive transcription elongation factor b (p-tefb;), and in the commitment of pre-mrnas to the splicing pathway . aire can also interact directly with p-tefb . a mutation in the transcription activation domain (tad) of aire, found in apeced patients, can prevent this interaction, leading to a decrease in the level of spliced versus un-spliced mrnas . in order to ensure efficient negative selection, a diverse range of peptides needs to be presented in the thymus to developing t cells. this includes peptides that are introduced by alternative splicing , specifically tras resulting from tissuespecific alternative splicing. to investigate the diversity of alternative splicing in the thymus, we calculated splicing entropy using existing rna-seq data from mtecs and compared it with the splicing entropy of other tissues. entropy can be considered as a measure of uncertainty, and splicing entropy reflects the diversity of observed splice isoforms in a given sample. we also compared mrna splicing between wild-type and knock-out mtecs. finally, we investigated the ectopic expression of tissue-specific splice isoforms in mtecs. we suggest that aire plays a role in promiscuous splicing in mtecs, resulting in the expression of tras in the thymus for the purpose of negative selection of t cells. this is likely to contribute to the role of aire in inducing tolerance to self-antigens.it is well established that aire induces the expression of tissue restricted genes in the thymus. here, we show that aire also influences alternative splicing in mtecs, increasing the number of exons detectable per gene and allowing antigens on these exons to be produced. mtecs express a range of tissue-specific splice isoforms and knock-out of aire affects splicing of the genes for which tissuerestricted splice isoforms are found in mtecs. we suggest that promiscuous splicing in mtecs is under the control of aire, and that aby tissue-specific splice isoforms found in mtecs only (i.e. found in mtecs but not in ctecs or secs), the second column includes all 21 tissue-specific isoforms found in secs, whether or not they are expressed in mtecs or ctecs breakdown in this mechanism would result in the absence of isoform-specific tras in the thymus, allowing t cells capable of directing autoimmunity towards tissue-specific isoforms to escape the thymus and contribute to autoimmine disease.  
