a non-independent energy-based multiple sequence alignment improves prediction of transcription factor binding sites motivation: multiple sequence alignments (msas) are usually scored under the assumption that the sequences being aligned have evolved by common descent. consequently, the differences between sequences reflect the impact of insertions, deletions and mutations. however, non-coding dna binding sequences, such as transcription factor binding sites (tfbss), are frequently not related by common descent, and so the existing alignment scoring methods are not well suited for aligning such sequences. results: we present a novel multiple msa methodology that scores tfbs dna sequences by including the interdependence of neighboring bases. we introduced two variants supported by different underlying null hypotheses, one statistically and the other thermo-dynamically generated. we assessed the alignments through their performance in tfbs prediction; both methods show considerable improvements when compared with standard msa algorithms. moreover, the thermodynamically generated null hypothesis outper-forms the statistical one due to improved stability in the base stacking free energy of the alignment. the thermodynamically generated null hypothesis method can be downloaded from http://sourceforge.net/ projects/msa-edna/with the advent of third-generation sequencing technology, the rate of genome sequencing is likely to continue to outstrip the capacity for experimental analysis of gene function and regulation. in addition, there is a similar growth in the availability of transcription factor binding site (tfbs) sequences through genome-wide chip-seq methods. thus, there is a continued need for more accurate computational methodologies. particularly important are multiple sequence alignment (msa) programs, such as clustalw and dialign , that are widely used to identify sections of protein or dna sequences that share similar consensus. these alignment programs generally work under the assumption that the sequences being aligned are evolutionarily related and that they have been derived from a common ancestor, undergoing changes because of insertions, deletions and substitutions. this assumption is then built into scoring matrices, which are used to find the best possible alignment, such as blosum and pam , as well as for gap penalties. however, non-coding dna regions, especially tfbss, are rather more conserved and not necessarily evolutionarily related , and may have converged from noncommon ancestors. thus, the assumptions used to align protein sequences and dna coding regions are inherently different from those that hold for tfbs sequences. although it is meaningful to align dna coding regions for homologous sequences using mutation operators, alignment of binding site sequences for the same transcription factor cannot rely on mutation operators. similarly, the evolutionary operator of point mutations can be used to define an edit distance for coding sequences, but this has little meaning for tfbs sequences because any sequence variation has to maintain a certain level of specificity for the binding site to function. it has been long known that interdependencies between neighboring dna bases have a significant impact on dna topology. for example, the thermodynamic properties of base stacking interactions have been extensively measured and are commonly used in computational methods for dna secondary structure prediction . this was illustrated in work discussing the effect of dna flexure on the binding site affinity . compensating mutations between neighboring dna bases have been long known . consideration of the codependencies between dna bases in a tfbs have been proved to be efficient in modeling binding site specificity , also suggesting the possibility of coevolution between the dna bases . we have shown in previous work using mutual information analysis that there are dependencies between neighboring and distant positions of the tfbss; many of the distant interactions reflect the palindromic nature of tfbss. the issues of effective msas for dna binding sites become particularly important for supervised tfbs prediction. supervised tfbs prediction algorithms take as input a set of known tfbs sequences, known as a training set, and use these to build an expected model of the tfbs that can be used to identify further sequences . these can be contrasted with de novo binding site prediction methods that analyze upstream regions to whom correspondence should be addressed. of genes to find overrepresented motifs and which are not the subject of this article. we previously demonstrated that the use of a nonoptimal alignment for training can seriously disrupt tfbs prediction efficacy, even as compared with using a block alignment . moreover, effective supervised tfbs prediction relies on a suitably large training set of known binding sites, and so predictions can only be made for global regulators. most transcription factors only regulate a small number of genes, and supervised prediction of those non-global regulators has been particularly hard. one solution would be to use binding sites from paralogous or orthologous transcription factors, as interdependence patterns are similar across related transcription factors . to do so, it becomes necessary to produce msas for those binding sites that capture tfbs specificity. in this article, we aim to include the interdependencies in the msa to provide a better representation for the dna binding site specificity. we introduce a dinucleotide representation method of the tfbs sequence that captures the interdependencies. we then introduce two alignment cost metrics methodologies: the first is using a statistical approach similar to the one used to calculate blosum ; the second makes use of base stacking thermodynamics. we specifically used a boltzmann distribution centered on the change in base stacking free energy as the null hypothesis for dinucleotide substitutions. to validate our work, we compare both methods against each other, against other commonly used alignment methods (clustalw, dialign) and against our previously published method using block alignments. there is a good range of benchmark alignments to test protein msa methods including balibase , oxbench , sabmark and smart . for dna coding regions,have developed a dna reference benchmark based on the tertiary structure of encoded protein. however, no such benchmark alignments are available for non-coding dna sequences. a score is often used to detect the accuracy of the msa using the homology in the resulting alignment . the approach we take is to test the alignments for their capacity to act as a training set for a supervised first-order hidden markov model (hmm) to predict known tfbss.we have developed a new methodology for msas of non-coding dna sequences that uses an alignment of dinucleotides. two variants have been described, using two different null hypotheses, one statistically driven and the other thermodynamically driven. these have been compared with other alignment programs, exemplified by clustalw and dialign, which are designed with a null hypothesis derived from the evolution of peptide sequences. they have been evaluated by assessing tfbs prediction for 18 global regulators from e.coli k12. the roc curves for the first-order supervised hmm prediction using the dinucleotide alignment demonstrated better alignment than the current alignment tools, irrespective of the null hypothesis used. between the two variants, the use of thermodynamic-driven null hypothesis proved to be statistically better. the boltzmann distribution derived provides a base stacking interaction dinucleotide distribution for each tfbs set studied. an independent thermodynamic joint distribution of dinucleotides represents the random distribution of dinucleotide thermodynamic alignment. the log odd scoring system in this case would provide a negative or 0 score if the observed dinucleotides alignment joint probability is less than or equal to the random joint probability, and positive otherwise. accordingly, scoring the observed joint distribution versus this null hypothesis distribution would indicate the odds of randomly aligning any dinucleotide pair under thermodynamic hypothesis. the higher these odds are, the less favored they are in the alignment. this would indicate that the resulting alignment from edna would favor to align dinucleotides that are more thermodynamically dependent than independent.  
