protael: protein data visualization library for the web protael is a javascript library for creating interactive visualizations of biological sequences and various associated data. it allows users to generate high-quality vector graphics (svg) and integrate it into web pages. availability and implementation: protael distribution, documentation and examples are freely available atpredictive methods of bioinformatics address the gap between the explosive growth of sequence data and experimental characterization of biomolecules. the number and accuracy of prediction methods are increasing but the individual algorithms are often implemented as separate programs and webservers. from a user point of view this creates a need for shopping around and then often manual integration of the results into a comprehensive bioinformatics characterization of a protein. at the same time, servers, which automatically combine results of different prediction algorithms, require graphical tools to integrate different types of proteinrelated data and predictions into a single visualization. while there are many excellent biological sequence visualization tools, most of them are tightly coupled with the specific data sources and websites and cannot be easily reused by other resource. at the time of writing we are aware of several reusable visualization libraries for the web, including pviz , rscb protein feature viewer (http://andreasprlic.github.io/proteinfeatureview/), biojs/ featureviewer and mason for feature annotations and snipviz and jsav for multiple sequence alignment. to enable fully customizable visualization of protein sequence features, predictions, annotations, various posttranslational modifications and alignments with known structures (including their local structural features) we developed protaela reusable and extendable library to display heterogeneous linear protein-related data on the web. the library is written in javascript and uses cascading style sheets (css) to define styles of the graphics elements. the visualization content is fully controlled by a single json object. protael is compatible with all modern browsers on desktop and mobile systems, and does not require any additional plugin installation. protael visualization is currently focused on proteins but it can also be used and customized for nucleic acids. generated svg visualization allows unrestricted scaling and provides vector images. protael is used to visualize protein data in cancer3d , xtalpred , pdbflex (http://pdbflex.org/) webservers and to display alignments of nucleotide sequences in bnaber .  
