protannot: an app for integrated genome browser to display how alternative splicing and transcription affect proteins one gene can produce multiple transcript variants encoding proteins with different functions. to facilitate visual analysis of transcript variants, we developed protannot, which shows protein annotations in the context of genomic sequence. protannot searches interpro and displays profile matches (protein annotations) alongside gene models, exposing how alternative promoters, splicing and 3 0 end processing add, remove, or remodel functional motifs. to draw attention to these effects, protannot color-codes exons by frame and displays a cityscape graphic summarizing exonic sequence at each position. these techniques make visual analysis of alternative transcripts faster and more convenient for biologists. availability and implementation: protannot is a plug-in app for integrated genome browser, an open source desktop genome browser available from http://www.bioviz.org.many genes produce multiple transcript variants due to alternative splicing, alternative promoters and alternative 3 0 end processing. often these transcript variants encode proteins with different amino acid sequences and thus different functions. we and other groups have often used protein annotation methods to detect when this occurs. for example, we used blocks, interpro and tm-hmm to show that alternative transcription frequently remodels or deletes conserved regions and trans-membrane spans in human and mouse proteins . however, even now it is difficult for biologists to perform similar analysis. using web tools , biologists can identify conserved regions in proteins encoded by different splice variants, but mapping those regions back onto gene structures is time-consuming and error-prone. to address this, we developed protannot as a new plug-in extension for the integrated genome browser (igb). igb is a highly interactive, desktop genome browser that helps biologists explore and analyze experimental data from genomics, especially rna-seq data . using protannot together with igb, users can achieve deeper insight into how alternative transcription affects protein sequence and function.protannot enables fast, efficient visual analysis of the impact of alternative transcription on proteins by extending standard genome browser iconography, in which linked blocks represent transcript structures and block thickness indicate translated regions. protannot improves on this in three ways. first, it uses exon fill colors to show the frame of translation, revealing frame shifts across transcript variants. by comparing exon colors between transcripts, a user can quickly determine if they encode the same protein without having to zoom in to see the amino acid sequence.protannot benefits users by exposing how gene structures affect protein sequence and function. as such, protannot complements the mi bundle, another igb extension that links genomic features to protein interaction and structure viewers . like mi bundle, protannot highlights relationships between the language of dna (exons, introns, codons) and the more structure-oriented  
