protein domain recurrence and order can enhance prediction of protein functions motivation: burgeoning sequencing technologies have generated massive amounts of genomic and proteomic data. annotating the functions of proteins identified in this data has become a big and crucial problem. various computational methods have been developed to infer the protein functions based on either the sequences or domains of proteins. the existing methods, however, ignore the recurrence and the order of the protein domains in this function inference. results: we developed two new methods to infer protein functions based on protein domain recurrence and domain order. our first method, drdo, calculates the posterior probability of the gene ontology terms based on domain recurrence and domain order information, whereas our second method, drdo-nb, relies on the nave bayes methodology using the same domain architecture information. our large-scale benchmark comparisons show strong improvements in the accuracy of the protein function inference achieved by our new methods, demonstrating that domain recurrence and order can provide important information for inference of protein functions. availability: the new models are provided as open source programs atproteins play vital roles in biological systems. understanding their functions is one of the most important problems in biology today. due to rapid advances in genomic sequencing techniques and computational gene identification, the number of explored protein sequences has increased dramatically. a number of experimental methods has been developed to predict the functions of proteins . these experimental methods, however, cover only a limited number of experimental conditions and have limited protein coverage. in addition, these methods cannot follow the exponential increase in the number of newly discovered protein sequences or their variants, caused by improved sequencing technologies. to whom correspondence should be addressed. a number of protein databases has been compiled such as uniprot , pdb and cath . these databases, along with controlled function vocabularies like gene ontology (go), have made computational annotation of protein functions easier. various computational techniques have been applied to predict protein functions based on different features of protein sequences, such as protein functional sites and domains , sequence similarity and gene expression patterns . a comprehensive summary of the existing techniques can be found in a number of reviews . the classical approach to the annotation of protein functions is based on sequence similarity using blast or similar programs. other variants of this classical approach include building phylogenetic trees to infer protein functions based on proteins from the same subfamily . on the other hand, machine learning methods have been extensively applied to protein function annotation, including support vector machines , nave bayes (nb) , and decision trees to represent the go annotation hierarchy . there are also significant efforts in developing protein tertiary structure-based function prediction methods that either consider global or local structural similarity . generally, it is believed that functions of a protein are carried out via protein domains, which are proteins functional or structural units. hence, it is intuitive that protein functions can be inferred from the architecture of the domains. this logic has led to development of models to predict protein functions from domain information without regard to the protein amino acid sequence. domain context information has been applied to automatic protein function prediction either implicitly or explicitly .proposed several nave bayes models for protein function annotation. instead of using domains as the units in their models, they selected k consecutive amino acids, i.e. kgrams, as the units. the dependency between the kgrams was modeled by the navehere, we compare the drdo and drdo-nb models with the fs model and several other state-of-the-art protein function predictors. the nave bayes model proposed inis not compared here because it is not publicly available. the results from the tests with the two datasets are discussed in this section. the evaluation measurements are described in supplementary materials.the main problem with sequence-based function predictors is that the number of false positives is high. domain-based predictors, on the other hand, can achieve much higher precision. therefore, an ideal protein function annotation predictor should be able to encode both the amino acid information and the domain information. we are currently exploring how to use this sequence information in combination with our proposed models. another possible improvement to our models can be achieved by using the spatial positions of the domains with predicted or native tertiary structural information. in addition, we are also trying to consider the hierarchical nature of go terms as a directed acyclic graph (de lima) and checking the effects of considering the go terms from the mf and biological process (bp) separately, since they are quite different in describing functional signals inherited in domains. furthermore, the overlap between the predictions made by drdo and drdo-nb is about 70 (as shown in supplementary). it is thus possible to combine the prediction results from drdo and drdo-nb to further enhance the accuracy. as shown in, most of the existing proteins have fewer than 10 domains, whereas the largest number of domains found so far for a protein is less than 60. this property enables efficient enumeration as used in our methods and other domain-based predictors. the main focus of this article is to demonstrate that domain recurrence and order is important for predicting protein functions. previous methods showed that considering domain architecture improves prediction over conventional sequence similarity-based methods. here, we show that domain recurrence and order further enhance protein function inference.  
