systems biology protein-driven inference of mirna–disease associations motivation: micrornas (mirnas) are a highly abundant class of non-coding rna genes involved in cellular regulation and thus also diseases. despite mirnas being important disease factors, mirnadisease associations remain low in number and of variable reliability. furthermore, existing databases and prediction methods do not explicitly facilitate forming hypotheses about the possible molecular causes of the association , thereby making the path to experimental follow-up longer. results: here we present mirpd in which mirnaproteindisease associations are explicitly inferred. besides linking mirnas to diseases, it directly suggests the underlying proteins involved, which can be used to form hypotheses that can be experimentally tested. the inference of mirnas and diseases is made by coupling known and predicted mirnaprotein associations with proteindisease associations text mined from the literature. we present scoring schemes that allow us to rank mirnadisease associations inferred from both curated and predicted mirna targets by reliability and thereby to create high-and medium-confidence sets of associations. analyzing these, we find statistically significant enrichment for proteins involved in pathways related to cancer and type i diabetes mellitus, suggesting either a literature bias or a genuine biological trend. we show by example how the associations can be used to extract proteins for disease hypothesis. availability and implementation: all datasets, software and a search-able web site are available at http://mirpd.predictions from two state-of-the-art mirna-target methods, namely, miranda version 5 and targetscan version 6.2 . to enable comparison and integration of these sources, we mapped all mirnas to mirbase identifiers and all targets to ensembl protein identifiers (ensps) using the string aliases file . each association between a mirna (m) and a protein (p) has a quality measure assigned to it, referred to as tm, p. in case of the manually curated croft dataset, we used as score the number of medline abstracts supporting the association. for miranda and targetscan, we used the mirsvr and context scores, respectively. in the small proportion of cases where miranda or targetscan predicts multiple target sites for the same mirna within a single mrna, we sum their scores.summarizes the mirna protein association datasets.  
