structural bioinformatics protein peeling 3d: new tools for analyzing protein structures we present an improved version of our protein peeling web server dedicated to the analysis of protein structure architecture through the identification of protein units produced by an iterative splitting algorithm. new features include identification of structural domains, detection of unstructured terminal elements and evaluation of the stability of protein unit structures. availability: the website is free and open to all users with no login requirements at http://www.dsimb.inserm.fr/dsimb-tools/analyzing the architecture and organization of protein structures is essential for understanding protein flexibility, folding, functions and interactions. we previously proposed an innovative representation of protein architecture that gives a detailed description of protein structure anatomy. proteins are split into sets of compact subregions, called protein units (pus). a pu corresponds to one sequence fragment characterized by a high number of intra-pu contacts and a low number of inter-pu contacts. contact probabilities between residues are computed as distances between c atoms using a logistic function. using this contact probability matrix and an optimization procedure based on matthewss correlation coefficient (mcc) between submatrices, the algorithm defines optimal cutting points that separate the region examined into two or three pus. this methodology is called protein peeling (pp) . the process is iterated until the compactness of the pus reaches a given limit. an index assesses the compactness quality and relative independence of each pu. pus bridge the representation and description gap between secondary structures and structural domains. pp is a useful tool for better understanding and analyzing the organization of protein structures. the pp 2 web server has been developed to accommodate advanced parameters. here, we present a new version of our pp web server that offers substantial improvements and new features: recognition of unstructured n-or c-terminal segments, a novel scoring function for pu characterization and identification of structural domains. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
