protein–protein binding affinity prediction from amino acid sequence motivation: proteinprotein interactions play crucial roles in many biological processes and are responsible for smooth functioning of the machinery in living organisms. predicting the binding affinity of pro-teinprotein complexes provides deep insights to understand the recognition mechanism and identify the strong binding partners in proteinprotein interaction networks. results: in this work, we have collected the experimental binding affinity data for a set of 135 proteinprotein complexes and analyzed the relationship between binding affinity and 642 properties obtained from amino acid sequence. we noticed that the overall correlation is poor, and the factors influencing affinity depends on the type of the complex based on their function, molecular weight and binding site residues. based on the results, we have developed a novel methodology for predicting the binding affinity of proteinprotein complexes using sequence based features by classifying the complexes with respect to their function and predicted percentage of binding site residues. we have developed regression models for the complexes belonging to different classes with three to five properties, which showed a correlation in the range of 0.7390.992 using jack-knife test. we suggest that our approach adds a new aspect of biological significance in terms of classifying the proteinprotein complexes for affinity prediction.proteinprotein interactions are crucial prerequisite for many biological interactions involved in cellular signaling, immunity, cellular transport, etc. it is important to identify the interacting pairs of proteins and their strength of interaction for understanding the functions in proteinprotein interaction networks. in the past, several studies have been carried out to understand the principle and recognition mechanism of proteinprotein complexes , and most of them suggested the importance of amino acid residues located at the interface of the two interacting proteins for the recognition process . recently,suggested that along with the interface residues, non-interface residues also play a key role in protein protein interactions. experimentally, proteinprotein interactions have been mainly studied with the yeast two-hybrid system, f orster/fluorescence resonance energy transfer, surface plasmon resonance and isothermal titration calorimetry, which provide the affinity of interacting proteins in terms of dissociation constant and binding free energy change, thereby adding a new dimension to the task of proteinprotein interaction network analysis. these experimental techniques for measuring the proteinprotein binding affinity require expensive experimental setup and heavy man power and are time-consuming. hence, computational methods have been developed for predicting the binding affinity that has a strong potential to help experimental biologists for selecting proteinprotein complexes of interest with respect to the binding affinity. the problem of binding affinity prediction has been addressed for the past two decades starting with a relatively small dataset of 15 complexes . consequently, various structure-based methods have been proposed using empirical scoring functions , knowledge-based methods and quantitative structureactivity relationships . the main drawback of these methods is they either considered less number of data or used improper validation procedures.set up a benchmark dataset and discussed the performance of several available methods. they reported that the performance of most of the methods was poor on the benchmark dataset. further,refined the dataset, which contains the experimental affinity data for a non-redundant set of 144 proteinprotein complexes along with the information about their free proteins. this led to the development of few structure-based methods for proteinprotein affinity prediction, and most of them performed well only on the rigid complexes .developed a method using 378 features, which caused the possibility of over-fitting. hence, it is necessary to develop accurate and reliable methods to address the task of predicting proteinprotein binding affinity. recently, we have devised a model based on machine learning approaches for distinguishing low-and highaffinity proteinprotein complexes using sequence-based parameters (in this work, we have developed a novel approach for predicting the binding affinity of a given proteinprotein complex from its amino acid sequence. we have classified the proteinprotein complexes based on their function, molecular weight and percentage of binding site residues and analyzed the relationship between sequence and structural properties of interacting free proteins and binding affinity. this imparts biological relevance to the prediction method, as the function of the complex is also taken into consideration. we have classified the complexes into nine groups based on their functions and set up multiple regression equations for predicting the binding affinity. our method showed a correlation range of 0.8360.998 and 0.7390.992 using self-consistency and jack-knife test, respectively.we have developed the first sequence-based method for predicting the binding affinity of proteinprotein complexes using a robust methodology based on the functional classification. we obtained a mean correlation and mae of 0.91 and 0.52, respectively, using jack-knife test. further, we have systematically analyzed the importance of selected features in each class and related with experimental observations. it is evident that the percentage of binding site residues plays an important role in governing proteinprotein binding affinity. we suggest that our method (ppa-pred) could be used as an efficient tool for proteinprotein interaction network analysis for specific diseases. visiting fellowship. the authors acknowledge the reviewers for their constructive comments.  
