structural bioinformatics protein stability: a single recorded mutation aids in predicting the effects of other mutations in the same amino acid site motivation: accurate prediction of protein stability is important for understanding the molecular underpinnings of diseases and for the design of new proteins. we introduce a novel approach for the prediction of changes in protein stability that arise from a single-site amino acid substitution; the approach uses available data on mutations occurring in the same position and in other positions. our algorithm, named pro-maya (protein mutant stability analyzer), combines a collaborative filtering baseline model, random forests regression and a diverse set of features. pro-maya predicts the stability free energy difference of mutant versus wild type, denoted as g. results: we evaluated our algorithm extensively using cross-validation on two previously utilized datasets of single amino acid mutations and a (third) validation set. the results indicate that using known g values of mutations at the query position improves the accuracy of g predictions for other mutations in that position. the accuracy of our predictions in such cases significantly surpasses that of similar methods, achieving, e.g. a pearsons correlation coefficient of 0.79 and a root mean square error of 0.96 on the validation set. because pro-maya uses a diverse set of features, including predictions using two other methods, it also performs slightly better than other methods in the absence of additional experimental data on the query positions. availability: pro-maya is freely available via web server atunderstanding the mechanisms by which mutations affect protein stability is important for characterizing disease mechanisms and for protein design . hence, the energetics of mutants has been studied extensively through experimental and theoretical approaches. to whom correspondence should be addressed.the methods for predicting the change in a proteins stability (g) that results from a single amino acid mutation can be roughly classified according to the types of effective potentials they rely on: physical effective potentials (pep), statistical effective potentials (sep) and empirical effective potentials (eep). notably, none of these potentials explicitly take into consideration relevant known mutations at the query position. pep-based methods use atomic-level representations to capture the underlying physical phenomena affecting protein stability, e.g. van der waals interactions and dihedral (torsion) angle . these techniques are computationally demanding and not applicable to large datasets . sep-based methods are based on the inverse boltzmann law, which states that probability densities and energies are closely related quantities. hence, these methods use datasets of proteins of known structures to calculate conditional probabilities that certain residues or atoms will appear in different contexts. most sep-based methods use pairwise potentials , though some studies have employed higher order potentials; for exampleused a fourbody potential. sep-based methods are computationally efficient, more robust than pep-based methods to low-resolution protein structure prediction and are suitable to include known and unknown physical effects . methods in the third category (eep-based) use experimental energy data to calibrate the weights of the energy function terms. the types of energy terms used can vary and might be sep-, pep-, physicochemically-or evolution-based methods . for example, popmusic-2.0 utilizes a neural network algorithm with sep features that couple between the identity of the amino acid, secondary structure, accessibility and the spatial distance between amino acids . conversely, foldxs energy function consists of pep energy terms calibrated using a grid search method on experimental data. the recently developed prethermut tool incorporates the energy terms of foldx and modeller into a random forests machine regression, and has reached impressive results. the use of a machine learning algorithm enables non-energy-like terms to be incorporated into the scoring function . for example, both i-mutant2.0 and mupro encode the identities of the wildtype (wt) and mutant amino acids in addition to the quantitywe tested pro-maya extensively using cross-validation on two datasets and an additional validation dataset, and found that it outperformed current methods for the prediction of mutation stability. our results demonstrate that the availability of as few as one or two records in the query position improve the prediction accuracy of g values of additional mutations in that position. this improvement is independent of the amino acid identity of these records and of the sequence identity of the query protein to the training set. thus, a systematic alanine-scanning mutagenesis of all the amino acids in a protein could greatly increase pro-mayas prediction accuracy for any mutation in the protein. the performance of our random forests prediction scheme on the srpm subset is slightly better than that of the other methods we investigated. we attribute the improvement to the use of an inhomogeneous feature set comprising pep-, sep-and evolutionbased features, including predictions by the prethermut and popmusic-2.0 tools. previous prediction methods, in contrast, have been based on features of a single type (e.g. only pep). pro-mayas rmses for mutations in the popmusic-db set are consistently lower than those for the potapov-db set. this is presumably because of the different procedures used for compilation of each dataset. popmusic-dbs compilation procedure used a weighted average of the identical mutations occurring in different conditions to calculate the g values that are most likely to occur at physiological conditions. whereas, the potapov-db compilation procedure gives equal weight to the various conditions at which g values are measured. our prediction scheme does not take into account the conditions at which the g was measured. thus, it assumes that all measurements were taken under the same conditions. therefore, the popmusic-db mutation set, which is characterized by more homogenous experimental conditions, is presumably more suitable for our prediction scheme, as indicated by the low rmse value. to achieve more accurate predictions, we trained the pro-maya web server using the popmusic-db set. thus, the server is best suited for predicting mutations at physiological conditions. pro-mayas improved accuracy is facilitated by the use of a baseline estimator that utilizes known g records to determine a position-specific baseline g (b i ) model. the underlying assumption of pro-maya is that the g of a mutation is strongly dependent on properties that are inherent to the amino acid position in the protein (e.g. solvent accessibility, amino acid identity, interaction with the environment and secondary structure). thus, on average all mutations at the same position are expected to have similar g values. therefore, the position baseline g which presumably reflects the inherent properties of the position can roughly model the query mutation. to fully model a mutation, pro-maya also uses a content based-model and a mu-specific g baseline-based model. these models describe the mutation outcome attributes (e.g. physicochemical properties) and predict the g shift from the position baseline. nevertheless, it is expected that mutations with an irregular g that differs much from the position g baseline would be harder to predict. by design, pro-maya is not very suitable as a classifier of whether a mutation would stabilize or destabilize the protein; a classifier should be trained to this end. cf algorithms have been developed mainly for online electronic commerce applications and are particularly useful for exploiting large datasets very rapidly. to the best of our knowledge, their use in biology is quite scarce . the success of the cfcb algorithm in this study and the capability of the neighborhood-and latent factor-based models to identify biological properties (discussed in the supplementary material) suggest that the cf approach could be applied to additional problems in biology. examples include the identification of deleterious mutations in single nucleotide polymorphism data, the detection of true protein protein interactions in noisy yeast two-hybrid and massspectrometry data, as well as the prediction of ligand and drug molecules that could bind target proteins. our cfcb algorithm and its integration with the neighborhood-and latent factor-based models can be readily adapted to these problems.  
