protein subcellular localization of fluorescence imagery using spatial and transform domain features motivation: subcellular localization of proteins is one of the most significant characteristics of living cells. prediction of protein subcellular locations is crucial to the understanding of various protein functions. therefore, an accurate, computationally efficient and reliable prediction system is required. results: in this article, the predictions of various support vector machine (svm) models have been combined through majority voting. the proposed ensemble svm-subloc has achieved the highest success rates of 99.7 using hybrid features of haralick textures and local binary patterns (harlbp), 99.4 using hybrid features of haralick textures and local ternary patterns (harltp). in addition, svm-subloc has yielded 99.0 accuracy using only local ternary patterns (ltps) based features. the dimensionality of harlbp feature vector is 581 compared with 78 and 52 for harltp and ltps, respectively. hence, svm-subloc in conjunction with ltps is fast, sufficiently accurate and simple predictive system. the proposed svm-subloc approach thus provides superior prediction performance using the reduced feature space compared with existing approaches. availability: a web server accompanying the proposed prediction scheme is available at http://111.68.99.218/ svm-subloccomprehension of the functions of proteins is of prime importance in the field of biological sciences . one of the significant characteristics of proteins is its subcellular localization that reveals precious information regarding the working of proteins . determining protein subcellular locations is significant to the understanding of various protein functions. for instance, during the drug discovery process, precise knowledge of the subcellular localization of proteins can be useful for the identification of drugs. in addition, the effectiveness of drugs can be estimated by knowing the exact locations of proteins before and after using the drugs . fluorescence microscopy is frequently used to determine subcellular localization of proteins in cells. images of protein to whom correspondence should be addressed. locations are normally analyzed in traditional ways, which are time consuming and prone to errors . automated approaches are thus required for the classification of such images. these methods need to be computationally efficient and accurate. fortunately, considerable progress is made in recent years for the development of computational methods that can automatically determine the subcellular protein locations from fluorescence microscopy images . murphy et al. have developed subcellular location feature (slf) sets and trained a back propagation neural network (bpnn) to test the performance of these features using 2d hela dataset . boland and murphy have tested the performance of haralick textures, zernike moments, slf1 and different combination of these three by employing the bpnns .have trained bpnn using enhanced feature sets consisting of haralick textures, zernike moments and morphological features.have employed support vector machine (svm) using various feature extraction strategies including threshold adjacency statistics (tass), zernike moments as well as a hybrid of tass and haralick textures.have developed automated classification system for protein subcellular location images in multiresolution subspaces. they have employed ann at different decomposition levels to obtain the classification results, which are then combined through weight assignment.have utilized random subspace of levenbergmarquardt neural networks and adaboost learning algorithm. in addition, they have employed the fusion between these two ensemble classifiers, while different local and global descriptors have been implemented as feature sets. recently,have employed a random subspace of levenbergmarquardt neural networks using optimized sets of various feature extraction strategies including wavelet features, haralick textures, local binary patterns (lbps), local ternary patterns (ltps) and tass for 2d hela and locate mouse protein datasets. the models proposed by different researchers have still margin in improving the prediction accuracy and reducing the dimensionality of the feature space. the aim of this study is to develop an accurate and simple system compared with the existing approaches. we thus develop both individual and hybrid feature based classification approaches for the prediction of protein subcellular localization.in the proposed approach, we employ haralick textures, zernike moments, lbps, ltps and tass based feature extraction strategies. different hybrid feature sets are formed by concatenating these features. the performance of various kernels of svm has been investigated using these features. to enhance the performance of the proposed model, the success rates of different svms have been combined through majority voting. discrete wavelet transforms is used for the extraction of haralick textures and zernike moments only. for this purpose, we have decomposed the image upto four levels so that the best decomposition level could be detected. then, we have used statistical measures to acquire haralick textures and zernike moments from each decomposed image. rest of the article is organized as follows: datasets and different feature extraction strategies are described in section 2. the proposed approach is presented in section 3. results and discussions are elaborated in section 4. conclusions are drawn at the end.  
