protein subcellular location pattern classification in cellular images using latent discriminative models motivation: knowledge of the subcellular location of a protein is crucial for understanding its functions. the subcellular pattern of a protein is typically represented as the set of cellular components in which it is located, and an important task is to determine this set from microscope images. in this article, we address this classification problem using confocal immunofluorescence images from the human protein atlas (hpa) project. the hpa contains images of cells stained for many proteins; each is also stained for three reference components, but there are many other components that are invisible. given one such cell, the task is to classify the pattern type of the stained protein. we first randomly select local image regions within the cells, and then extract various carefully designed features from these regions. this region-based approach enables us to explicitly study the relationship between proteins and different cell components, as well as the interactions between these components. to achieve these two goals, we propose two discriminative models that extend logistic regression with structured latent variables. the first model allows the same protein pattern class to be expressed differently according to the underlying components in different regions. the second model further captures the spatial dependencies between the components within the same cell so that we can better infer these components. to learn these models, we propose a fast approximate algorithm for inference, and then use gradient-based methods to maximize the data likelihood. results: in the experiments, we show that the proposed models help improve the classification accuracies on synthetic data and real cellular images. the best overall accuracy we report in this article for classifying 942 proteins into 13 classes of patterns is about 84.6, which to our knowledge is the best so far. in addition, the dependencies learned are consistent with prior knowledge of cell organization.the systematic study of subcellular protein location patterns is required for the full characterization of the human proteome, as these location patterns provide context necessary for understanding the proteins functions. given human protein atlas (hpa) images that demonstrate the spatial distribution of various proteins and components (organelles) in cells, each of which has been assigned to one of 13 location pattern classes by visual inspection, our goal is to learn to recognize those pattern classes in future images. we can solve this problem using multiclass classification methods. however, a key difficulty is that we can only observe three types of reference components due to the limitation of staining and imaging techniques. therefore, it is hard to infer the locations of the invisible components given the observations. for example, we may want to classify a protein into the class of golgi complex if it mainly overlaps with the golgi complex, but the golgi complex is not directly visible to us in the images. thereby, it is important to uncover these invisible parts and then use them for classification from their co-occurrence information with the protein. although invisible, we still have some clues about the presence of a component in some region of one cell. for instance, one component may have an effect on the appearance of another overlapping and/or interacting component. we can also make inference about the component in the given image region based on the distribution of certain proteins in the cell (e.g. locations and shapes), and its relative distances to other components. if we can discover the dependencies between the observed features extracted from regions and the underlying components, as well as the co-localization relationships between components, then the presence of those hidden components can be inferred and our classification task would be easier. we therefore aim at learning from the data the dependencies among features, components and the protein pattern classes into which the images have been divided. to accomplish this, we build two graphical models with latent variables to capture the components and these dependencies. these two models are based on logistic regression (lr) . the first model, called hidden logistic regression (hlr), introduces the concept of component as a latent variable into the simple lr, so that the protein and the component can determine the expressed features together. the second model, called hidden conditional random field (hcrf), further introduces spatial dependencies among components at different locations as in conditional random field (crf) developed by. these two models can capture the components influence on the expressed features and their spatial configurations, hopefully improving our ability to recognize the patterns. we use gradient-based methods to estimate the models parameters. we show that the gradients depend on the marginal probabilities on the nodes and edges in the model. for hlr, this computation is easy. but for the hcrf model, inferences for these marginals cannot be done exactly. to address this difficulty inin this article, we address the problem of classifying proteins based on their subcellular localization patterns. given the spatial distribution of a protein in the cells, we want to know the class of this protein. to solve this problem, we proposed two discriminative models that extend lr with latent variables. the first one, called the hlr, extends regular logistic regression so that the features can depend on factors other than the class label. the hlr model addresses the issue that the same protein can be expressed differently at different locations of the cell. the second model, called the hcrf, further extends the hlr model by allowing the regions in the same cell to interact with each other. hcrf is able to guess the component at a location based on information from other regions, thus helping us better predict the class of the protein. in both synthetic and real data experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed models are able to enhance classification performance. particularly, on the hpa dataset, hcrf achieved 84.6 overall accuracy on proteins, which is best result up to now. in the future, we plan to enhance the performance by using better features and devise more accurate learning algorithms. for example, we can incorporate richer dependencies between components. the features can also be transformed to take potential non-linearity into considerable. more efficient inference algorithm can be developed to allow for more complex interactions between components. moreover, because there are much larger amounts of images of proteins that can localize in more than one component in cell, we want to apply the models proposed in this article to classify more challenging protein subcellular location pattern complexes.  
