systems biology an optimal experimental design approach to model discrimination in dynamic biochemical systems motivation: finding suitable models of dynamic biochemical systems is an important task in systems biology approaches to the biosciences. on the one hand, a correct model helps to understand the underlying mechanisms and on the other hand, one can use the model to predict the behavior of a biological system under various circumstances. typically, before the correct model of a biochemical system is found, different hypothetical models might be reasonable and consistent with previous knowledge and available data. the main goal now is to find the best suited model out of different hypotheses. the process of falsifying inappropriate candidate models is called model discrimination. results: we have developed a new computational tool to compute optimal experiments for biochemical kinetic systems with underlying ordinary differential equation (ode) models for the purpose of model discrimination. we were inspired by the demands of biological experimentalists which perform one run measurement where perturbations to the system are possible. we provide a criterion which calculates the number and location of time points of optimal measurements as well as optimal initial conditions and optimal perturbations to the system. availability: the model discrimination algorithm described here is implemented in c++ in the package modeldiscriminationtoolkit. the source code can be downloaded fromtypically, before the correct model of a biochemical system is found different hypothetical models might be reasonable and consistent with previous knowledge and available data. let us assume that all the models have in common that they fit one initial series of measurements. the main goal now is to find the best suited model out of different hypotheses. this is usually done by iterative measurements and successive fitting of the different models to the to whom correspondence should be addressed. collectivity of all series of measurements. this is repeated until all wrong models do not fit to the collectivity of all series of measurements any more. thus, the wrong models are iteratively falsified. the whole process is called model discrimination. to discriminate a set of candidate models against a given set of experimental data often likelihood ratio tests based on bootstrap methods are preformed (see e.g.). ranking methods like stewarts method or the well-known akaike information criterion (see e.g.) are popular as well in the field of biological modeling. applications can be found, for example, inor bernacki and murphy (2009). this article deals with the problem of designing experiments so that these methods can be applied in an optimal sense. this fundamentally differs from the case of finding an experimental design to best estimate the parameters of a model for a given experimental system (see e.g.). an overview of different experimental design techniques can be found in kreutz and timmer (2009). different approaches to design experiments for model discrimination exist. beside optimization methods (see e.g.), a model-based feedback controller (see e.g.) and markov chain monte carlo sampling methods are used to construct an appropriate design. we have developed a new computational tool to compute optimal experiments for biochemical kinetic systems with underlying ordinary differential equation (ode) models for the purpose of model discrimination. we were inspired by the demands of biological experimentalists who perform one run measurement where perturbations to the system are possible. we provide a criterion which calculates optimal measurement time points instead of a continuous design (see e.g.;). the theory of the new criterion is presented in section 2. in section 2.1, we give a brief overview of kullbackleibler (kl)-optimality introduced by lpez. in section 2.2, we derive our optimality criterion by use of kl-optimality. in section 2.3, we present the numerical implementation of our optimal design algorithm. numerical results on allosteric models for glycolytic oscillations are presented in section 3. we provide supplementary material for more details on theory and applications.  
