sequence analysis proteomic analysis and prediction of human phosphorylation sites in subcellular level reveal subcellular specificity motivation: protein phosphorylation is the most common post-translational modification (ptm) regulating major cellular processes through highly dynamic and complex signaling pathways. large-scale comparative phosphoproteomic studies have frequently been done on whole cells or organs by conventional bottom-up mass spec-trometry approaches, i.e at the phosphopeptide level. using this approach , there is no way to know from where the phosphopeptide signal originated. also, as a consequence of the scale of these studies, important information on the localization of phosphorylation sites in subcellular compartments (scs) is not surveyed. results: here, we present a first account of the emerging field of subcellular phosphoproteomics where a support vector machine (svm) approach was combined with a novel algorithm of discrete wavelet transform (dwt) to facilitate the identification of compartment specific phosphorylation sites and to unravel the intricate regulation of protein phosphorylation. our data reveal that the subcellular phosphorylation distribution is compartment type dependent and that the phosphorylation displays site-specific sequence motifs that diverge between scs. availability and implementation: the method and database both are available as a web server at: http://bioinfo.protein phosphorylation is a reversible post-translational modification (ptm) regulating major cellular processes such as cell division, growth and differentiation through highly dynamic and complex signaling pathways. approximately one-third of proteins encoded by the human genome are presumed to be phosphorylated during their life cycle . mass spectrometry (ms) has been successfully used to identify protein phosphorylation in specific pathways and for global phosphoproteomic analysis . however, phosphoproteomic approaches do not evaluate the subcellular localization of the phosphorylated forms of proteins, which is an important factor for understanding the roles of protein phosphorylation on a global scale and the function of protein phosphorylations in regulating biological processes. unfortunately, this understanding is limited by conventional ms technology to identify protein phosphorylations and their subcellular localization . subcellular phosphoproteomics still represents a major analytical challenge, as only a few studies were reported over the past 5 years although efficient phosphopeptide enrichment methods were available since. this is in stark contrast to the large number of subcellular proteomics studies that have been reported over the same time period, reviewed by. several examples of subcellular phosphoproteomics were chosen to illustrate how this emerging field already uncovered important biological paradigms as shown by. although subcellular phosphoproteomics has the potential to uncover new regulatory pathways, the in-depth mapping of protein phosphorylation at the subcellular level and the further understanding of their biological significance require independent methods. computational methods for identifying phosphorylation sites have become increasingly popular, which can predict potential targets to significantly reduce the number of candidates that need to be verified by ms. a recent review by trost and kusalik (2011) described a comprehensive list of these methods. most current predictors focus on organism-specific or kinase-specific phosphorylation sites, and such predictors do not take into account for specific subcellular compartment (sc). every subcellular context is highly dynamic because the expressed proteins, their abundance and their post-translational modifications (including phosphorylation) depend on the physiological state of the cell . therefore, annotating the subcellular phosphoproteome is important as can be viewed from the following four aspects. (i) it can offer helpful clues or insights about their functions; particularly, one of the fundamental goals in proteomics and cell biology is to identify the functions of proteins in the context of a specific compartment. (ii) it can indicate in what kind of and how subcellular contexts the proteins interact with other molecules and with each other; this is particularly pivotal for the in-depth study of in vivo phosphorylation networks, one of the current hot topics in phosphoproteomics. (iii) it can help our understanding of the intricate phosphorylation pathways that regulate biological processes at the subcellular level , and hence, it is indispensable for many studies in system to whom correspondence should be addressed. biology. (iv) it is extremely useful for identifying and prioritizing drug targets (http://www.biocompare.com/editorial-articles/ 41619-subcellular-targeting-of-proteins-and-drugs/) during the process of drug development. to efficiently accelerate development of the highly complex subcellular phosphoproteomic, an integrated platform combining experimentally data querying and unknown data annotation is highly demanded. here, we developed a platform that provides both a searchable online database and a computational tool to efficiently and reliably accumulate the subcellular phosphoproteome for further experimental investigation. in this work, we report the most thorough characterization of subcellular phosphoproteome in humans to date. originally, reliable experimental phosphoproteomic data with verified information of subcellular localization in humans were collected from several sources and used to profile subcellular phosphoproteome. not only do we find that most phosphorylation proteins are uniquely resided in a specific sc, but also we show that the distribution of phosphorylated proteins in scs is compartment-specific. functional enrichment analysis and proteinprotein network analysis reveal that the phosphorylation signaling pathways of scs have higher specialization. moreover, our large dataset allows us to delineate type-specific phosphorylation sequence motifs contrary to general phosphoproteome, and we show that there are sequence motifs of specific scs. overall, our observations highlight compartment-specific phosphorylation signaling pathways, which stress the importance of mapping protein phosphorylation in the physiologically relevant sc. later, we developed a bioinformatics tool termed subphospred, which combines a novel discrete wavelet transform (dwt) algorithm with a support vector machine (svm) approach to identify phosphorylation sites for different scs in humans. as one innovative character of our method, the most attractive character of wavelet transform is the ability to elucidate simultaneously both the spectral and temporal information that was used for encoding as features for ptm prediction. cross-validation tests show that the dwt algorithm can boost predictive performance and obtain encouraging prediction results for each compartment. additionally, the independent test demonstrates that the proposed method outperforms musite when the customized models use the same training datasets as subphospred. for subphospred, we have trained eight compartment-specific phosphorylation prediction models [cell membrane (cm), nucleus (nu), cytoplasm (cy), mitochondrion (mi), golgi apparatus (ga), endoplasmic reticulum (er), secretion (se) and lysosome (ly)] using datasets from our database (subphosdb). finally, the platform-integrated subphosdb database and subphospred predictor are freely available for academic research at: http://bioinfo.ncu.edu.cn/subphos.aspx.  
