gene expression proteostats—a library for estimating false discovery rates in proteomics pipelines statistical validation of peptide assignments from a large-scale shotgun proteomics experiment is a critical step, and various methods for evaluating significance based on decoy database search are in practice. false discovery rate (fdr) estimation of peptide assignments assesses global significance and corrects for multiple comparisons. various approaches have been proposed for fdr estimation but unavailability of standard tools or libraries leads to development of many in-house scripts followed by manual steps that are error-prone and low-throughput. the proteostats library provides an open-source framework for developers with many fdr estimation and visualization features for several popular search algorithms. it also provides accurate q-values, which can be easily integrated in any proteomics pipeline to provide automated, accurate, high-throughput statistical validation and minimize manual errors. availability: https://sourceforge.net/projects/mssuite/files/proteostats/.high-throughout shotgun proteomics generates millions of spectra that are assigned to peptides by database searching in an automated manner. a scoring function is used to calculate the level of similarity found between the experimental spectrum and the theoretical spectrum from a peptide. this quantitative value, known as the score, may be a probability, an expectation value or a simple score. owing to random matching of peaks in a peptide spectral match (psm), there is a fuzzy boundary between true and false matches leading to sensitivity versus specificity trade-off at any chosen threshold score. conventional metrics like p-value/e-value are intended for significance assessment of a single hit (or psm) but are not suitable for global significance assessment in large-scale datasets. a multiple testing correction procedure known as false discovery rate (fdr) is applied to the results for controlling the false positives globally. target-decoy (td) search-based fdr estimation is used as a standard method for global significance assessment . several challenges can arise in (i) dealing with multiple nonstandard file formats, (ii) presence of correct peptides in decoy results, which should be removed prior to fdr calculation and (iii) q-value calculation. leucine/isoleucine cannot be distinguished by collision-induced dissociation, resulting in identical scores for both target and decoy peptides. such peptides need to be removed from decoy hits. this is a non-trivial exercise if carried out manually but critical for accurate estimation of fdr because even one such peptide may penalize hundreds of matches in target database. the calculation can be tedious for large datasets and numerous files. fdr estimation has recently been a major field of research in statistical proteomics, and several methods and their refined variants have been proposed. unfortunately, not as many tools are available as there are fdr estimation methods. most methods involve custom in-house scripts that may not implement all nuances of the algorithm and thus lack provenance. custom pipelines only include the most popular methods like concatenated or separate methods, even though the refined methods improve the results. fdranalysis provides fdr for three algorithms but only provides fdr for concatenated search. the barrier to their widespread adoption is the lack of software. this may also lead to different implementations of same method, code duplication and a considerable waste of research effort.  
