proteus: a web-based, context-specific modelling tool for molecular networks molecular networks are often studied in diverse cellular or experimental contexts, with highly context-specific details. modelling introduces further choices as to levels of mathematical description. the resulting possibilities are difficult to explore rapidly, hampering the integration of modelling and experiment. we have developed proteus, a web-based, context-specific tool for building compartmentalized, ordinary differential equation (ode) models. it is inspired by the idea of a molecular toolkit for ca 2+ signalling. toolkits in proteus are context-independent representations of biological systems as sets of components, which may correspond to mechanisms of differing levels of complexity. users pick and choose components from a toolkit and, for each component, pick and choose from different mechanisms, each of which describes a different instantiation of the components mechanism. proteus combines these choices into a system of odes, which may then be downloaded in sbml (systems biology markup language), matlab or fortran format and independently analyzed. toolkits, components and mechanisms are user-constructible, either de novo or by cannibalizing existing models, including all those in the biomodels database. a wide variety of context-specific models may thereby be rapidly built, modified and explored. availability and implementation: proteus, implemented in c, and a prototype toolkit for modelling calcium signalling are freely and universally available at www.modularmodeling.commathematical models are increasingly used with experimental approaches to analyze the functional complexities of molecular networks. one of the challenges in doing this is model reconstruction in the light of new experiments, new knowledge, changing biological context and changing levels of mathematical description. new approaches have emerged to shift the burden of model re-construction to software. the models as programs approach has brought programming principles to bear, both at the to whom correspondence should be addressed. present address: department of bioinformatics and computational biology, genentech inc., south san francisco, california 94080, usa. low level of molecular domains, through rule-based methodologies, , and, at a higher level of modularity, through the functional paradigm, . here, we take a complementary approach inspired by biological ideas. compared to other tools, the main advantage of proteus is modularity allowing the user to model complex systems by combining simpler components via a webbased pick and choose approach. moreover, proteus allows the establishment of a user community that manages and shares toolkits and mechanisms. experimental work typically focusses on a specific biological context, such as the nf-b pathway or calcium signalling. such contexts allow for much variation in detail but also for constraining assumptions about the molecular players and their underlying mechanisms. for instance, calcium signalling is thought to involve a calcium signalling toolkit, with a limited repertoire of functional partstransporters, pumps, calcium-sensitive enzymes, buffering proteins, organelle stores and leak currentsfrom which mammalian cells mix and match-specific molecular mechanisms to orchestrate the calcium response appropriate to their biological context, . we exploit the biological idea of a toolkit by analogy at the software level.  
