protpos: a python package for the prediction of protein preferred orientation on a surface atomistic molecular dynamics simulation is a promising technique to investigate the energetics and dynamics in the proteinsurface adsorption process which is of high relevance to modern biotechnological applications. to increase the chance of success in simulating the adsorp-tion process, favorable orientations of the protein at the surface must be determined. here, we present protpos which is a lightweight and easy-to-use python package that can predict low-energy protein orientations on a surface of interest. it combines a fast conformational sampling algorithm with the energy calculation of gromacs. the advantage of protpos is it allows users to select any force fields suitable for the system at hand and provide structural output readily available for further simulation studies. availability and implementation: protpos is freely available for academic and non-profit uses atunderstanding the mechanisms of protein adsorption on surfaces is important for many biotechnological applications, such as the design of medical implants, protein biochips, drug delivery systems and point-of-care devices, etc. by virtue of molecular modeling and simulations, the protein adsorption processes, its dynamics and subsequent proteinsurface interactions can be studied at the molecular or atomic level of detail. however, a successful simulation of the adsorption process depends largely on the initial protein orientation relative to the surface . to avoid sampling protein trajectory which will eventually fail to adsorb, a work-around is to firstly determine the preferred orientations of the protein and use them as starting structures in molecular simulations. essentially, a search for the low-energy protein orientation on a given surface is an optimization process which includes a conformation generation strategy and a scoring function. for the former, a systematic rotation (and translation) of the protein or a monte carlo simulation is commonly used . for this structure determination problem, a simplified scoring function accounting for only proteinsurface interactions is usually preferred for higher computational efficiency. interaction parameters can be taken from an empirical force field or modification from the scoring function of a docking method . interestingly, unlike other structure prediction problems such as proteinligand docking or proteinprotein docking where numerous tools exist to simplify the prediction task, there are only limited choices available for fast proteinsurface structure prediction. one such option is rosettasurface which is included in the rosetta molecular modeling package, and hence the use of rosettasurface entails a deep learning curve. other prediction methods mentioned above, to our knowledge, are unavailable publicly for general use. hence, to fill this gap, we have developed a self-contained, lightweight and easy-to-use software package called prediction of protein preferred orientation on a surface (protpos) based on the protein-surface docking method described in . it combines particle swarm optimization (pso) algorithm with energy minimization to perform global and local search over six degrees of freedom of the protein translation and rotation on v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.  
