p-sams: a web site for plant artificial microrna and synthetic trans-acting small interfering rna design the plant small rna maker site (p-sams) is a web tool for the simple and automated design of artificial mirnas (amirnas) and synthetic transacting small interfering rnas (syn-tasirnas) for efficient and specific targeted gene silencing in plants. p-sams includes two applications , p-sams amirna designer and p-sams syn-tasirna designer. the navigation through both applications is wizard-assisted, and the job runtime is relatively short. both applications output the sequence of designed small rna(s), and the sequence of the two oligonucleotides required for cloning into b/c compatible vectors. availability and implementation: the p-sams website is available atartificial mirnas (amirnas) and synthetic trans-acting small interfering rnas (syn-tasirnas) are two classes of designed small rnas used to silence plant transcripts with high sequence complementarity . amirna and syn-tasirna differ in their biogenesis but are functionally similar. methods to computationally design plant small rnas are based on several criteria, including the requirement for a high degree of small rna:target rna base pairing . we recently reported efficient molecular methods to generate amirna and syn-tasirna constructs by ligation of synthesized dsdna oligonucleotides that include the amirna or syn-tasirna sequence into b/c expression vectors . b/c amirna vectors were tested in both monocots and eudicots and express a single amirna that targets one or multiple sequence-related transcripts. b/c syn-tasirna vectors express several syn-tasirnas targeting sequence-unrelated transcripts in arabidopsis and closely related species. p-sams is a wizard-assisted web tool for the simple and automated design of plant amirnas and syn-tasirnas. p-sams includes two applications, p-sams amirna designer and p-sams syn-tasirna designer. both applications output a list of recommended amirna or syn-tasirna, and the sequence of the two oligonucleotides required for cloning into compatible b/c vectors.  
