psekraac: a flexible web server for generating pseudo k-tuple reduced amino acids composition the reduced amino acids perform powerful ability for both simplifying protein complexity and identifying functional conserved regions. however, dealing with different protein problems may need different kinds of cluster methods. encouraged by the success of pseudo-amino acid composition (pseaac) algorithm, we developed a freely available web server, called psekraac (the pseudo k-tuple reduced amino acids composition). by implementing reduced amino acid alphabets, the protein complexity can be significantly simplified, which leads to decrease chance of overfitting, lower computational handicap, and reduce information redundancy. psekraac delivers more capability for protein research by incorporating three crucial parameters that describes protein composition. users can easily generate many different modes of psekraac tailored to their needs by selecting various reduced amino acids alphabets and other characteristic parameters. it is anticipated that the psekraac web server will become a very useful tool in computational proteomics and protein sequence analysis.with the emergence of big data in the post-genomic age, an enormous amount of data had been generated, which requires efficient computational methods for rapid and effective identification of biological features contained in sequences. even more so in the study of proteomics, because of the structure of protein exhibits more complexity when compared to nucleotide, due to the possible 20 amino acid peptides to the 4 nucleic bases. therefore, the complexity and information content are expanded exponentially when polypeptides are formed. also, protein sequence vary widely in length, which poses additional difficulty for incorporating the sequence-order information consistently in both dataset construction and algorithm formulation. to overcome these obstacles, the pseudo-amino acid composition (pseaac) algorithm was proposed in the year 2001. this concept has been widely utilized in nearly all areas of computational proteomics, and was selected as one of the key topics in molecular science for drug development and biomedicine . encouraged by the success of this idea, various approaches similar to pseaac had been simulated to deal with problems in protein and protein-related systems, including three powerful software programs for generating different modes of pseaac: pseaac-builder, propy and pse-in-one. when dealing with extremely large dimensions can potentially cause overfitting or high-dimension disaster , restrict by computation handicap, and increase information redundancy, which results in bad prediction accuracy. to solve this problem, we present a convenient approaches based on the idea of pseudo reduced amino acid composition (pseraac), and provide a flexible and user-friendly web server for pseudo k-tuple reduced amino acids composition (psekraac) (http://bigdata.imu.edu.cn/ psekraac), where users can easily generate many different modes of psekraac tailored to their needs by selecting various reduced amino acids alphabets and other characteristic parameters. types of reduced amino acid alphabets were proposed to generate various different modes of pseraac.  
