systems biology psexplorer: whole parameter space exploration for molecular signaling pathway dynamics motivation: mathematical models of biological systems often have a large number of parameters whose combinational variations can yield distinct qualitative behaviors. since it is intractable to examine all possible combinations of parameters for non-trivial biological pathways, it is required to have a systematic strategy to explore the parameter space in a computational way so that dynamic behaviors of a given pathway are estimated. results: we present psexplorer, a computational tool for exploring qualitative behaviors and key parameters of molecular signaling pathways. utilizing the latin hypercube sampling and a clustering technique in a recursive paradigm, the software enables users to explore the whole parameter space of the models to search for robust qualitative behaviors. the parameter space is partitioned into sub-regions according to behavioral differences. sub-regions showing robust behaviors can be identified for further analyses. the partitioning result presents a tree structure from which individual and combinational effects of parameters on model behaviors can be assessed and key factors of the models are readily identified. availability: the software, tutorial manual and test models are available for download at the following address: http://computational modeling is a valuable tool to understand the complex biological systems. such models often possess complex topological structures with multiple positive and/or negative feedbacks and a large number of parameters so that combinational perturbations on these parameter values can greatly affect qualitative behaviors of the models. two important issues in this approach are to understand the scope of behaviors that the model can experience, and to identify key parameters regulating the behaviors. bifurcation analysis is one of welldeveloped methods for qualitative behavior analysis of dynamical models. its application to systems biology is limited, however, since it can examine the effects of only a few parameters, mostly one or two at a time. although a tool for the global parametric perturbation analysis of biochemical models is available , it is focusing on parameter sensitivity analysis, i.e. a quantification of individual effects of parameter variations respecting to quantitative changes in the model outputs. in this note, we outline psexplorer, an efficient computational tool to explore high-dimensional parameter space of biochemical models for identifying qualitative behaviors and key parameters. the software supports input models in sbml format. it provides a friendly graphical user interface allowing users to vary model parameters and perform time-course simulations at ease. various graphical plotting features helps users analyze the model dynamics conveniently. its output is a tree structure that encapsulates the parameter space partitioning results in a form that is easy to visualize and provide users with additional information about important parameters and sub-regions with robust behaviors.it is imperative to employ an in silico analysis to systematically identify the specific perturbations that have significant effects on the system behaviors, especially when numerous experiments on living systems are not practical. globally perturbing model parameters to analyze system dynamics was used in previous studies . for automating the approach, psexplorer has been developed from the framework proposed bywith necessary refinements to boost computational performance. instead of using an exhaustive sampling approach, psexplorer utilizes a novel recursive stratified sampling approach that can help explore high-dimensional spaces efficiently. on each recursion step, the latin hypercube sampling requires less samples to be generated, thanks to its balancing distribution property. then, the coupling of a clustering algorithm with a regression tree model provides a mean for a parameter space stratification, which allows the sampling process to concentrate on highly heterogeneous regions while ignoring homogeneous ones. as a result, the number of samples required to properly explore the parameter spaces can significantly reduce. last but not the least, one unique feature of the software that makes it more interesting than the sensitivity analysis technique is the ability to identify combinatory effects of parameter variations on model behaviors. the result tree not only identifies sensitive parameters but it also can tell how they combine to produce a specific behavior of interest.  
