sequence analysis psicov: precise structural contact prediction using sparse inverse covariance estimation on large multiple sequence alignments motivation: the accurate prediction of residueresidue contacts, critical for maintaining the native fold of a protein, remains an open problem in the field of structural bioinformatics. interest in this long-standing problem has increased recently with algorithmic improvements and the rapid growth in the sizes of sequence families. progress could have major impacts in both structure and function prediction to name but two benefits. sequence-based contact predictions are usually made by identifying correlated mutations within multiple sequence alignments (msas), most commonly through the information-theoretic approach of calculating mutual information between pairs of sites in proteins. these predictions are often inaccurate because the true covariation signal in the msa is often masked by biases from many ancillary indirect-coupling or phylogenetic effects. here we present a novel method, psicov, which introduces the use of sparse inverse covariance estimation to the problem of protein contact prediction. our method builds on work which had previously demonstrated corrections for phylogenetic and entropic correlation noise and allows accurate discrimination of direct from indirectly coupled mutation correlations in the msa. results: psicov displays a mean precision substantially better than the best performing normalized mutual information approach and bayesian networks. for 118 out of 150 targets, the l/5 (i.e. top-l/5 predictions for a protein of length l) precision for long-range contacts (sequence separation 23) was 0.5, which represents an improvement sufficient to be of significant benefit in protein structure prediction or model quality assessment. availability: the psicov source code can be downloaded fromresidueresidue contacts are known to play critical roles in maintaining the native fold of proteins and guiding protein folding . such residue contacts are usually well to whom correspondence should be addressed. separated with regards to the primary sequence but display close proximity within the 3d structure. although different geometric criteria for defining contacts have been given in the literature, typically, contacts are regarded as those pairs of residues where the c- atoms approach within 8 of one another (c- in the case of glycine) . it has long been observed that with sufficient correct information about a proteins residueresidue contacts, it is possible to elucidate the fold of the protein . however, accurate prediction of intrachain residueresidue contacts from sequence data alone remains an open problem. a solution would yield benefits for a range of endeavours including fold recognition, ab initio protein folding, 3d model quality assessment and de novo protein design. the majority of successful approaches for contact prediction attempt to extract contact information from the content of a multiple sequence alignment (msa); usually through the simple identification of correlated mutations or by calculating the mutual information (mi) between columns in the msa . the underlying rationale rests on the fact that any given contact critical for maintaining the fold of a protein will constrain the physicochemical properties of the amino acids involved. should a given contacting residue mutate and potentially perturb the properties of the contact, then its contacting partner will be more likely to mutate to a physicochemically complementary amino acid residue, to ensure the native fold of the protein remains stabilized. turning this observation around, pairs of residues seen to coevolve in tandem and thus preserving their relative physiochemical properties, are likely candidates to form contacts. such linked mutational events are often referred to simply as correlated mutations. the physicochemical similarity of residue pairs is typically scored with the mclachlan matrix , although recent work has called into question its use . to date, a wide variety of information theory and machine learning algorithms have been applied to the problem of correlated mutation analysis including mi, neural networks, support vector machines and linear regression models .we have demonstrated that the graphical lasso procedure, previously applied successfully to other graphical inference problems such as gene network reconstruction, performs excellently in the task of identifying directly coupled covarying columns in large msas, which are indicative of residueresidue contacts in protein families. for 44 of the targets, contact prediction was excellent with a precision 0.5 for the longest-range top-l/2 predicted contacts (i.e. 50 correctly predicted long-range contacts per residue). at this level of accuracy, predicted contacts should be invaluable in determining protein folds; e.g. in protein model quality assessment or decoy selection . both the mean and peak performance of psicov is substantially higher than that achieved by either the recently proposed bayesian network approach of burger and van nimwegen (2010) or the apc corrected mutual information approach of, and it is likely that when further combined with other predicted structural information such as predicted secondary structure and solvent exposure that psicov will be able to reach even higher levels of accuracy. although psicov is able to deal with many of the statistical problems in contact prediction from large msas, there remain several practical issues. first, sequence weighting becomes more important as the sizes of families increase. it turns out that for large families, sequence weighting occupies the bulk of the computation time as it is an o(n 2 ) procedure. more efficient sequence weighting schemes do exist [e.g.], but we found these schemes performed poorly in this application, probably because they tend to overweight misaligned or incorrect sequences. secondly, the practical difficulties of accurately and automatically aligning tens or hundreds of thousands of protein sequences cannot be underestimated. better alignment methods for large sequence families are certain to offer improvements in contact prediction accuracy. although the standard graphical lasso approach has been used in psicov, other sparse learning algorithms could easily be applied to the same problem. one interesting possibility, that we are currently investigating, is to make use of a group lasso approach to cluster together covariances relating to different residue pairs. in the current approach, each potential contact is scored by summing 2020 matrix values relating to the individual amino acid pairs in the two alignment columns. in a grouped lasso approach, rather than treating the matrix values in the 2020 submatrix as independent, they could be processed as a group of related variables. overall, we would hope that more tailored sparse learning algorithms, better alignment algorithms, along with better sequence weighting and regularization schemes will significantly improve the results obtained from methods such as psicov in the future.  
