psi-search: iterative hoe-reduced profile ssearch searching iterative similarity searches with psi-blast position-specific score matrices (pssms) find many more homologs than single searches, but pssms can be contaminated when homologous alignments are extended into unrelated protein domainshomologous over-extension (hoe). psi-search combines an optimal smithwaterman local alignment sequence search, using ssearch, with the psi-blast profile construction strategy. an optional sequence boundary-masking procedure, which prevents alignments from being extended after they are initially included, can reduce hoe errors in the pssm profile. preventing hoe improves selectivity for both psi-blast and psi-search, but psi-search has 4-fold better selectivity than psi-blast and similar sensitivity at 50 and 60 family coverage. psi-search is also produces 2-for 4-fold fewer false-positives than jackhmmer, but is 5 less sensitive.psi-blast uses an iterative strategy to construct a protein profile, in the form of a position-specific score matrix (pssm), which dramatically improves homology detection in diverse protein families. improved versions of psi-blast have more accurate statistics and more sensitive consensus profiles , but the most common cause of psi-blast errors is contamination of the pssm by extension of an homologous domain into a non-homologous region (homologous over-extension, hoe) . even searches with a single welldefined domain do not guarantee uncontaminated profiles . some hoe errors can be reduced by profile cleaning;) focuses on long insertions, but requires insertion boundaries to be specified by the user, thus assuming a priori knowledge of the domain structure of the query protein.five iterative search strategiespsi-blast (standard and hoe-reduced), psi-search (standard and hoe-reduced) and jackhmmer (were evaluated on the refprotdom benchmark queries (500 sampled domain-embedded sequences) against the refprotdom benchmark database using an e-value threshold of 0.001. jackhmmer is another iterative search tool that uses hidden markov models(hmms) rather than a pssm. the output alignments from the fifth iteration were classified into true positives (tps) and false positives (fps,). at 50 family coverage, psi-search reduces the weighted fraction of errors from 4.5 (psi-blast) to 2.9 (psi-search). reducing hoe improves sensitivity even more, to 1.7 for hoe-reduced psiblast and 0.5 for hoe-reduced psi-search. at 50 coverage, jackhmmer performs very well using its statistical alignment envelope, producing only 1 weighted fps, but its selectivity is worse than psi-search or hoe-reduced psi-search at 60 and 75 coverage. overall, hoe-reduced psi-search is 9-fold more selective than psi-blast. at the end of iteration 5, 78.3, 79.5, 77.3, 78.8 and 82.5 of weighted homologs are found by psi-blast, psi-search, hoe-reduced psi-blast, hoe-reduced psi-search and jackhmmer respectively. thus, (i) hoe-reduction greatly improves search selectivity with a small cost in sensitivity in both psi-blast and psi-search; (ii) both psi-search and jackhmmer are more sensitive and selective than psi-blast; (iii) hoereduced psi-search is more selective, but slightly less sensitive, than jackhmmer. jackhmmer is the most sensitive tool, but hoe-reduced psi-search is the most selective iterative tool.  
