psumo-cd: predicting sumoylation sites in proteins with covariance discriminant algorithm by incorporating sequence-coupled effects into general pseaac motivation: sumoylation is a post-translational modification (ptm) process, in which small ubiquitin-related modifier (sumo) is attaching by covalent bonds to substrate protein. it is critical to many different biological processes such as replicating genome, expressing gene, localizing and stabilizing proteins; unfortunately, it is also involved with many major disorders including alzheimers and parkinsons diseases. therefore, for both basic research and drug development, it is important to identify the sumoylation sites in proteins. results: to address such a problem, we developed a predictor called psumo-cd by incorporating the sequence-coupled information into the general pseudo-amino acid composition (pseaac) and introducing the covariance discriminant (cd) algorithm, in which a bias-adjustment term, which has the function to automatically adjust the errors caused by the bias due to the imbalance of training data, had been incorporated. rigorous cross-validations indicated that the new predictor remarkably outperformed the existing state-of-the-art prediction method for the same purpose. availability and implementation: for the convenience of most experimental scientists, a user-friendly web-server for psumo-cd has been established at http://www.jci-bioinfo.cn/psumo-cd, by which users can easily obtain their desired results without the need to go through the complicated mathematical equations involved.in vivo, protein post-translational modification (ptm or ptlm) is an important biological mechanism for expanding the genetic code as well as regulating cellular physiology. small ubiquitin-like modifier (sumo) proteins are a type of ptm that play an important role in subcellular transport, transcription, dna repair and signal transduction. recent researches have indicated that sumoylation can promote the binding ability of proteins, and that some proteins, such as claspin, whose binding function is sumoylation-dependent. many diseases and disorders, such as alzheimers and parkinsons diseases, have been found to be closely related with sumoylation. therefore, identification of sumoylation sites in proteins is important not only for in-depth understanding many important biological processes but also for developing effective drugs. identification of sumoylation sites with biological and chemical approaches is more laborious and slow; particularly the sumoylation is reversible and instable. with the avalanche of protein sequences generated in the post-genomic era, it is highly demanded to develop computational methods as a complimentary tool to the pure experimental methods. actually, considerable efforts have been made in this regard, including the method called sumosp developed by, the method sumosp2.0 byand the method gps-sumo by; all of them were developed using the group-based phosphorylation scoring algorithm. meanwhile, based on support vector machine (svm), the methods sumopre and sumohydro were developed by, respectively. very recently, based on the linear discriminant analysis,proposed the method sumo_lda. each of these methods did make contribution in stimulating the development of such an important area. particularly, the most recent method sumo_lda , which was established by combining three different types of sequence features into the general pseudo-amino acid composition (pseaac) , achieved quite decent success rates. in considering, however, the topics importance and also the urgency of demanding more powerful computational tools in this area, further efforts aiming at prediction of protein sumoylation sites are definitely needed. the present study was initiated in an attempt to develop a new and more powerful predictor by (i) incorporating the vectorized sequence-coupling model into the general form of pseudo amino acid composition and (ii) installing the covariance discriminant operation engine into the prediction system. rigorous cross-validations indicated that the new predictor significantly outperformed the existing state-of-the-art predictor in both overall accuracy ( 10) and stability (16). according to the chous 5-step rule and concurred by many investigators in a series of recent publications for developing a new prediction method that can be widely used by broad users, we should consider the following five points: (i) a good benchmark dataset used to train or test the new model; (ii) an effective mathematical formulation to represent the statistical samples concerned; (iii) a powerful algorithm to operate the calculation; (iv) a compelling demonstration to show its prediction quality being improved over the existing counterparts and (v) the prediction method should be with a web-server accessible to public. below, we are to address these points one by one, making them very natural in logic and crystal clear in description.the psumo-cd predictor is a new bioinformatics tool for identifying the sumoylation sites in proteins. compared with the existing state-of-the-art predictor in this area, its prediction quality is much better, with remarkably higher overall accuracy and stability. for the convenience of most experimental scientists, we have provided its web-server and a step-by-step guide, by which users can easily obtain their desired results without the need to go through the detailed mathematics. the reason of including them in this paper is for the integrity of the new prediction method, and also for that some interesting techniques, such as incorporating the sequence-coupled approach into the general pseaac, introducing the prior probabilitythe scores here were generated by the 10-fold cross-validation on the 510 proteins as used by. histograms to show the clusters of the true-and false-sumoylation peptide samples that are expressed by the general pseaac of equation (10). each of the components is marked on the horizontal axis, and its average value on the vertical axis. the red histogram is for the mean value derived from the positive subset, and the blue for that from the negative subset. see the text for further explanationsemi-screenshot of the top-page for the web-server psumo-cd at http://www.jci-bioinfo.cn/psumo-cd term in the cd algorithm to adjust the bias errors caused by unbalanced training dataset, and applying chous invariance theorem to overcome the divergence problem, may be of use as well in developing other tools in computational biology. we anticipate that psumo-cd will become a very useful high throughput tool for both basic research and drug development in the areas relevant to the protein sumoylation.  
