psygenet: a knowledge platform on psychiatric disorders and their genes psygenet (psychiatric disorders and genes association network) is a knowledge platform for the exploratory analysis of psychiatric diseases and their associated genes. psygenet is composed of a database and a web interface supporting data search, visualization, filtering and sharing. psygenet integrates information from disgenet and data extracted from the literature by text mining, which has been curated by domain experts. it currently contains 2642 associations between 1271 genes and 37 psychiatric disease concepts. in its first release, psygenet is focused on three psychiatric disorders: major depression, alcohol and cocaine use disorders. psygenet represents a comprehensive, open access resource for the analysis of the molecular mechanisms underpinning psychiatric disorders and their comorbidities. availability and implementation: the pysgenet platform is freely available atpsychiatric disorders have a great impact on morbidity and mortality, accounting for 1:3 of disability worldwide and generating most of healthcare expenditure . psychiatric diagnoses are syndromes rather than diseases with operative diagnostic criteria based on symptoms and signs (e.g. the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, and the international classification of diseases diagnostic criteria) and lacking reliable biological markers. cooccurrence of two or more psychiatric diagnoses (psychiatric comorbidity) has been reported to be very frequent. this cooccurrence raises two major clinical questions: whether there are underlying common environmental, genetic and neurobiological ethiopathological factors and what is their impact on clinical care. for instance, there is a high prevalence of comorbidity between major depression (md) and substance use disorders which might be related to poor therapeutic outcome for both disorders (who.global status report on). in the past years, there has been a great progress on the genetics of psychiatric disorders . however, there v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.  
