data and text mining pubchem promiscuity: a web resource for gathering compound promiscuity data from pubchem promiscuity counts allow for a better understanding of a compounds assay activity profile and drug potential. although pubchem contains a vast amount of compound and assay data, it currently does not have a convenient or efficient method to obtain in-depth promiscuity counts for compounds. pubchem promiscuity fills this gap. it is a java servlet that uses ncbi entrez (eutils) web services to interact with pubchem and provide promiscuity counts in a variety of categories along with compound descriptors, including pains-based functional group detection.a better understanding of a compounds drug potential can be obtained by determining a compounds selectivity for protein targets and how many and what type of assays a compound is active or tested in. compound promiscuity data are essential to fully exploit the therapeutic potential and minimize the toxic effects of drug candidates . promiscuous compounds are also traditionally problematic in highthroughput screening (hts) and it is helpful to identify them early in the hts process . gathering compound promiscuity data can help determine if the compounds activity may be affected by a particular assay technology, detection method or interaction with biological targets . there are additional positive uses for the identification of promiscuous compounds. for instance, finding chemical promiscuity across a family of proteins could provide chemical starting points for targets within that family that lack chemical probes. pubchem is a public repository of substance information, compound structures and bioactivity data for hts campaigns. the majority of the data points come from the molecular libraries screening center network (mlscn) under the nih molecular libraries program (mlp) . mlp screening campaigns use the molecular libraries small molecule repository (mlsmr), which is a collection of over 300 000 compounds (http://mli.nih.gov/mli/compound-repository/). this results in data that is highly amenable for assessing compound promiscuity. pubchem is a valuable resource for studying to whom correspondence should be addressed. the promiscuity of compounds . pubchem is integrated with entrez (ncbis primary search engine) and also has bioactivity services (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assay) that provide simple promiscuity counts for compounds including active and tested protein and bioassay counts. here, we present a tool that gathers promiscuity counts and compound descriptors for multiple compounds. results are displayed in a formatted web table for easy interpretation. although pubchem has extensible search and data management features, to manually obtain the results that the tool provides a user would need to visit five bioactivity services web pages and complete nine entrez queries (see section 2). each entrez query requires determining the appropriate search terms and extracting the data from those searches. in comparison, this tool runs queries in batches and provides results in only a few seconds per compound.pubchem promiscuity extracts promiscuity counts and compound descriptors from pubchem, and example results of known promiscuous compounds are available on the tools website. this data can give a picture of a compounds selectivity and drug potential. the promiscuity counts are not easily accessible in pubchem itself, especially if desired for several compounds at once. the resultant data are accessible in a convenient and relatively quick fashion that is based on the restrictions of using ncbi eutils web services (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ query/static/eutils_help.html). design considerations and limitations are addressed below: project counts eliminate artificial inflation of assay counts where a compound is tested multiple times within one screening campaign. with the definition of active project used for this tool, it is possible that probes of a project may not be counted as active if that compound is active in an assay that is part of the project and has a target that is not in the pubchem summary aid. protein counts can show if a compound is protein selective, and assays with no-protein targets can typically point out cytotoxic compounds. if a compound is specified as active in a pubchem panel assay, it is not possible with ncbi entrez to determine which individual panels and therefore targets the compound is active against. pubchem promiscuity will return the result that the compound is active against all the targets in the panel assay, but this may not be true. assay reporter technologies that are commonly used include luciferase, -lactamase and fluorescence. if a compound is active in many or all assays that use the same assay reporter technology and across protein targets, this could mean that the compound is interfering with the assay technology. pubchem does not have an annotation for these types of assays and therefore the counts are dependent on the keywords and fields used in the search. mlp and chembl are two common sources of assays in pubchem. mlp assays are large-scale screening assays, and chembl assays are mostly single points curated from the scientific literature. also, chembl data may not specify compounds as active or inactive. mlp and chembl assay counts are given separately because of the contrast in the data they provide.  
