databases and ontologies pubdna finder: a web database linking full-text articles to sequences of nucleic acids pubdna finder is an online repository that we have created to link pubmed central manuscripts to the sequences of nucleic acids appearing in them. it extends the search capabilities provided by pubmed central by enabling researchers to perform advanced searches involving sequences of nucleic acids. this includes, among other features (i) searching for papers mentioning one or more specific sequences of nucleic acids and (ii) retrieving the genetic sequences appearing in different articles. these additional query capabilities are provided by a searchable index that we created by using the full text of the 176 672 papers available at pubmed central at the time of writing and the sequences of nucleic acids appearing in them. to automatically extract the genetic sequences occurring in each paper, we used an original method we have developed. the database is updated monthly by automatically connecting to the pubmed central ftp site to retrieve and index new manuscripts. users can query the database via the web interface provided. availability: pubdna finder can be freely accessed atthe biological literature is the main source of information reporting empirically validated genetic sequences, such as for instance pcr primers and probes. as result, researchers usually need to review the available literature to search for sequence data, which can be a hard and time-consuming task. pubmed central is currently the main source of open-access full-text papers reporting genetic sequence data. however, the search engine provided by pubmed central does not support researchers to retrieve papers containing the genetic sequences specified by the user, and to automatically identify and extract the sequences of nucleic acids mentioned in the retrieved articles. pubdna finder is an online repository linking pubmed central manuscripts to the different genetic sequences appearing in them. it extends the search capabilities provided by pubmed central to whom correspondence should be addressed. by allowing researchers to (i) retrieve all articles containing the genetic sequences specified by the userfeaturing both exact and approximate matching; (ii) retrieve all the sequences appearing in the manuscripts matching a keyword-based query; and (iii) retrieve all articles matching a keyword-based query and containing the sequences specified by the user. pubdna finder currently contains the 176 672 papers available from pubmed central at the time of writing. the database is automatically updated on a monthly basis to retrieve and index new manuscripts.  
