data and text mining pugsvm: a cabig tm analytical tool for multiclass gene selection and predictive classification phenotypic up-regulated gene support vector machine (pugsvm) is a cancer biomedical informatics grid (cabig tm) analytical tool for multiclass gene selection and classification. pugsvm addresses the problem of imbalanced class separability, small sample size and high gene space dimensionality, where multiclass gene markers are defined by the union of one-versus-everyone phenotypic upregulated genes, and used by a well-matched one-versus-rest support vector machine. pugsvm provides a simple yet more accurate strategy to identify statistically reproducible mechanistic marker genes for characterization of heterogeneous diseases.microarray gene expression studies provide new opportunities for the molecular characterization of heterogeneous diseases . multiclass gene selection is an imperative task for identifying phenotype-associated mechanistic genes and achieving accurate diagnostic classifications . most existing multiclass gene selection methods heavily rely on the direct extensions of two-class gene selection methods . however, simple extensions of binary discriminant analysis to multiclass gene selection are suboptimal and not well matched to the unique characteristics of a multicategory classification problem. specifically, the existing methods will select gene subsets that preserve the distances of well-separated classes, while likely create error-prone large overlap between neighboring classes . in phenotypic up-regulated gene support vector machine (pugsvm; see schematic flowchart and mathematic descriptions to whom correspondence should be addressed. of the method in the supplementary material) , we select genes that are highly expressed in one phenotype relative to each of the remaining phenotypes, namely one-versus-everyone phenotypic up-regulated genes (ovepug). ovepug provides evenhanded gene resources for discriminating both neighboring and well-separated classes, and intends to assure the statistical reproducibility and biological plausibility of the selected genes. ovepug is well suited for small sample size problems (a concern with many current microarray datasets). we also implement other competing peer methods for multiclass gene selection, including signal-to-noise ratio (snr) , t statistic (t-stat) , pooled ratio of between-groups to withingroups sum of squares (bw) and svm-based recursive feature elimination (svmrfe) . in the classification component of pugsvm, we implement the ovrsvm committee classifier, which has proved highly successful in multicategory classifications with finite or limited amounts of high-dimensional data in real-world applications . we also include several other popular multicategory classifiers, including k nearest neighborhood (knn) , nave bayes classifier (nbc) and ovosvm . pugsvm was developed through the cabig (cabig.nci.nih.gov) in silico research centers of excellence (isrce) effort, and offers users across the broader cancer research community a unique yet effective tool for identifying multiclass gene markers and predicting clinical outcomes in cancer treatment. pugsvm is an open-source software package. the java and matlab codes and documents are freely available at the authors web site, enabling users to easily modify the program and add new functions or extensions (http://www.cbil.ece.vt.edu/cabig-pugsvm.htm).pugsvm is a comprehensive open-source tool that consists of interconnected components for multiclass gene selection and predictive classification. the core algorithms in the package are ovepug and ovrsvm, which address several critical yet subtle issues in molecular characterization of heterogeneous diseases for both biological research and clinical applications. pugsvm emphasizes the statistical reproducibility of the selected gene markers under small sample size, supported by their biologically plausible interpretations. several competing gene selection and classification methods are also incorporated into the package to demonstrate the superior performance of pugsvm via objective comparisons. through the cabig isrce effort, we plan to adapt pugsvm to identify gene markers as druggable targets and predict breast cancer resistance and recurrence after tamoxifen treatment. we have established several workflow pipelines for using pugsvm. for example, we first download breast cancer gene expression datasets from tcga and g-doc, and then normalize and label the data using cabig tools, such as genepattern. we feed the processed data to pugsvm. the gene candidates identified by pugsvm will be sent to visual statistical data analyzer for visualization, mapping onto known signaling pathways and further analysis. we are currently working to create taverna workflow modules for all analyses and making them publicly available to the cancer community.  
