genome analysis purbayes: estimating tumor cellularity and subclonality in next-generation sequencing data we have developed a novel bayesian method, purbayes, to estimate tumor purity and detect intratumor heterogeneity based on next-generation sequencing data of paired tumor-normal tissue samples , which uses finite mixture modeling methods. we demonstrate our approach using simulated data and discuss its performance under varying conditions. availability: purbayes is implemented as an r package, and source code is available for download through cran at http://cran.r-project. org/packagepurbayes.with advances in high-throughput next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies, sequencing of tumor-normal tissue pairs is becoming commonplace in cancer studies. often, the sampled tumor tissue is contaminated with stromal cells, resulting in a mixture of tumor and normal sequence data in the tumor sample. there has been a recent interest in accurate estimation of tumor purity levels in tumor data analysis , including methods specific to ngs data such as purityest . however, a subset of the observed somatic mutations may be subclonal because of intratumor heterogeneity . unlike clonal mutations, which are observed tumor-wide, subclonal mutations will be observed at cellularities less than the tumor purity level and subsequently bias purity estimates under an assumption of tumor tissue homogeneity. by modeling this heterogeneity, it may also be possible to make inferences about tumor evolution and founder events. to date there are no methods that aim to both quantify tumor purity and detect intratumor heterogeneity using ngs data. in this article, we present a bayesian mixture modeling approach, purbayes, toward estimating tumor purity and subclonality using ngs data, resulting in posterior distributions of tumor cellularities from which credible intervals (ci) can be derived. to illustrate its implementation, we conduct a simulation study under a variety of conditions and discuss the performance of purbayes on synthetic data.  
