pvaas: identify variants associated with aberrant splicing from rna-seq motivation: rna-seq has been widely used to study the transcriptome. comparing to microarray, sequencing-based rna-seq is able to identify splicing variants and single nucleotide variants in one experiment simultaneously. this provides unique opportunity to detect variants that associated with aberrant splicing. despite the popularity of rna-seq, no bioinformatics tool has been developed to leverage this advantage to identify variants associated with aberrant splicing. results: we have developed pvaas, a tool to identify single nucleotide variants that associated with aberrant alternative splicing from rna-seq data. pvaas works in three steps: (i) identify aberrant splicings; (ii) use user-provided variants or perform variant calling; (iii) assess the significance of association between variants and aberrant splicing events. availability and implementation: pvaas is written in python and c. source code and a comprehensive users manual are freely available at: http://pvaas.sourceforge.net/.alternative pre-messenger rna splicing is the primary mechanism to increase protein diversity in eukaryote . in humans, 95 of multi-exon genes are alternatively spliced . on the other hand, this tightly regulated, sophisticated nuclear process is also a natural source of disease-causing errors. genetic mutations in splice sites or other cis-regulatory sites (such as exonic splicing enhancer, or ese) can impair the splicing process and lead to aberrantly spliced transcripts. aberrant splicings are increasingly recognized as responsible for human disease . it is estimated that 50 of disease causing mutations affect splicing (l pez). despite the importance of aberrant splicing in disease development and progression, little work has been done to identity the causal mutations that are directly associated with aberrant splicing in genome scale. the sequencing of the transcriptome using high-throughput sequencing platforms provides a unique opportunity to study the association between single nucleotide variants (snvs) and splice variants. first, rna-seq experiment is able to simultaneously identify aberrant splicing events and snvs, a clear advantage compared with microarrays. second, spliced reads (i.e. reads that spanning exonexon junctions) provide physical evidence of the association between variants and certain isoforms. to our knowledge, no bioinformatics tool is currently available to characterize this association. we have developed pvaas, a program to detect snvs that are associated with aberrant alternative splicing from rna-seq data directly. it efficiently handles large-scale data with hundreds of millions of alignments.  
