systems biology pwomics: an r package for pathway-based integration of time-series omics data using public database knowledge characterization of biological processes is progressively enabled with the increased generation of omics data on different signaling levels. here we present a straightforward approach for the integrative analysis of data from different high-throughput technologies based on pathway and interaction models from public databases. pwomics performs pathway-based level-specific data comparison of coupled human proteomic and genomic/transcriptomic datasets based on their log fold changes. separate downstream and upstream analyses results on the functional levels of pathways, transcription factors and genes/transcripts are performed in the cross-platform consensus analysis. these provide a basis for the combined interpretation of regulatory effects over time. via network reconstruction and inference methods (steiner tree, dynamic bayesian network inference) consensus graphical networks can be generated for further analyses and visualization. availability and implementation: the r package pwomics is freely available on bioconductorhigh-throughput technologies applied in systems biology research generate large amounts of molecular information nowadays. interpretation of genome-and proteome-wide data is dependent on current analysis tools. as each technique shows a certain bias and has natural limitations in identifying full signaling responses , cross-platform analysis is an up-to-date approach in order to connect biological implications on different signaling levels. usage of diverse data types provides a deeper understanding of global biological functions and the underlying processes . thus, development of integrative software solutions for data from different high-throughput techniques is a current major challenge for bioinformatic analysis. existing widely used commercial software solutions such as qiagens ingenuity v r pathway analysis (ipa v r , qiagen redwood city, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity) or metacore and also open-source software, such as cytoscape , often handle proteomic and genomic/transcriptomic data as if coming from the same functional level. more specific integration tools which are considering these levels include, e.g. the web tool impala , which provides knowledge based data integration on transcriptomics or proteomics data combined with metabolomics data, and the webserver steinernet , which enables integration of transcriptional, proteomic and interactome data utilizing steiner trees. however, pwomics combines these distinct omics levels of evidence in order to refine the understanding of molecular mechanisms including the biologically important time effect. thereby, it joins tools used for network analysis , but adds a level of complexity by attributing weight to the different functional levels of measurement in the first place and the dimension of time in the second place. we implemented pwomics as open-source package for r, a free software environment for statistical computing commonly used for bioinformatic analyses.  
