sequence analysis pybamview: a browser-based application for viewing short read alignments current sequence alignment browsers allow visualization of large and complex next-generation sequencing datasets. however, most of these tools provide inadequate display of insertions and can be cumbersome to use on large datasets. i implemented pybamview, a lightweight web application for visualizing short read alignments. it provides an easy-to-use web interface for viewing alignments across multiple samples, with a focus on accurate visualization of insertions. availability and implementation: pybamview is available as a standard python package. the source code is freely available under the mit license at https://mgymrek.github.io/pybamview.the rapid growth of next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies has led to a wide variety of short read dna datasets. manual inspection of sequence alignments is an important aspect of quality control. while the majority of ngs analyses have focused on single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), recent bioinformatics advances allow analysis of more complicated variants, such as small insertions or deletions , larger structural variants and short tandem repeats . furthermore, widely used genome engineering techniques, such as the crispr-cas9 system can often produce a wide range of complex variants. in these cases, visualization of insertion and deletion events is a particularly critical analysis step. current genome browsers, such as the ucsc genome browser and the integrative genomics viewer (igv) , offer visualization of alignments from sam/bam files across multiple samples and integration of many layers of genomics datasets. however, most existing tools have two important limitations. first, most are based on alignments to an ungapped reference sequence, which provides inadequate visualization of insertions. the sam specification supports a padded reference, which captures multiple sequence alignment information and results in accurate insertion display by most browsers. however, most bam files consist of pairwise alignments of short reads to a reference and do not use this feature. as a result, insertions are represented by an icon such as a vertical bar, which does not provide any visual information about the size or sequence of the inserted nucleotides. second, the majority of alignment browsers are cumbersome to use, especially to visualize the large datasets typical of ngs experiments. they either require that the user upload large data files to a remote server or involve complicated installation and large resource requirements to run locally. several alignment browsers, such as bambino , consed and the text-based samtools tview, overcome these limitations: they display the sequence of insertions even when using the standard ungapped reference, and are run locally with relatively low system requirements. however, tview does not allow the user to view multiple bam files at once, and none of these tools allow for exporting alignments as snapshots or for sharing alignments remotely through a web browser. here, i present pybamview, a lightweight web application for viewing alignments from bam files. pybamview provides alignment visualizations that accurately represent snp, insertion and deletion events that can easily be exported to create publicationready figures. it runs locally from the command line with minimal resource requirements and displays alignments in a web browser. this interface allows users to quickly view alignments locally and to easily share alignments with local or remote collaborators.  
