a novel algorithm for calling mrna m 6 a peaks by modeling biological variances in merip-seq data motivation: n 6-methyl-adenosine (m 6 a) is the most prevalent mrna methylation but precise prediction of its mrna location is important for understanding its function. a recent sequencing technology , known as methylated rna immunoprecipitation sequencing technology (merip-seq), has been developed for transcriptome-wide profiling of m 6 a. we previously developed a peak calling algorithm called exomepeak. however, exomepeak oversimplifies data characteristics and ignores the reads variances among replicates or reads dependency across a site region. to further improve the performance, new model is needed to address these important issues of merip-seq data. results: we propose a novel, graphical model-based peak calling method, metpeak, for transcriptome-wide detection of m 6 a sites from merip-seq data. metpeak explicitly models read count of an m 6 a site and introduces a hierarchical layer of beta variables to capture the variances and a hidden markov model to characterize the reads dependency across a site. in addition, we developed a constrained newtons method and designed a log-barrier function to compute analytically intractable, positively constrained beta parameters. we applied our algorithm to simulated and real biological datasets and demonstrated significant improvement in detection performance and robustness over exomepeak. prediction results on publicly available merip-seq datasets are also validated and shown to be able to recapitulate the known patterns of m 6 a, further validating the improved performance of metpeak. availability and implementation: the package metpeak is implemented in r and c , and additional details are available at https://github.com/compgenomics/metpeak contact:compared with dna methylation, which is a well-established and extensively studied epigenetic phenomenon, m 6 a methylation in mrna is still largely an uncharted territory. recent surge of interest comes mainly as a result of two groundbreaking studies that show high abundancy of m 6 a in 25 of transcripts in human and mouse cells. a number of subsequent studies have provided significant insights into the mechanism as well as the functions of mrna m 6 a methylation. it is known now that the m 6 a methyltransferase complex, or the m 6 a writer, consists of wilms tumor 1-associating protein (wtap), methyltransferase-like 3 (mettl3) and methyltransferase-like 14 (mettl14) . different from dna methylation, m 6 a methylation is reversible and v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.we presented metpeak, a novel graphical model-based peak calling method for detecting m 6 a sites from merip-seq data. we formulated the m 6 a peak calling problem as an inference of the mixture of binomial distributions by introducing a hierarchical layer of beta distribution to model the variances among m 6 a sites in replicates. we also used hmm model to capture the reads dependency among the bins. to find the solution to the inference problem, we proposed a constrained newtons method for estimating the beta parameters and developed a fast inference mothed for estimating the m 6 a peaks. the method is suitable for processing merip-seq data with replicates and high variance, which are common cases in merip-seq data. we have compared metpeak with exomepeak both on simulated and real merip-seq datasets and the results showed that metpeak is highly robust against the data variances and outliers and making far less fps than exomepeak. finally, prediction of metpeak on real merip-seq datasets have suggested that it precisely recapitulates the motif and distribution of m 6 a sites, as well as correctly predicting the methylation differences among these methyltransferases, demonstrating the validity of metpeak.  
