genome analysis pybedtools: a flexible python library for manipulating genomic datasets and annotations pybedtools is a flexible python software library for manipulating and exploring genomic datasets in many common formats. it provides an intuitive python interface that extends upon the popular bedtools genome arithmetic tools. the library is well documented and efficient, and allows researchers to quickly develop simple, yet powerful scripts that enable complex genomic analyses. availability: pybedtools is maintained under the gpl license. stable versions of pybedtools as well as documentation are available on the python package index at http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pybedtools. contact:due to advances in dna sequencing technologies, genomic datasets are rapidly expanding in size and complexity . it is now clear that the primary bottleneck in genomics is data analysis and interpretation, not data generation. therefore, researchers depend upon fast, flexible genome arithmetic tools for interrogating and comparing diverse datasets of genome features. for example, genome arithmetic is used to interpret results from whole-genome sequencing, chip-seq and rna-seq experiments by integrating experimental datasets with genes, genetic variation and the wealth of existing genome annotations (1000 genomes project). these analyses are complicated by the fact that they are often done via custom scripts or one-off manipulations that are inefficient and difficult to reproduce and maintain. tools designed to manipulate, intersect and annotate these datasets in commonly-used formats greatly facilitate such analyses and provide a consistent framework for reproducible research. here we introduce pybedtools, which extends the bedtools genome arithmetic utilities by providing a powerful interface combining the benefits of python scripting and the bedtools libraries. using a simple syntax, it allows researchers to analyze datasets in bed , vcf (to whom correspondence should be addressed.2011), gff, bedgraph and sam/bam formats without the need for format conversion.the pybedtools package employs a syntax that is intuitive to python programmers. for example, given an annotation file of genes, hg19.gff, and a file containing relevant genetic variation, snps.bed, one can identify genes that contain snps with the following:the pybedtools package provides a convenient and flexible interface to both the bedtools command-line tools and efficient functions in the bedtools c++ libraries. pybedtools simplifies complicated analyses by extending the functionality in bedtools and by providing, to our knowledge, the first python library offering a common interface for manipulating datasets in diverse formats. other new functionality includes: set operations on multiple datasets using a simple, intuitive syntax, the ability to filter features and select specific columns or attributes, a unified interface to common attributes (e.g. chromosome, start, end, name and strand) from many file formats, and a documented command history. pybedtools provides researchers with a simple and efficient interface for exploring complex genomics datasets in widely used formats.  
