structural bioinformatics pyetv: a pymol evolutionary trace viewer to analyze functional site predictions in protein complexes pyetv is a pymol plugin for viewing, analyzing and manipulating predictions of evolutionarily important residues and sites in protein structures and their complexes. it seamlessly captures the output of the evolutionary trace server, namely ranked importance of residues, for multiple chains of a complex. it then yields a high resolution graphical interface showing their distribution and clustering throughout a quaternary structure, including at interfaces. together with other tools in the popular pymol viewer, pyetv thus provides a novel tool to integrate evolutionary forces into the design of experiments targeting the most functionally relevant sites of a protein. availability: the pyetv module is written in python. installation instructions and video demonstrations may be found at the url:since proteinprotein interactions are ubiquitous and an emerging target for design and therapeutics , it is critical to improve the tools that enable their characterization. here, we present an et viewer that provides a high-quality interface to map and analyze evolutionary forces and the functional sites they define across multi-protein interfaces and assemblies. importantly, it enables the integration of evolutionary trace (et) analysis with any type of structural and biophysical information accessible to pymol . et is a well-validated method to identify functional sites and their residue determinants in proteins. it drives experiments that efficiently elucidate the molecular basis of binding, catalysis and allostery, and that rationally perturb networks . et ranks the evolutionary importance of sequence positions by tracking whether their variations during evolution correlate with large or small divergences among orthologs and paralogs . these et ranks are robust, and the best-ranked sequence positions form continuous spatial clusters that reveal functional sites and their functional determinants. varying the threshold of importance reveals these sites at varying levels of to whom correspondence should be addressed. detail. recent studies show that small motifs of et residues can be compared across all protein structures to predict functions in enzymes and non-enzymes alike, thereby validating et predictions of functional determinants on a large scale . yet, the study of the structural interactions of evolutionary important et residues across structural interfaces has been limited. the et report_maker only provided a pdf report of individual sequence or structure et analysis, with no graphical user interface. a prior evolutionary trace viewer (etv) that did provide an interactive molecular viewer could only display just a single protein chain at a time; and it could not show surfaces, secondary structure elements or any other type of information, such as crystallographic b-factors, electrostatics or bound ligands. by addressing these problems, pyetv offers a tool to study protein functional determinants and evolutionary forces in the more relevant structural context of quaternary interactions.  
