pyfdap: automated analysis of fluorescence decay after photoconversion (fdap) experiments we developed the graphical user interface pyfdap for the fitting of linear and non-linear decay functions to data from fluorescence decay after photoconversion (fdap) experiments. pyfdap structures and analyses large fdap datasets and features multiple fitting and plotting options. availability and implementation: pyfdap was written in python and runs on ubuntu linux, mac os x and microsoft windows operating systems. the software, a user guide and a test fdap data-set are freely available for download from http://people.fluorescence microscopy techniques have been widely used to measure the properties of fluorescently labeled proteins in embryos, tissues and cells . over the last decade, the repertoire of fluorescent proteins has been extended with the discovery and engineering of photoconvertible proteins that change their emission properties upon light exposure and that can be used to track sub-populations of pulse-labeled proteins . photoconvertible proteins have recently been adapted to determine protein stability via microscopy-based fluorescence decay after photoconversion (fdap) assays. in fdap assays, a protein of interest is tagged with a photoconvertible protein and expressed in vivo. after photoconversion, the decay in fluorescence intensity of the protein is monitored. the data is then fitted with a decay function that models protein clearance to calculate protein half-lives. protein stability is context-dependent. for example, protein stability might be different inside cells and in the extracellular space . both intra-and extracellular protein half-lives can be determined by fdap using a static intracellular signal to create masks for intraand extracellular intensities . we have previously described how to execute fdap experiments in living zebrafish embryos . here, we provide a standardized computational framework to analyse the resulting datasets. our software pyfdap features (i) a comprehensive data format for handling, sorting and annotating large fdap datasets, (ii) the ability to separate fdap datasets into their intra-and extracellular components based on counter-labeling, (iii) established fitting algorithms and (iv) a user-friendly environment that allows researchers from a non-computational background to easily evaluate fdap datasets.pyfdap is an open-source gui for the analysis and handling of fdap data. usage of pyfdap does not require any programming knowledge. the straightforward gui provides a quick workflow, and the integrated terminal and open-source nature of pyfdap enable researchers to extend the software to suit their needs.  
