genome analysis pyicos: a versatile toolkit for the analysis of high-throughput sequencing data motivation: high-throughput sequencing (hts) has revolutionized gene regulation studies and is now fundamental for the detection of proteindna and proteinrna binding, as well as for measuring rna expression. with increasing variety and sequencing depth of hts datasets, the need for more flexible and memory-efficient tools to analyse them is growing. results: we describe pyicos, a powerful toolkit for the analysis of mapped reads from diverse hts experiments: chip-seq, either punctuated or broad signals, clip-seq and rna-seq. we prove the effectiveness of pyicos to select for significant signals and show that its accuracy is comparable and sometimes superior to that of methods specifically designed for each particular type of experiment. pyicos facilitates the analysis of a variety of hts datatypes through its flexibility and memory efficiency, providing a useful framework for data integration into models of regulatory genomics. availability: open-source software, with tutorials and protocol files, is available atgene expression is regulated through a complex network of protein interactions with rna and dna. recent advances in highthroughput sequencing (hts) technologies provide a very effective way to obtain information about these interactions at genome-wide level at reasonable cost. chip-seq (chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by hts) has become the preferred method for current analysis of transcriptional regulation in vivo, since it provides genome-wide coverage at a high sensitivity and signal-to-noise ratio . however, to unravel the complete gene expression network, it is also necessary to systematically identify proteinrna interactions in cells. hitsclip or clip-seq (cross-linking immunoprecipitation followed by hts) provides a powerful mean to obtain global information about direct proteinrna interactions in cells . additionally, the rna-seq experiments provide a way to measure rna levels at a higher sensitivity and coverage than microarray experiments. despite the inherent biases, rnaseq can overcome some of the array limitations and provides the possibility to measure alternative splicing events or expression levels , to detect single nucleotide polymorphisms and to discover novel genes . short-read sequencing platforms such as illumina are very suitable for the study of proteindna and proteinrna interactions, since they can produce enough data to perform accurate quantitative analysis. furthermore, the resulting reads are of sufficient length to be mapped accurately to a reference sequence, but short enough to define the interaction sites with enough precision. however, not all interactions can be detected at the same coverage. for instance, transcription factors produce generally a clearly localized, or punctuated, signal , whereas histone marks or rna polymerase ii (rnapii) produce broad signals, covering more extended regions . most of the tools published for the analysis of chip-seq data focus on punctuated signals , with only few methods devoted to analyse broad signals . however, these methods are not readily applicable to other hts datatypes, like clip-seq or rna-seq, making it necessary to incorporate additional tools to perform gene regulation studies, which generally involve multiple hts experiments. the increase in variety and sequencing depth of such experiments, as well as the growing need for memoryefficient tools that can be applied to various datatypes, motivated us to develop pyicos. in this article, we describe pyicos, a versatile toolkit operating on short hts reads that have already been mapped to a reference coordinate system, like a genome or a transcriptome. we demonstrate its accuracy on punctuated chip-seq data comparing it to macs , findpeaks and useq , using published chip-seq datasets. we also describe the accuracy of pyicos enrichment analysis (ea) to detect differentially expressed (de) genes from rna-seq data by comparing it with the bioconductor packages degseq , deseq and edger using published rna-seq data and microarray experiments on the same samples. furthermore, we illustrate the flexibility of  
