structural bioinformatics pyknot: a pymol tool for the discovery and analysis of knots in proteins understanding the differences between knotted and unknotted protein structures may offer insights into how proteins fold. to characterize the type of knot in a protein, we have developed pyknot, a plugin that works seamlessly within the pymol molecular viewer and gives quick results including the knots invariants, crossing numbers and simplified knot projections and backbones. pyknot may be useful to researchers interested in classifying knots in macromolecules and provides tools for students of biology and chemistry with which to learn topology and macromolecular visualization. availability: pymol is available atknots are rare in proteins despite their length . when knotted proteins do occur, experiments and computational studies suggest that knots have a significant effect on protein stability or folding . although it is still unclear whether knots are selected in evolution for their utility , in at least one case, that of a ubiquitin hydrolase, the existence of a five-crossing knot (labeled 5 2 in alexanderbriggs notation) is speculated to serve as protection against degradation by the proteasome as ubiquitin hydrolase tries to rescue other proteins from degradation . computer programs to visualize and analyze knots in proteins are not only of mathematical and recreational interest, but they may also be put into practical use in protein structure prediction. as knots are rare in real proteins, knot-finding programs may be used in protein structure prediction methods to filter predicted models, where knotted structures occur more frequently . there are a host of computer programs and web services available to analyze knots. knotplot (r.g. scharein, http://knotplot.com/) is a program that visualizes and manipulates mathematical knots. to whom correspondence should be addressed. knots and pknot are web servers that survey the protein data bank (pdb) for knotted proteins and also allow users to upload or specify a pdb structure to be analyzed and viewed. pyknot takes a different and unique approach by directly integrating knot analysis tools into the desktop application pymol, a very popular molecular graphics viewer (the pymol molecular graphics system, version 1.3, schrdinger, llc.). to our knowledge, pyknot is the only such plugin for any biomolecular viewer, offering direct access to knot-mathematical techniques such as computation of topological invariants, gauss codes and reidemeister moves on a knot projection. this combination of techniques was used previously to study knots in lattices, loops and proteins . pyknot can also reduce the backbone of the protein to a few segments (not necessarily of equal length), a simplification that enables users to see the knot more clearly and which has its roots in the so-called koniarismutukhumartaylor algorithm . the reduced backbone forms the basis of a heuristic approach to estimating the location of the knots core along the protein sequence.pyknot is an easy-to-use add-on to the intuitive graphical user interface of pymol that allows users to quickly assess the knot in a protein. although it can also perform analysis of knots in other macromolecular backbones (e.g. dna/rna backbone defined by phosphate atoms), in the future, we expect pyknot to offer a more extensive analysis of links as well as knots in and among dna and other biopolymers.  
