phylogenetics pyrad: assembly of de novo radseq loci for phylogenetic analyses motivation: restriction-siteassociated genomic markers are a powerful tool for investigating evolutionary questions at the population level, but are limited in their utility at deeper phylogenetic scales where fewer orthologous loci are typically recovered across disparate taxa. while this limitation stems in part from mutations to restriction recognition sites that disrupt data generation, an additional source of data loss comes from the failure to identify homology during bioinformatic analyses. clustering methods that allow for lower similarity thresholds and the inclusion of indel variation will perform better at assembling radseq loci at the phylogenetic scale. results: pyrad is a pipeline to assemble de novo radseq loci with the aim of optimizing coverage across phylogenetic datasets. it uses a wrapper around an alignment-clustering algorithm, which allows for indel variation within and between samples, as well as for incomplete overlap among reads (e.g. paired-end). here i compare pyrad with the program stacks in their performance analyzing a simulated radseq dataset that includes indel variation. indels disrupt clustering of homologous loci in stacks but not in pyrad, such that the latter recovers more shared loci across disparate taxa. i show through re-analysis of an empirical radseq dataset that indels are a common feature of such data, even at shallow phylogenetic scales. pyrad uses parallel processing as well as an optional hierarchical clustering method, which allows it to rapidly assemble phylogenetic datasets with hundreds of sampled individuals. availability: software is written in python and freely available atrestriction-siteassociated dna libraries and related genotyping-by-sequencing approaches (e.g. gbs,) take advantage of next-generation sequencing platforms to generate short reads from thousands of potentially homologous loci, across multiple individuals, by targeting genomic regions adjacent to restriction enzyme cut sites. in contrast to whole-genome shotgun data, this provides a more efficient and economical source for performing comparisons across many sampled individuals, making it a popular tool for population genetic analyses (reviewed in). the problem of efficiently obtaining sequence data across many individuals is also relevant to studies at deeper evolutionary time scales, such as genus-or family-level phylogenetics, and it is at this scale that radseq is now receiving increased attention. rad sequences generated in silico from multi-species genome alignments have been shown to retain accurate phylogenetic information over evolutionary divergences as deep as 60 million years ; however, to date, all empirical radseq studies conducted above the species level were done at much shallower scales . still, these studies confirm theoretical expectations by demonstrating that concatenated, genome aligned or even individual radseq loci are capable of recovering well-supported gene trees and species trees. yet, these studies also demonstrate that large amounts of missing data are a common feature of radseq, which may limit its applications. theoretically, the ultimate scale over which radseq data will be recovered, and thus phylogenetically useful, is inherently limited by mutations that disrupt restriction recognition sites, causing locus dropoutmanifest as more missing data between more distantly related samples. however, empirically such limits are approached much sooner owing to the loss of data to other technical factors related to data generation and analysis. for example, the choice of restriction enzyme, the size of selected fragments and variation in sequencing coverage across samples all affect the number of loci recovered. moreover, bioinformatic analyses used to assemble radseq datasets recover different amounts of data depending on the parameters used to identify and cluster orthologs as well as filter for paralogs (or repetitive dna regions.) in this article, i focus mainly on the latter aspect of locus dropout: factors limiting the identification (recovery) of orthologous loci when they are present in a dataset. few programs are currently available to assemble radseq data, which currently includes stacks , rainbow and rtd . here i describe a new software pipeline called pyrad, which assembles de novo aligned radseq loci for populationlevel or phylogenetic analyses, with a particular focus on the analysis of highly divergent samples. pyrad differs from both stacks and rainbow through its use of a global alignment clustering algorithmperformed with a wrapper around the program usearch which allows for incorporation of indel variation while identifying homology. in this way, pyrad is more similar to rtd, which uses a graph clustering algorithm that also allows for indels. pyrad stands apart from these programs in its speed, flexibility for analyzing multiple radseq data types, its scalability to extremely large and divergent datasets and its ease of use. below i describe the pyrad pipeline in detail. i then demonstrate its performance on simulated and empirical datasets and compare the results with those of stacks, which is currently the most commonly used alternative software.pyrad performs de novo assembly of radseq datasets, including rad, gbs, ddradseq and paired-end options. it is designed to perform equally well from population to phylogenetic scales and is currently being implemented across this range, from linkage analyses among siblings to clade-level phylogenies with hundreds of tips. a major goal of this software was ease of use, and for this reason, it uses common file formats familiar to those working in phylogenetics and offers a variety of output formats for downstream analyses, from snp and allelic data to individualor concatenated loci. because the software does not need to be compiled, pyrad is easy to install on any desktop or computing cluster. it does not require large memory usage, and an analysis can be easily split into multiple shorter-length jobs through its step-wise execution.  
