a novel approach for determining environment-specific protein costs: the case of arabidopsis thaliana motivation: comprehensive understanding of cellular processes requires development of approaches which consider the energetic balances in the cell. the existing approaches that address this problem are based on defining energy-equivalent costs which do not include the effects of a changing environment. by incorporating these effects, one could provide a framework for integrating omics data from various levels of the system in order to provide interpretations with respect to the energy state and to elicit conclusions about putative global energy-related response mechanisms in the cell. results: here we define a cost measure for amino acid synthesis based on flux balance analysis of a genome-scale metabolic network, and develop methods for its integration with proteomics and metabolomics data. this is a first measure which accounts for the effect of different environmental conditions. we applied this approach to a genome-scale network of arabidopsis thaliana and calculated the costs for all amino acids and proteins present in the network under light and dark conditions. integration of function and process ontology terms in the analysis of protein abundances and their costs indicates that, during the night, the cell favors cheaper proteins compared with the light environment. however, this does not imply that there is squandering of resources during the day. the results from the association analysis between the costs, levels and well-defined expenses of amino acid synthesis, indicate that our approach not only captures the adjustment made at the switch of conditions, but also could explain the anticipation of resource usage via a global energy-related regulatory mechanism of amino acid and protein synthesis.the complexity of a cell is reflected in the necessity to balance the conflicting demands for resources to maintain cell vitality and function with those to support growth . the study of cell metabolism has traditionally focused on determining the factors that influence metabolic rate, at levels of both metabolic pathway and the whole organism . recently assembled condition-and tissue-specific metabolic network models offer means for determining another compelling feature of metabolic pathwaystheir metabolic efficiency. in addition, the advances in omics technologies have yielded datasets from various levels of cell organization, which could be employed to make more refined biological interpretations to whom correspondence should be addressed. by coupling metabolic rates, efficiencies and levels of the key system constituents (e.g. gene, proteins and metabolites). metabolic efficiency can be regarded as the energy-equivalent production of a pathway relative to the energy-equivalent costs for maintaining the pathway . it is related to the energy balance of the cell given by the difference of energy supply and demand. the supply is a direct consequence of the environment, while the demand is influenced by the processes which ensure cell functions and the mechanisms for adaptation. therefore, it is necessary that any quantification of the cellular energy state incorporates the environmental effects. plant growth depends on the photosynthetic assimilation of carbon dioxide and the uptake and assimilation of inorganic nutrients , of which nitrogen is quantitatively most important . there is a close interplay between carbon and nitrogen metabolism in higher plants . photosynthesis provides carbon skeletons, reducing equivalents and atp, required for assimilating inorganic nitrogen and synthesizing nucleotides, amino acids and proteins . on the other hand, nitrogen-containing metabolites allow for utilization of carbon in growth. amino acids, bridging the carbon-and nitrogen-utilization pathways and necessary for protein synthesis, thus, play a pivotal role in coordinating the interactions between these two parts of metabolism. the concentrations of amino acids are likely determined by the interplay of several other processes, such as: export, storage and synthesis of metabolites other than proteins . they are also closely linked with protein turnover in different nitrogen-and carbon-starved conditions . moreover, amino acid daily balances in conjunction with those of carbohydrates, may serve as good indicator of environmental stress, e.g. water deficit . plants typically grow in a diurnal light/dark cycle, providing an amenable system to analyze the temporal dynamics of changes in amino acid contents and their effects on metabolism . for instance, it has been demonstrated that nicotiana tabacum plants grown in short days have relatively high levels of glutamate and aspartate, and extremely low levels of most of the minor amino acids (i.e. amino acids synthesized by longer and dedicated pathways, usually present at lower levels compared with major amino acids) in their source leaves at the end of the night; moreover, illumination yields to decrease in glutamate and an increase in the minor amino acids. due to the proximal regulation, the overall amino acid level often changes in parallel to those of sugars. this observation has led to the suggestion that sugars may exert a global control on amino acid metabolism . on the other hand, recent studies point out that, in arabidopsis thaliana, fumarate and malate levels show diurnal changes similar  
