qcgwas: a flexible r package for automated quality control of genome-wide association results qcgwas is an r package that automates the quality control of genome-wide association result files. its main purpose is to facilitate the quality control of a large number of such files before meta-analysis. alternatively, it can be used by individual cohorts to check their own result files. qcgwas is flexible and has a wide range of options, allowing rapid generation of high-quality input files for meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies. availability: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/qcgwasthe number of consortia aiming to identify genes for complex traits through meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies (gwas) has mushroomed in the past 6 years. the advantage of this strategy is that large sample sizes can be reached, allowing detection of genetic variants with small effects. a downside is the lack of unified quality control (qc) on the gwas analyses of the individual cohorts, as each cohort will typically perform their own analysis according to a standard analysis plan and share only summary statistics. gwas result files are prone to errors due to the vast amount of data they contain and the different manner in which these data are generated by individual cohorts. before combining data from individual studies in a metaanalysis, it is important to ensure that all data included are valid, of high quality and compatible between cohorts to reduce both the false-positive and the false-negative findings . because gwas result files usually contain a standard set of variables, it is feasible to automate the qc of these files, thereby gaining speed, reliability, flexibility and the possibility to perform more elaborate checks. to our knowledge, the only other software package currently available for qc of gwas result files is gwatoolbox . however, gwatoolbox does not produce cleaned results files, is less flexible regarding file format and uses a restrictive format for the qc log. this makes it less suited for processing (and comparing) large numbers of files in preparation of a meta-analysis. it also does not check allele information or allow for the retesting of individual qc steps. to address these shortcomings, we developed qcgwas with the aim to automate qc and allow rapid generation of high-quality input files for gwas meta-analyses.qcgwas is a flexible and comprehensive package for automated qc of gwas result files. it can handle a large number of files within reasonable time and is therefore particularly useful for a centralized qc preceding a gwas meta-analysis. it can also be used by individual cohorts to inspect the quality of their results. currently it is geared toward quantitative traits, but case-control results can also be used with proper transformations. future versions of the package are under development to accommodate nonsnp variants, such as used in sequence-based gwas data.  
