data and text mining qtlminer: qtl database curation by mining tables in literature motivation: figures and tables in biomedical literature record vast amounts of important experiment results. in scientific papers, for example, quantitative trait locus (qtl) information is usually presented in tables. however, most of the popular text-mining methods focus on extracting knowledge from unstructured free text. as far as we know, there are no published works on mining tables in biomedical literature. in this article, we propose a method to extract qtl information from tables and plain text found in literature. heterogeneous and complex tables were converted into a structured database, combined with information extracted from plain text. our method could greatly reduce labor burdens involved with database curation. results: we applied our method on a soybean qtl database curation, from which 2278 records were extracted from 228 papers with a precision rate of 96.9 and a recall rate of 83.3, f value for the method is 89.6.a quantitative trait locus (qtl) is a region of dna that is associated with a particular phenotypic trait, and is important information for breeding and gene cloning. qtl studies have a long and rich history; a large number of articles recording the experiment results of qtl mapping have been published in recent years. to allow researchers to query qtl information easily, several databases have been developed by manually curating the information scattered in the literature . however, manual curation is labor-intensive work, and it is impossible to remain current with the rapidly increasing numbers of articles; consequently, automatic methods are necessary for qtl database development. unlike other experiment results, such as genome and molecular data, qtl information is usually presented in tables, especially in scientific papers. it is difficult to extract such information using traditional text-mining methods that focus on mining knowledge in unstructured plain text. although, knowledge hidden in tables and figures has received increasing attention , as far as we know there are only a few works on web table mining and no published work on mining tables in biomedical literature. in this article, we present a pipeline for automatically mining qtl information from scientific literature. a flowchart of this process is shown in. we started the process by locating qtl tables in articles; the tables were then converted into twodimensional qtl databases. the natural language process method was used to extract information that was not presented in tables, including captions, footnotes and full text. lastly, contentverification and duplication checks were performed on the outputs of previous steps. we applied this pipeline for soybean qtl database curation with a precision rate of 96.9 and f value of 89.6; this software can also be used to construct qtl databases for other species.we applied this pipeline for soybean qtl database construction, from which 2278 records were automatically extracted from 228 papers. the precision rate of the mining results was 96.9. compared with the records in the soybase qtl database , we collected more records from the literature. we also tested our pipeline on the literature listed on the soybase website, which was used for manual curation, with a recall rate up to 79.7. this method is also suitable for development of comprehensive qtl databases for a wide range of species.  
