qualimap 2: advanced multi-sample quality control for high-throughput sequencing data motivation: detection of random errors and systematic biases is a crucial step of a robust pipeline for processing high-throughput sequencing (hts) data. bioinformatics software tools capable of performing this task are available, either for general analysis of hts data or targeted to a specific sequencing technology. however, most of the existing qc instruments only allow processing of one sample at a time. results: qualimap 2 represents a next step in the qc analysis of hts data. along with comprehensive single-sample analysis of alignment data, it includes new modes that allow simultaneous processing and comparison of multiple samples. as with the first version, the new features are available via both graphical and command line interface. additionally, it includes a large number of improvements proposed by the user community. availability and implementation: the implementation of the software along with documentation is freely available athigh-throughput sequencing (hts) is a powerful discovery method applied in genomics, transcriptomics and other omics disciplines. projects such as encode or blueprint generated terabytes of sequencing data, providing new insights into the molecular mechanisms of the cell. the sequencing technology itself has been improving continuously, allowing longer reads and deeper coverage at lower cost . however, despite these advantages, hts is prone to random errors and systematic biases, including polymerase chain reaction amplification problems, gc-content shift and read contamination . to generate reliable conclusions from hts data, these biases have to be detected and addressed accordingly. in this regard, several bioinformatics tools have been developed to perform quality control (qc) of the hts data by analyzing raw reads and their derivatives in the form of sequencing alignments and other quantitative data . in the context of large sequencing projects, it is also crucial to have a global overview of all samples in the experiment. multisample analysis results comparison enables examination of data clustering and detection of possible outliers. there are special toolkits such as statsdb that allow creating detailed multi-sample analysis workflows; however, they require accurate construction of custom pipelines. several existing ngs qc software tools including rna-seq qc and rseqc have only a few options for working with multiple samples. this is a major limitation, since sequencing experiments are often conducted using biological replicates and can include multiple conditions. here, we present the second version of qualimap , a toolkit for qc of hts alignment data. in qualimap 2, we provide new analysis capabilities that allow multi-sample comparison of sequencing datasets. additionally, we have added a novel mode for discovery of biases and problems specific to rna-seq technology, redesigned the read counts qc mode and implemented numerous improvements.  
