genome analysis qualimap: evaluating next-generation sequencing alignment data motivation: the sequence alignment/map (sam) and the binary align-ment/map (bam) formats have become the standard method of representation of nucleotide sequence alignments for next-generation sequencing data. sam/bam files usually contain information from tens to hundreds of millions of reads. often, the sequencing technology , protocol and/or the selected mapping algorithm introduce some unwanted biases in these data. the systematic detection of such biases is a non-trivial task that is crucial to drive appropriate downstream analyses. results: we have developed qualimap, a java application that supports user-friendly quality control of mapping data, by considering sequence features and their genomic properties. qualimap takes sequence alignment data and provides graphical and statistical analyseswith the advent of next-generation sequencing (ngs), a number of novel alignment methods have been developed (seefor a review). the sequence alignment/map (sam) and the binary alignment/map (bam) formats have become the standards used for representation of nucleotide sequence alignments for these algorithms . the results from such alignments can be used in subsequent analyses, such as genome-wide comparative studies, to drive conclusions concerning a variety of biological processes, such as gene expression and epigenomic modifications. sam/bam files usually contain the information from tens to hundreds of millions of reads, and the quantity of data contained in these files is continuously increasing. unfortunately, sam/bam data files frequently contain biases that are introduced by sequencing technologies, during sample preparation, and/or the selected mapping algorithm . therefore, one of the fundamental requirements during analysis of these data is to perform quality control, i.e. to get an idea of how reliable mapping data are and how well data fit with the expected outcome. to these ends, we have developed qualimap, a java application that aims to facilitate the quality-control analysis of mapping data. recently, some efforts have been made to facilitate this task, for example see samstat , rna-seqc or picard; qualimap advances this area by providing some additional features (supplementary).  
