systems biology qualitative translation of relations from biopax to sbml qual motivation: the biological pathway exchange language (biopax) and the systems biology markup language (sbml) belong to the most popular modeling and data exchange languages in systems biology. the focus of sbml is quantitative modeling and dynamic simulation of models, whereas the biopax specification concentrates mainly on visualization and qualitative analysis of pathway maps. biopax describes reactions and relations. in contrast, sbml core exclusively describes quantitative processes such as reactions. with the sbml qualitative models extension (qual), it has recently also become possible to describe relations in sbml. before the development of sbml qual, relations could not be properly translated into sbml. until now, there exists no biopax to sbml converter that is fully capable of translating both reactions and relations. results: the entire nature pathway interaction database has been converted from biopax (level 2 and level 3) into sbml (level 3 version 1) including both reactions and relations by using the new qual extension package. additionally, we present the new webtool biopax2sbml for further biopax to sbml conversions. compared with previous conversion tools, biopax2sbml is more comprehensive , more robust and more exact. availability: biopax2sbml is freely available atthe goal of systems biology is the model-driven understanding of biological and biochemical processes across all layers and various levels of detail. the biological pathway exchange language (biopax) and the systems biology markup language (sbml) are common modeling languages that facilitate the exchange and storage of in silico models. biopax can be used to describe the biological semantics of metabolic, signaling, molecular, gene-regulatory and genetic interaction networks. it is mainly used for qualitative analysis and information exchange . sbml describes the structure of models. in contrast to biopax, it offers the possibility to include mathematical expressions, which are necessary for dynamic simulations . a detailed comparison between both languages has been given by strombackstromba). besides these language differences, biopax models from databases like the nature pathway interaction database (pid,) or metacyc are often used as information source to build sbml models for further simulation processes . the sbml core specification defines quantitative processes, such as reactions, events, rules and constraints, in detail but no other relationships between molecules. those relationships are denoted as relations that specify enzymeenzyme relations, proteinprotein interactions, interactions of transcription factors and genes, proteincompound interaction, links to other pathways, etc. these relations are also provided in biopax models, but before the creation of the qualitative models extension for sbml (qual, see), it was not possible to define those relations or to include reactions together with relations in one model.hence, new biopax to sbml converters are needed. today, there exist mainly converters from sbml to biopax like the system biology format converter (see european bioinformatics institutecomputational systems neurobiology), but no converter for biopax to sbml that is capable of properly including relations. other research groups previously faced the same problem with incompatibilities between biopax and sbml. to overcome the limitations of those file formats and to avoid the creation of pseudo-reactions or similar constructions, rubenackerintroduce an intermediate bridging format. the need to combine both formats to use the knowledge from a multitude of databases in various applications becomes more and more urgent. in this article, we present a webtool for the translation from biopax into sbml format. we demonstrate its functionality by converting the whole pid from biopax level 2 and level 3 formats to the sbml format, including the qual extension.  
