quality control and preprocessing of metagenomic datasets here, we present prinseq for easy and rapid quality control and data preprocessing of genomic and metagenomic datasets. summary statistics of fasta (and qual) or fastq files are generated in tabular and graphical form and sequences can be filtered, reformatted and trimmed by a variety of options to improve downstream analysis. availability and implementation: this open-source application was implemented in perl and can be used as a stand alone version or accessed online through a user-friendly web interface. the source code, user help and additional information are available athigh-throughput sequencing has revolutionized microbiology and accelerated genomic and metagenomic analyses; however, downstream sequence analysis is compromised by low-quality sequences, sequence artifacts and sequence contamination, eventually leading to misassembly and erroneous conclusions. these problems necessitate better tools for quality control and preprocessing of all sequence datasets. for most next-generation sequence datasets, the quality control should include the investigation of length, gc content, quality score and sequence complexity distributions; sequence duplication; contamination; artifacts; and number of ambiguous bases. in the preprocessing step, the sequence ends should be trimmed and unwanted sequences should be filtered. here, we describe an application able to provide graphical guidance and to perform filtering, reformatting and trimming on fasta (and qual) or fastq files. the program is publicly available through a user-friendly web interface and as a stand alone version. the web interface allows online analysis and data export for subsequent analysis.prinseq allows scientists to efficiently check and prepare their datasets prior to downstream analysis. the web interface is simple and user-friendly, and the stand alone version allows offline analysis and integration into existing data processing pipelines. the results reveal whether the sequencing experiment has succeeded, whether the correct sample was sequenced and whether the sample contains any contamination from dna preparation or host. the tool provides a computational resource able to handle the amount of data that nextgeneration sequencers are capable of generating and can place the process more within reach of the average research lab.  
