data and text mining quantifying the complexity of medical research motivation: a crucial phenomenon of our times is the diminishing marginal returns of investments in pharmaceutical research and development. a potential reason is that research into diseases is becoming increasingly complex, and thus more burdensome, for humans to handle. we sought to investigate whether we could measure research complexity by analyzing the published literature. results: through the text mining of the publication record of multiple diseases, we have found that the complexity and novelty of disease research has been increasing over the years. surprisingly, we have also found that research on diseases with higher publication rate does not possess greater complexity or novelty than that on less-studied diseases. we have also shown that the research produced about a disease can be seen as a differentiated area of knowledge within the wider biomedical research. for our analysis, we have conceptualized disease research as a parallel multi-agent search in which each scientific agent (a scientist) follows a search path based on a model of a disease. we have looked at trends in facts published for diseases, measured their diversity and turnover using the entropy measure and found similar patterns across disease areas.diseases are complex problems investigated by myriads of scientists working in parallel. most of these scientists work on narrow niches to produce pieces of knowledge that contribute to our overall understanding of diseases. this understanding then enables the test of therapeutic interventions that might be better alternatives to existing treatments. to investigate this process, we have used the analogy of a multi-agent system throughout this study. we compare disease research with a search performed by a multi-agent system in which the agents (scientists) explore a space (a disease) to enable the selection of the best solutions (interventions) to a problem. this analogy has limitations, but it aids in delving into the intrinsic properties of the problem (the metaproblem). there are similar motivations in intra-human modeling that can be seen in projects such as the virtual physiological human or apinatomy . the search agents in our multi-agent system use models of reality to guide their path. these models represent the models that scientists use to guide their research. an important part of disease research involves building models that recapitulate some of the main properties of diseases. the best known of these models are in vitro and in vivo proxies that are lower-cost lower-risk alternatives to clinical studies (e.g. the unilateral ureteral obstruction mouse is an animal model for human kidney disease). there are also disease models of a mathematical nature that represent diseases at the systems or epidemiological level. another type of model is based on the knowledge available for a disease , such as the models used in knowledge-based clinical decision support systems. biomedical researchers use knowledge models of diseases based on knowledge acquired from textbooks, scientific literature and experimental and clinical experience. they are made up of multiple elements, which can be clinical, cellular, molecular and public health relatedto name a few. these models are the focus of this study. for each disease, researchers pay more attention to different sets of elements. for example, clinicians may use a patients symptoms, demographics, clinical history and laboratory reports to evaluate disease progression. biologists, on the other hand, may use genes, pathways, organelles and other elements to generate hypotheses about the mechanism of action of a drug or the activity of signaling pathways. in a disease such as psoriasis, a clinician may focus on the relationship between psoriasis area and severity index (pasi) scores and different immunosuppressive drugs, whereas a biologist may investigate the interplay of cutaneous and immune cells. in diabetic nephropathy, on the other hand, the interest may fall on the biology of podocytes and myofibroblast proliferation or on a patients glomerular filtration rate and arterial blood pressure. thus, different elements are combined by each scientist to construct a model of reality that enables reasoning about the disease. we incorporate such scientific models in our multi-agent system analogy by postulating that each scientific agent has a model of a disease built into its internal state. this model helps the agent navigate its path and is based on inputs produced by other agents, such as scientific publications, compounds or tools. these models are crucial because the agents cannot perform their search through brute-force exploration. they need to choose a path based on the likelihood of success. thus, disease models facilitate decision making. we were interested in learning how the structure of these disease models can affect the task of the search agents. we started with the hypothesis that some disease models might be more complex than others for several reasons. one of the reasons could come from the number of articles published about a disease per year, as scientific publishing has been increasing exponentially across many areas of medical research . another reason could come from anatomy. for example, psoriasis is a fairly localized disease of the skin; to whom correspondence should be addressed. however, a disease such as diabetes involves multiple organs and tissues. yet another reason could come from the multiplicity of signaling pathways involved in a disease. thus, a greater multiplicity of elements in a disease could mean a greater search space to investigate. a theoretical disease model can further illustrate this latter point. this theoretical model involves a non-existent animal species called bigenes, which has two genes in its genome: a and b. bigenes suffers a species-specific disease called x, which is known to be driven by a mutation in a. up to the year t, the literature on x comprised five articles focused on gene a. the publication record about x at time t could be represented as x t aaaaa. thus, x t is a simplified representation of what was known about x up to time t. the genes belonging to x t may not be disease genes in a traditional sense, but they represent the scientific conversation taking place about x, even in cases when negative results are reported, which may be contradicted later on. defining disease genes is in itself a complicated task as the relationship between a gene and a disease can range from strong and firmly established to tenuous, depending on the weight of the existing evidence. a breakthrough in the research of x occurred in the year t 1, when a mutation in b was newly associated with x. new articles appeared investigating this association; however, other articles still focused on a, leading to x t1 aaaaababba, where the subsequence babba corresponds to publications for the year t 1. thus, the discovery of a mutation in b made the scientific model of the disease x more complex, and this is reflected in the publication record. this change in complexity can be quantified using the entropy measure from information theory, which is a common measure of statistical complexity used in biomedical applications such as monitoring heart rates (perkiomakiperkioma) and brain electrical activity or in evolutionary biology . the entropy for x t is h(x t ) 0, but the introduction of b in year t 1 leads to h(x t1 ) 0.88 (see section 2). h(x t1 )4h(x t ) reflects the increase in complexity over time. a number of works have been devoted to analyzing the growth and evolution of publications on gene and protein interactions outside the context of disease by analyzing the accumulated published record . however, there is a divergence between the published record and the focus of active research, as older works fade in influence (on average). we believe that practical disease models do not involve every piece of knowledge published about a disease. defining boundaries, nonetheless, is not straightforward. in the case of the disease x, publications were initially only about gene a, but that changed after an important discovery. realizing this requires specific knowledge of the disease and a scientific consensus that may not be found. to generalize, we have used a time window. a model containing the state of the art in year t 1 for a 1-year time window would be x 0 t1 babba. we call this a fading memory model, and it reflects that the older a finding is, the less relevant it becomesjust like a fading memory. this decay can be observed in the evolution of citation counts of published literature over time. one shortcoming of the fading memory approach is that some diseases have much higher publication rate than others. however, memories may fade faster for diseases with higher publication rate owing to the finite memory of the scientists that study them. a finite memory approach would consider the latest n publications rather than a time window. in the case of x, this would mean a disease model x 0 t1 ba for a memory size of n 2. we have centered our analysis on the finite memory approach because publication rates change widely over time and between diseasesand thus comparing fixed time windows would require some type of normalization, which could introduce distortions. nonetheless, the fading memory approach is also discussed, as will be shown later in the text. another important aspect of disease models is their evolution in time. a rapid pace of change may signify, for example, that the principles of a disease are not properly defined. a disease model whose elements have a high turnover rate requires a greater effort at understanding and leaves less time to devote to its details. in the case of the disease x, the appearance of b in the publication record was unexpected, which in bayesian probability terms can be expressed as p(b2x 0 t1 j x 0 t ) 0. on the other hand, articles about a were fully anticipated, p(a2x 0 t1 j x 0 t ) 1. thus, conditional probabilities can be used to gauge the rate of change in a disease model and the novelty of a finding. the bigenes example is about an organism with only two genes (like some simple viruses), but a similar case could have been made about an organism with only two cell types because research emphasis on cell types also changes over time. for example, much immunological research has been focused on the t-cell subsets th 1 and th 2 , but, recently, there has been increased emphasis on th 17 and t reg cells, whereas new cell types, such as th 9 and th 22 , are regularly proposed. in this analysis, we have considered disease models not only involving genes (as in the bigenes example) but also cell types, drugs and chemicals, and we have looked at how they influence each other.the complexity of disease models made of genes has been increasing over time, as can be seen in. this is reflected in the r 2 and the multiple linear regression coefficients in. to test the robustness of the result, we changed the value of the time window (originally n 100) to n 2 25, 50, 75, 100, 125, f 150, 175, 200g and found that the relation persisted and even became stronger with increasing n. the r 2 fit increased with the size n of the window (r 2 $ 3.4 10 2 ln(n) 2.8 10 2 ), as did the coefficients for time (r 2 $ 2.3 10 2 ln(n) 4.2 10 2 ) and publication rate (r 2 $ 1.1 10 5 ln(n) 3.4 10 5 ). choosing the value of n is a trade-off between resolution and coverage, as diseases with less than n published facts are not included in the analysis. we also looked within disease groups and found similar patterns (seeand), with, for example, cardiovascular diseases and nervous system diseases increasing in complexity at a faster pace over the period involved, and neoplasms and substance-related disorders growing slower. an illustrative example is the disease retinitis pigmentosa (rp), a retinal degenerative disease. the entropy of its disease model over time fits a linear regression with r 2 0.89 and a positive slope of 0.13, indicating that its complexity has been increasing over time (see). the lower early entropy is illustrated by one of the main genes studied in rp: rhodopsin. owing to the early discovery of a rhodopsin mutation associated to rp , rhodopsin was important in publications about rp, leading to initial low entropy in the rp disease model. however, rhodopsin has faded relatively in importance as many other mutations and genes have been associated to rp in recent times. the current multiplicity of genes studied has led to higher entropy in the disease model of rp. for disease models of chemicals and drugs, we can see a milder increase in complexity (see section 2). thus, the increase incomplexity is not homogeneous across all categories of elements. this is seen in models of rp as well. the linear regression for the disease model of chemicals has r 2 of 0.54 and slope of 0.06, and for drugs r 2 of 0.80 and slope of 0.05. the low entropy in chemical models in the earlier studies of rp is illustrated by the relatively higher prominence of fluorescein, whose use tended to be highlighted in the abstract [e.g. (, a practice which has faded since. fluorescein is counted both as a chemical and as a drug (fda approved in this case). thus, the drug and chemical categories overlap. the control disease models created by random permutation of disease annotations (see section 2) do not show any of these properties (see). moreover, control disease models do not show the heterogeneity of entropy values seen in actual disease models, suggesting that entropy differences are significant between disease models. for example, the linear regression that fits the control gene disease model for rp has r 2 and slope close to 0 and does not show dependence with time. moreover, the entropy values are high and close to what a discrete uniform distribution with sufficient cardinality would produce. actual disease models have lower entropy than control disease models because they are concentrated around certain elements such as popular genes or drugs and form differentiated areas of knowledge, as the rp example shows. an implication is that 100 randomly selected articles about a disease should, on average, cover less unique facts (e.g. genes) than 100 articles picked at random from the overall literature. this means that the focus of a diseases research is narrower and there is more repetition, which gives it more coherence and makes it more understandable to humans. when the focus of a disease becomes too broad it could be an indication that the disease definition has become too inclusive. as seen in the disease models of rp, the slope of the linear regression between entropy and time tends to be positive,all diseases, we found these values to be unrelated to the average publication rate, showing that disease models with high average publication rates are no more complex than those of diseases with low average publication rates. this is similarly reflected in, where we show that a small fraction of the increase in complexity is driven by higher publication rates. for example, in gene disease models, the linear regression coefficients indicate that a 5000-fold publication rate increase would increase the complexity as little as 1 year of time would. by looking at the rp example alone, we could not have known whether the increase in entropy of its disease models was somehow related to the increase in the rate of publications about rp that happened over the same time period. our analysis, however, allows us to say that these two variables are generally unrelated. instead, diseases with high publication rates would seem to have a fast forward behavior in which findings are brought up faster but without an increase in associated complexity. thus, the finite memory approach chosen here (as described in section 2) seems more appropriate to study this phenomenon than the fading memory approach. as can be seen inand, the novelty in disease models made of genes has been increasing over time as well. this can be seen in the negative relation between time and the probability of a publication mentioning a gene that is already in a disease model. for chemicals, this relationship is barely significant, and for drugs, it is not significant. the linear regression for disease models of genes has a median slope of 0.00942 and an interquartile range of(here, negative slope means increased novelty). increased novelty could be one of the main drivers of increased entropy, as they are related. in the gene disease model of rp, novelty increases noticeably with time, and fits a linear regression of slope 0.07 and r 2 of 0.63. from the complexity and novelty of the disease models of rp, we postulate that rp has become harder to study over time. rp is not a unique case, as can be seen infor two disease groups and multiple sclerosis. as shown in, we found that publication rates do not correlate with novelty. thus, a slower pace of publication does not entail a lower appetite for novelty in less-explored diseases. control disease models show a more stable and much higher rate of novelty, as would be expected from a randomly shuffled set. to further study the drivers of complexity in disease models we measured the correlations between the entropies of disease models for genes, chemicals and drugs (see section 2). these correlations were found to be positive (seeand), meaning that increases in one category were correlated with increases in another category, even controlling for the common increase of entropy over time already described. in the case of rp, for example, the entropies for the disease models of genes and chemicals were correlated, with a slope of 0.50 and r 2 of 0.58. this shows that changes in complexity of disease models are not independent for each category and that it would be reasonable to consider disease models in a multidimensional fashion, with different categories of elements interacting with each other rather than studying them separately. it should also be noted that variations in complexity for each category may have different practical impact. for example, an increase in cell type complexity could be more relevant than an increase in gene complexity because a gene can be associated to different functions in different cell types.  
