quantitative phosphoproteomics-based molecular network description for high-resolution kinase-substrate interactome analysis downloaded from motivation: phosphorylation-dependent cellular signaling is known to play a diverse role in regulating multiple cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. recent technological advances in mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics have enabled us to measure network-wide signaling dynamics in a comprehensive and quantitative manner. as conventional proteinprotein interaction (ppi) information-based network analysis is insufficient to systematically analyze phosphorylation site-dependent complex interaction dynamics, here we develop and evaluate a platform to provide a high-resolution molecular network description for kin-asesubstrate interactome analysis. results: in this study, we developed a cytoscape-based bioinformatical platform named post translational modification mapper (ptmapper) to integrate ppi data with publicly available kinase-substrate relations at the resolution of phosphorylated amino acid residues. the previous phos-phoproteome data on egf-induced cellular signaling in glioblastoma stem cells was applied to evaluate our platform, leading to discovery of phosphorylation-dependent crucial signaling modulation in the p70s6k1-related pathway. our study revealed that high-resolution cellular network description of phosphorylation-site dependent kinase-substrate signaling regulation should accelerate phosphoproteomics-based exploration of novel drug targets in the context of each disease-related signaling. availability and implementation: ptmapper and the example data for construction of phosphoryl-ation site-oriented networks are available at https://github.com/y-narushima/ptmapper.protein phosphorylation is one of the most well-known post translational modifications (ptms) at serine, threonine and tyrosine residues within protein sequences and plays important roles in various cellular signaling pathways correlated with cell fate control. due to the technical development of phosphoprotein/peptide enrichment methodologies and the analytical improvement of lc-ms/ms systems, quantitative phosphoproteomics are now widely used to uncover global phosphorylation dynamics in cellular signaling networks . as with the analysis of genome and transcriptome data, advanced computational methodology is essential to translate phosphoproteome data into high-resolution protein interaction networks towards better understanding of the detailed biological mechanisms triggered by phosphorylation-dependent signal transduction. quantitative phosphoproteomics-based network analyses could be mainly categorized into the two methods: (i) visualization of activation dynamics by mapping the quantification data to each signaling molecules and (ii) sub-network extraction through the statistical calculation of network/pathway enrichment based on the quantified phosphoproteome data. the former is basically used for explanation of phosphorylation-related fold changes in particular signaling pathways . the latter enables us to unbiasedly reveal functionally important parts of signaling networks which reflect quantitative changes observed in the phosphoproteome data, leading to discovery of regulatory interactions unannotated in the conventional signaling pathways . these network analyses are mainly based on protein protein interaction (ppi) information, although the phosphorylationinduced reaction is controlled by site-specific kinases/phosphatases. in recent studies, the information on enzymesubstrate relationships between kinases and the corresponding phosphorylation sites has rapidly accumulated in public phosphorylation site databases, such as phosphositeplus , phospho.elm and phosphonetworks . the representative protein databases, including uniprot kb , human protein reference database and nextprot , also keep updating the large-scale information on phosphoyrlation sites and their specific kinases. in spite of the drastic expansion of these public databases, there are few platforms to analyze quantitative phosphoproteome data using the kinasephosphorylation site datasets as noted above. moreover, phosphorylation site-oriented network analysis is mainly applied for visualization of phosphoproteome data, but not for statistical interpretation of network dynamics. therefore, we developed a cytoscape-based network analysis platform named post translational modification mapper (ptmapper), which enables us to describe phosphorylation site-dependent ppi dynamics and statistically analyze network properties through combination with other cytoscape applications. the ptmapper-based analysis of our previous quantitative phosphoproteome data on egf-stimulated glioblastoma stem cells led to discovery of phosphorylation-dependent association regarding the p70s6k1related pathway upon egf stimulation, which was not unveiled in the network structure based on the conventional ppi information.in this study, we developed a bioinformatical platform named ptmapper to characterize the structures of phosphorylation site-oriented ppi networks. from the quantitative phosphoproteome data on egf-stimulated glioblastoma stem cells, our ptmapper-based network analysis unveiled p70s6k-related signaling as one of the most significantly regulated sub-networks, which was not observed in the conventional ppi network. as some previous studies demonstrated that p70s6k was correlated with survival and stemness maintenance of glioblastoma stem cells, the strategy based on phosphorylation site-oriented network analysis proved to be effective to unbiasedly extract crucial signaling pathways from the complex signaling networks. our ptmapper-based computational pipeline will be applied not only to phosphorylation but also to other ptms such as acetylation and ubiquitination, and contribute to further understanding of highly diversified ptm-dependent ppi networks.  
