quantitative trait association study for mean telomere length in the south asian genomes motivation: mean telomere length (mtl) is associated with cancers and age-related diseases, which necessitates identification of genomic and environmental factors that impact telomere length dynamics. here, we present a pilot genome wide association (gwa) study for mtl in south asian population using publicly available next generation whole genome sequences (wgs), both for mtl and genotype calculations. results: mtl in the studied population was not correlated with age, which is in accordance with previous reports. further, we identified that individuals with sikh religion had longer telomeres, which may be the result of complex interaction between genetic background and environmental factors. finally, we identified 51 mtl-associated snps residing in five loci. the top ones were located in adarb2 gene, which has previously been implicated with extreme old age. conclusion: our results show that wgs data can be used in telomere length studies. in addition, we introduce novel loci implicated in mtl that may be worth considering in further telomere studies.telomeres are repetitive stretches of dna that cap the ends of chromosomes. in humans, telomeres are comprised of ttaggg n tandem repeats and vary between 5 and 15 kb in length . among other functions, telomeres protect chromosome ends from being recognized as double-stranded dna breaks. each cell division results in shortening of telomeric sequences due to the end replication problem . in their study,have calculated that in humans the annual loss of telomere length ranges between 20 and 60 bp. telomere length can be restored in cells by telomerase enzyme, which is active in reproductive and stem cells, partially in leukocytes, as well as in certain types of tumors . significance of telomere length association with various conditions and diseases is clearly demonstrated through multiple studies. shortening of telomeres is associated with aging, age-related diseases and certain cancer types . identification of genetic and environmental factors impacting telomere length has been repeatedly addressed. from multiple loci implicated in association with telomere length, those including genes associated with telomerase were among the most validated ones.conducted a meta-analysis of 37 684 individuals and reported seven loci associated with leukocyte mean telomere length (mtl), including genes coding for telomerase rna component (terc), telomerase reverse transcriptase oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding fold containing 1 protein (obfc1), nuclear assembly factor 1 ribonucleoprotein (naf1), regulator of telomere elongation helicase (rtel1), which are involved in telomere biology, and two other loci including acyp2 and znf208 genes. these genes, apart from znf208, were validated or had supportive evidence in a study within the cogs project .). association of telomere length with snps is partially population specific, and until now there is no well-accepted genomic factor determining telomere length and telomere attrition rate. this may be partially attributed to population-specific genomic variations on one side, and lack of tools for measuring telomere length from whole genome sequencing (wgs) data, on the other. recently, we have developed a methodology and software computel that allows to calculate mtl from wgs data by capturing reads from telomeric regions via alignment to a special reference sequence. computel has been proven to be valid with reference to existing experimental methods and to outperform other computational approaches . this gives the opportunity to considerably promote the research aimed at understanding how telomere length is linked to genomic context. in this study, we have performed a genome wide quantitative trait association study for mtl in south asian population, using wgs data both for genotyping and mtl calculation.here, we have presented a pilot study of gwa for mtl in south asians, where we exploited wgs data for snp information and for mtl calculation. concordance of certain findings with previously published results validated our approach and demonstrated that the usage of wgs data can be extended to be utilized in telomere studies. this eliminates the necessity of conducting additional experiments for telomere length measurement, greatly facilitating further research. moreover, there is large amount of already existing wgs data focused on age-related diseases and cancers, where telomeres play an important role, and our approach can be used to exploit available datasets to enrich the results with telomere length data. our study showed that sikhs are distinguished with longer telomeres compared with other religious groups from south asia. this phenomenon needs further investigation in order to assess the involvement of genetic and/or environmental factors on telomere length dynamics. moreover, our results suggest that not only telomere length, but also its association with age can be affected by ethnicity. finally, we have identified that adarb2 gene highly impacts telomere length in south asians. longevity-related nature of this gene is characterized in other populations, thus combination of this information with our results calls for more investigation to understand the role of this gene in telomere regulation and ageing in general.  
