genome analysis quast: quality assessment tool for genome assemblies limitations of genome sequencing techniques have led to dozens of assembly algorithms, none of which is perfect. a number of methods for comparing assemblers have been developed, but none is yet a recognized benchmark. further, most existing methods for comparing assemblies are only applicable to new assemblies of finished genomes; the problem of evaluating assemblies of previously unse-quenced species has not been adequately considered. here, we present quasta quality assessment tool for evaluating and comparing genome assemblies. this tool improves on leading assembly comparison software with new ideas and quality metrics. quast can evaluate assemblies both with a reference genome, as well as without a reference. quast produces many reports, summary tables and plots to help scientists in their research and in their publications. in this study, we used quast to compare several genome assemblers on three datasets. quast tables and plots for all of them are available in the supplementary material, and interactive versions of these reports are on the quast website.modern dna sequencing technologies cannot produce the complete sequence of a chromosome. instead, they generate large numbers of reads, ranging from dozens to thousands of consecutive bases, sampled from different parts of the genome. genome assembly software combines the reads into larger regions called contigs. however, current sequencing technologies and software face many complications that impede reconstruction of full chromosomes, including errors in reads and large repeats in the genome. different assembly programs use different heuristic approaches to tackle these challenges, resulting in many differences in the contigs they output. this leads to the questions of how to assess the quality of an assembly and how to compare different assemblies. recently, there has been a lot of work on developing comprehensive ways to compare different assemblers. plantagora is a web-based platform aimed at helping scientists view characteristics of the most popular sequencing strategies (including sequencing platforms and assembly software) for plant genomes. plantagora has a well-designed interface to browse their database of evaluation results. researchers may run the plantagora assessment tool on their own assembly, but the results cannot be viewed through the friendly user-interface; instead, the user has to parse a large log file. the assemblathon competition compared 41 de novo assemblies on 4100 evaluation metrics. the assemblathon assessment scripts are freely available, but they are highly focused on the genomes used in the competition, and normal users cannot easily apply them to other genomes. another freely available genome assembly assessment tool is gage . in, it was used to evaluate several leading genome assemblers on four datasets. gage evaluates a set of metrics, including different types of misassembly errors (inversions, relocations and translocations). plantagora and gage can only be used to evaluate assemblies of datasets with a known reference genome; thus, they are not suitable for evaluating assemblies of previously unsequenced genomes. additionally, gage can only be run on one dataset at a time; therefore, to compare multiple assemblers on the same dataset, one has to manually combine output from separate gage reports into a table. we introduce quast, a new assembly quality assessment tool. quast evaluates a full range of metrics needed by various users. however, the number of metrics is not so large that it would become difficult to interpret all of them. the interface and visualizations are easy to use, representative and informative. quast can evaluate assembly quality even without a reference genome, so that researchers can assess the quality of assemblies of new species that do not yet have a finished reference genome. in addition, quast is rather fast, and its most time-consuming steps are parallelized; therefore, it can be effectively run on multi-core processors. see supplementaryfor quasts performance on different genomes.many assembly algorithms have been developed for the challenging problem of genome assembly from short reads. our new open-access quality assessment tool quast will help scientists to assess different assembly software to choose the best pipeline for their research, and it will help developers of genome assemblers to improve their software and algorithms.  
