sequence analysis quikr: a method for rapid reconstruction of bacterial communities via compressive sensing motivation: many metagenomic studies compare hundreds to thousands of environmental and health-related samples by extracting and sequencing their 16s rrna amplicons and measuring their similarity using beta-diversity metrics. however, one of the first stepsto classify the operational taxonomic units within the samplecan be a com-putationally time-consuming task because most methods rely on computing the taxonomic assignment of each individual read out of tens to hundreds of thousands of reads. results: we introduce quikr: a quadratic, k-merbased, iterative, reconstruction method, which computes a vector of taxonomic assignments and their proportions in the sample using an optimization technique motivated from the mathematical theory of compressive sensing. on both simulated and actual biological data, we demonstrate that quikr typically has less error and is typically orders of magnitude faster than the most commonly used taxonomic assignment technique (the ribosomal database projects navenave bayesian classifier). furthermore, the technique is shown to be unaffected by the presence of chimeras, thereby allowing for the circumvention of the time-intensive step of chimera filtering. availability: the quikr computational package (in matlab, octave, python and c) for the linux and mac platforms is available at http:// sourceforge.net/projects/quikr/.reconstructing the taxonomic composition of a bacterial community taken from an environmental sample (be it a humanassociated, ocean, or soil sample) is critical for understanding the role that such a community might play in affecting change in that environment. a popular reconstruction approach is to use 16s rrna amplicon sequencing (like roches 454 technology) to produce many ($400 0001 000 000) moderate-length ($400700 bp) reads of specific variable regions of the 16s rrna gene and then individually classify these reads using a custom database with blast or in a bayesian framework like the ribosomal database projects (rdp) navenave bayesian classifier (nbc) . rdps nbc is widely used owing to its speed but it can still take several days to assign millions of reads on a desktop computer, thereby alienating users who do not have access to large computer clusters. we introduce a method that enables desktop analysis: we take a novel approach by reconstructing all taxonomic concentrations of a bacterial community simultaneously (as opposed to read-byread classification). this allows for orders of magnitude decrease in execution time while maintaining comparable (and often better) reconstruction fidelity. this method, based on ideas from compressive sensing, was inspired by and tangentially related to wherein sparsity-promoting algorithms were used to analyze mixtures of dye-terminator reads resulting from sanger sequencing. here, however, we take a k-merbased approach that is designed for high-throughput sequencing technologies. this is similar in spirit to the k-mer based approach in but herein we use a distribution estimation procedure based on compressive sensing. put briefly, our method measures the frequency of k-mers (for a fixed k $ 6) in a database of 16s rrna genes for known bacteria, calculates the frequency of k-mers in the given sample, and then reconstructs the concentrations of the bacteria in the sample by solving an underdetermined system of linear equations under a sparsity assumption. to solve this system, we employ matlabs (matlab, 2012) iterative implementation of typical nonnegative least squares and hence we refer to this method as quikr: quadratic, iterative, k-merbased reconstruction. we point out that quikr has not yet been optimized for performance but still demonstrates orders of magnitude speed improvement over rdps nbc.quikr represents a new paradigm in algorithms for bacterial community reconstruction. by leveraging ideas from compressive sensing, an entire sample can be analyzed quickly and accurately. depending on how it is trained, quikr can be used as either an extremely rapid, almost constant time, high-level community profiling tool or else (using a larger training database) a fast, extremely accurate technique. besides improvements in speed, other advantages include the ability to use massive training databases (like d large ) that would be much too large for standard techniques (like rdps nbc). furthermore, quikr is unaffected by the presence of chimeras, so the time-consuming chimeraremoval step in standard analytic pipelines can be completely circumvented.  
