qure: software for viral quasispecies reconstruction from next-generation sequencing data next-generation sequencing (ngs) is an ideal framework for the characterization of highly variable pathogens, with a deep resolution able to capture minority variants. however, the reconstruction of all variants of a viral population infecting a host is a challenging task for genome regions larger than the average ngs read length. qure is a program for viral quasispecies reconstruction, specifically developed to analyze long read (100 bp) ngs data. the software performs alignments of sequence fragments against a reference genome, finds an optimal division of the genome into sliding windows based on coverage and diversity and attempts to reconstruct all the individual sequences of the viral quasispeciesalong with their prevalenceusing a heuristic algorithm, which matches multinomial distributions of distinct viral variants overlapping across the genome division. qure comes with a built-in poisson error correction method and a post-reconstruction probabilistic clustering, both parameterized on given error rates in homopolymeric and non-homopolymeric regions.next-generation sequencing (ngs) techniques produce thousands to billions of sequence fragments (called reads), composed of tens to hundreds of nucleotide bases. the current applications of ngs include de novo sequencing, re-sequencing and metagenomics . several technologies have been commercialized and while the purchase of a machine often is not possible by a clinical or research laboratory, ngs services are available at a reasonable price from other facilities for genetic studies or diagnostic purposes . ngs assembly software has been designed to infer a unique genome from a read set . one of the challenges of re-sequencing and de novo sequencing from ngs data is the reconstruction of a viral population, or viral swarm, also to whom correspondence should be addressed. referred to as a quasispecies . the current approach for quasispecies characterization uses clonal sanger sequencing. however, ngs has the advantage to detect minority variants at a higher resolution than sanger, at a competitive price. several theoretical approaches for the viral swarm reconstruction have been published, validated both via simulations and real ngs data (; b). three software have been implemented and released, shorah , predicthaplo (http://www.cs.unibas.ch/personen/roth_volker/hivhaplotyper/) and vispa , all for unix/linux platforms. an extensive review of methods has been recently published by. we introduce here qure (quasispecies reconstruction algorithm), a platform-independent, multi-threaded java implementation of the method by. qure reconstructs automatically a set of error-free, full-gene or full-genome, variants from a collection of ngs reads. it is based on a heuristic algorithm that maps reads to a reference genome, and then matches distinct viral variants across a partition of the reference into overlapping intervals, using multinomial distributions. however, the performance of reconstruction algorithms may depend on many factors, including quasispecies diversity, rate of heterogeneity, read length and coverage; it has been shown that qure has advantages over other methods in reducing the chance to reconstruct false in silico recombinants . the software has been designed for ngs technologies that produce long reads (100 bp), such as roche 454 life sciences (http://www.my454.com/).  
