ractip: fast and accurate prediction of rna-rna interaction using integer programming motivation: considerable attention has been focused on predicting rnarna interaction since it is a key to identifying possible targets of non-coding small rnas that regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally. a number of computational studies have so far been devoted to predicting joint secondary structures or binding sites under a specific class of interactions. in general, there is a trade-off between range of interaction type and efficiency of a prediction algorithm, and thus efficient computational methods for predicting comprehensive type of interaction are still awaited. results: we present ractip, a fast and accurate prediction method for rnarna interaction of general type using integer programming. ractip can integrate approximate information on an ensemble of equilibrium joint structures into the objective function of integer programming using posterior internal and external base-paring probabilities. experimental results on real interaction data show that prediction accuracy of ractip is at least comparable to that of several state-of-the-art methods for rnarna interaction prediction. moreover, we demonstrate that ractip can run incomparably faster than competitive methods for predicting joint secondary structures. availability: ractip is implemented in c++, and the source code is available at http://www.ncrna.org/software/ractip/recent years have seen a renewal of interest in the biological roles of functional non-coding rnas (ncrnas). modern studies have provided evidence that they can act as ubiquitous regulators in living cells . a class of small ncrnas downregulates gene expression post-transcriptionally via base-pairing with target mrnas of the ncrnas to inhibit the translation into the corresponding proteins. eukaryotic micrornas (mirnas) and small interfering rnas (sirnas) are very short and have almost full sequence complementarity to their targets. on the other hand, several regulatory antisense rnas have been found in bacterial chromosomes, which have relatively long sequences and interact with their target mrnas in a more intricate manner . this type of interaction comes from the fact that the genes encoding the antisense rnas are located at loci different from those encoding their targets (i.e. trans-encoded antisense rnas) . in particular, kissing hairpin structures (see) caused by looploop interaction have been observed . to help to understand the mechanism of rnarna interaction further, as well as to identify target rnas of specific ncrnas, it is desirable to develop fast and accurate computational methods for predicting interacting rna structures. rnarna interaction prediction has so far been performed by several computational approaches, which can be roughly classified into four groups. the first group including unafold , rnahybrid and rnaduplex from the vienna rna package disregards intramolecular bonds in both sequences and computes the minimum free energy (mfe) hybridization. they work out for short interacting rnas but are impracticable for long sequences with intramolecular structures. the second group belongs to the category that uses the idea of concatenating two rna sequences and considering them as a single strand so that the mfe structure of the resulting sequence can be computed. pairfold and rnacofold adopt this procedure, but these methods cannot predict general type of interaction such as kissing hairpins. other approaches such as rnaup , intarna , inrnas and bistarna fall into the third group, which considers rnarna interaction as the stepwise process of individual intramolecular foldings and their hybridization. rnaup and intarna can predict only one binding site, whereas inrnas and bistarna can predict multiple binding sites. the final group aims at predicting the mfe joint secondary structure or computing the interaction partition function under the comprehensive type of interaction. iris , interna , rig , pirna , rip and also inrnas are listed as this category. these methods impose natural constraints on the joint structure such that there are no internal pseudoknots, crossing interactions and zigzags . note thatsuggested that these constraints are satisfied by all examples ofpage: i461 i460i466we proposed ractip, a novel method for predicting rna rna interaction of general type using ip. in our approach, the threshold cut technique was adopted to reduce the complexity of the solution space of the ip problem, which also leads to maximizing expected accuracy. experimental results on real interaction data demonstrated that prediction accuracy of ractip is at least comparable to that of several state-of-the-art methods for joint structure prediction and binding site prediction. although it is difficult to evaluate theoretically the time complexity of our ipbased approach, experimental validations revealed that ractip can run much faster than competitive methods for predicting joint secondary structures. this is an important fact to stress since ractip is expected to improve prediction performance in unknown target search in long genomes by predicting respective intramolecular structures as well as intermolecular binding sites in practical time. for this purpose, we should also show that ractip can discriminate between targets and non-targets, which is left as our future work. ractip not only achieved success in rnarna interaction prediction but also showed further possibility of applying the fast ip-based method with threshold cut to other biologically important problems, which are worthwhile and challenging tasks.we employed the threshold cut technique to reduce the search space for the optimal joint secondary structure, which makes ractip run much faster than existing state-of-the-art algorithms for joint structure prediction. let us stress again that there is a close relation between the threshold cut and maximizing expected accuracy.  
