rail-dbgap: analyzing dbgap-protected data in the cloud with amazon elastic mapreduce motivation: public archives contain thousands of trillions of bases of valuable sequencing data. more than 40 of the sequence read archive is human data protected by provisions such as dbgap. to analyse dbgap-protected data, researchers must typically work with it administrators and signing officials to ensure all levels of security are implemented at their institution. this is a major obstacle, impeding reproducibility and reducing the utility of archived data. results: we present a protocol and software tool for analyzing protected data in a commercial cloud. the protocol, rail-dbgap, is applicable to any tool running on amazon web services elastic mapreduce. the tool, rail-rna v0.2, is a spliced aligner for rna-seq data, which we demonstrate by running on 9662 samples from the dbgap-protected gtex consortium dataset. the rail-dbgap protocol makes explicit for the first time the steps an investigator must take to develop elastic mapreduce pipelines that analyse dbgap-protected data in a manner compliant with nih guidelines. rail-rna automates implementation of the protocol, making it easy for typical biomedical investigators to study protected rna-seq data, regardless of their local it resources or expertise. availability and implementation: rail-rna is available from http://rail.bio. technical details on the rail-dbgap protocol as well as an implementation walkthrough are available at https://github.com/ nellore/rail-dbgap. detailed instructions on running rail-rna on dbgap-protected data using amazon web services are available atthe database of genotypes and phenotypes (dbgap) hosts controlled-access raw and processed human genomic data and associated phenotypic data. while datasets are stripped of metadata linking them with specific individuals, the remaining data is still sensitive in part because it could be combined with external information to identify individuals. the nih requires adherence to security guidelines for the proper handling of dbgapprotected data, from acquisition through destruction (see http:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/pdf/dbgap_2b_security_procedures. pdf). these include physical security of computing infrastructure, restricting inbound internet access, multi-factor authentication (mfa) and password policies, encryption of data, enforcing the principle of least privilege and logging data access. for many investigators, the guidelines pose a practical challenge: institutional computer clusters may not be compliant, requiring it policy revisions or intervention by it administrators.the rail-dbgap protocol is implemented in the v0.2 line of rail-rna. detailed instructions on implementation are available at https://github. com/nellore/rail-dbgap, and rail-rna v0.2.x may be downloaded at http://rail.bio. we used the rail-dbgap protocol to align 9662 pairedend rna-seq samples obtained by the gtex consortium in 30 batches across various human tissues over a period of 5 days, 5 h and 28 min for us$0.32 per sample. computational details, mapped read proportions and a cost calculation are described in the supplementary material. scripts for reproducing our results are available at https://github.com/nellore/runs/tree/master/gtex. ronald dowden and brian willey of it@jh for assistance in designing and validating the protocol.  
