ranking models of transmembrane β-barrel proteins using z-coordinate predictions motivation: transmembrane -barrels exist in the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria as well as in chloroplast and mitochondria. they are often involved in transport processes and are promising antimicrobial drug targets. structures of only a few -barrel protein families are known. therefore, a method that could automatically generate such models would be valuable. the symmetrical arrangement of the barrels suggests that an approach based on idealized geometries may be successful. results: here, we present tobmodel; a method for generating 3d models of -barrel transmembrane proteins. first, alternative topologies are obtained from the boctopus topology predictor. thereafter, several 3d models are constructed by using different angles of the -sheets. finally, the best model is selected based on agreement with a novel predictor, zpred3, which predicts the distance from the center of the membrane for each residue, i.e. the z-coordinate. the z-coordinate prediction has an average error of 1.61 . tobmodel predicts the correct topology for 75 of the proteins in the dataset which is a slight improvement over boctopus alone. more importantly, however, tobmodel provides a c template with an average rmsd of 7.24 from the native structure. availability: tobmodel is freely available as a web server at: http://tobmodel.cbr.su.se/. the datasets used for training and evaluations are also available from this site.there are two classes of integral transmembrane membrane proteins, -helical proteins and -barrels. -helical transmembrane proteins constitute 2030 of a typical genome. the transmembrane barrels, which are the focus of this article, are less abundant and only found in the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, chloroplast and mitochondria. although less abundant, transmembrane barrels are known to play a crucial role in the transport over the membrane and, additionally, in pore formation. they are also candidate targets for the development of antimicrobial drugs . the experimental determination of the structure of transmembrane proteins is fraught with difficulties and, thus, computational methods are essential for identification and structural prediction. in particular, such predictions can be used for further to whom correspondence should be addressed. experimental investigations and might aid in elucidating the function of these proteins. given the symmetrical structure of -barrels it is possible to generate models directly from a theoretical description of a barrel . obviously, these structural models might provide insights into the interactions between residues. further, a 3d model can be used to design sitedirected mutagenesis experiments and can be used in the modeling of large membrane protein complexes, such as the tom-complex of the mitochondrial outer membrane . many methods have been developed for the prediction of -barrel transmembrane protein topology . in addition, methods like partifold and tmbpro predict the inter -strand residue contacts. however, to our knowledge only two methods predict a full 3d model, tmbpro and 3d-spot . in fact, the latter requires the protein topology as input, so it is only tmbpro that provides the full sequence to structure prediction. tmbpro is based on secondary structure predictions and prediction of residue contacts in potential transmembrane -barrels. tmbpro uses templates derived from known transmembrane barrels and aligns the predicted secondary structure to one of the 18 predefined templates based on the number of predicted -strands. however, as discussed by, template-based methods cannot be applied to novel folds, such as transmembrane -barrels with an odd number of -strands . 3d-spot is based on optimizing hydrogen bonds and side chain interactions between adjacent -strands. three different types of bonds are taken into account; strong hydrogen bonds, weak hydrogen bonds and side chain interactions. during optimization, adjacent -strands are shifted up and down to obtain the lowest energy arrangement . the final model is then built using an intertwined coil geometric model, where each -strand is represented by a coil wrapped around a hypothetical cylinder, and each coil is separately modeled. finally, main chain atoms are added to the c trace using an algorithm developed by. here, we present tobmodela computational method for modeling of transmembrane -barrels. the workflow of tobmodel is outlined in. as shown, first boctopus is used to generate a set of potential topologies for a given protein sequence . the second step is to generate a set of alternative 3d models using -barrels with idealized geometries for each topology. finally, to rank the models, we developed a novel) is used to generate topologies. thereafter, 3d c models are generated using the predicted topologies and different shear numbers. finally, zpred3 is used to predict the z-coordinate of each residue, then the models are ranked based on the lowest z-coordinate error z-coordinate predictor, zpred3. the ranking is determined by the agreement between, on the one hand, the z-coordinate predictions from zpred3 and, on the other, the z-coordinates from the model. further, tobmodel provides better topologies than tmbpro, based on a 10-fold cross-validation test. the quality of the final model generated by tobmodel is comparable to the final tmbpro model, while 3d-spot seems to generate better models.here, we present a novel method, tobmodel, that given the amino acid sequence for a -barrel membrane protein generates a c model. first, hundreds of alternative topologies are produced by means of our -barrel topology predictor, boctopus. subsequently, many alternative c models are generated for each topology. finally, the best of all these models is selected based on the agreement between a model and the predicted distance (z-coordinate) from the center of the membrane. this distance is predicted using a novel support vector machine-based predictor, zpred3. the selection procedure results in a slightly higher number of correct topologies compared to boctopus alone. tobmodel performs well compared to available methods. although the quality of the models generated by tobmodel is somewhat worse than models generated by 3d-spot , it is on par with models by tmbpro , the only previously published method for barrel membrane protein prediction that takes protein sequences as input rather than precomputed topologies. further, the average rmsd of top ranking models, generated by tobmodel, is 7.24 . taken together, our results indicate that the inclusion of z-coordinate errors in the modeling of transmembrane -barrels is a promising new direction and, further, suggest that additional selection criteria and more accurate modeling may further improve our method.  
