ranks: a flexible tool for node label ranking and classification in biological networks ranks is a flexible software package that can be easily applied to any bioinformatics task formalizable as ranking of nodes with respect to a property given as a label, such as automated protein function prediction, gene disease prioritization and drug repositioning. to this end ranks provides an efficient and easy-to-use implementation of kernelized score functions, a semi-supervised algorithmic scheme embedding both local and global learning strategies for the analysis of biomolecular networks. to facilitate comparative assessment, baseline network-based methods, e.g. label propagation and random walk algorithms, have also been implemented. availability and implementation: the package is available from cran: https://cran.r-project.org/.relevant bioinformatics problems can be modeled through networks, where nodes represent biomolecular entities (e.g. proteins or genes) and edges functional relationships between them. in this context a typical class of problems is node label ranking, which consists of ordering nodes with respect to a given property under studye.g. the annotation with a specific gene ontology (go) or online mendelian inheritance in man (omim) term. examples of these problems are represented by protein function prediction, disease gene prioritization and drug repositioning. several software tools have been recently developed for the analysis of biomolecular networks. the bionet r package provides a set of methods for the integrated analysis of gene expression data and biological networks. htsanalyzer is a tool optimized for network analysis of highthroughput screens, while svd-phy predicts functional associations between non-homologous genes by comparing their phylogenetic distributions . generev aims at assessing the functional relevance of genes from highthroughput data. santa uses spatial statistics techniques to assess the functional information content of a biological network with respect to a given set of seed genes. the genenet toolbox for matlab can evaluate the relevance of functional relationships by performing a statistical assessment of gene connectivity using seed nodes, network randomization and permutation techniques. the aforementioned tools are limited in their application by the usage of a specific source of data (as in the case of bionet and htsanalyzer) or do not allow to integrate custom methods in the analysis workflow (as in the case of generev). other software tools can use different sources of data but are devised to evaluate the relevance of functional relationships, as in the case of genenet, and cannot be obviously used to predict functional labels for the nodes of the network. to provide a data source-independent bioinformatics tool for solving arbitrary node label ranking and classification problems in v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com biological networks, we devised ranks (ranking of nodes with kernelized score functions), a flexible algorithmic scheme implemented and distributed as an r software package. ranks embeds kernelized score functions that have been successfully applied to gene function prediction , gene disease prioritization and drug repositioning problems. other popular network-based algorithms, such as random walk and label propagation, are also provided by the package.the ranks learning framework is well suited to perform functional prediction experiments on the whole genome, as its semisupervised learning strategy allows to efficiently infer node labels in large networks, starting from a small set of annotated examples. the highly modular structure of the functions and methods available in the corresponding r package allows users to easily experiment with different learning algorithms by using a rich collection of interchangeable building blocks. notably, the library can be extended through user-defined kernels and score functions, and can be easily used as a stand-alone tool or within software pipelines aimed at ranking/classifying node labels in complex biological networks. conflict of interest: none declared.bionet: an r-package for the functional analysis of biological networks. bioinformatics, 26, 11291130.  
