structural bioinformatics raphael: recognition, periodicity and insertion assignment of solenoid protein structures motivation: repeat proteins form a distinct class of structures where folding is greatly simplified. several classes have been defined, with solenoid repeats of periodicity between ca. 5 and 40 being the most challenging to detect. such proteins evolve quickly and their period-icity may be rapidly hidden at sequence level. from a structural point of view, finding solenoids may be complicated by the presence of insertions or multiple domains. to the best of our knowledge, no automated methods are available to characterize solenoid repeats from structure. results: here we introduce raphael, a novel method for the detection of solenoids in protein structures. it reliably solves three problems of increasing difficulty: (1) recognition of solenoid domains, (2) determination of their periodicity and (3) assignment of insertions. raphael uses a geometric approach mimicking manual classification , producing several numeric parameters that are optimized for maximum performance. the resulting method is very accurate, with 89.5 of solenoid proteins and 97.2 of non-solenoid proteins correctly classified. raphael periodicities have a spearman correlation coefficient of 0.877 against the manually established ones. a baseline algorithm for insertion detection in identified solenoids has a q 2 value of 79.8, suggesting room for further improvement. raphael finds 1931 highly confident repeat structures not previously annotated as solenoids in the protein data bank records.protein repeats contain tandem arrays of smaller structural motifs where, unlike most globular domains, folding is reduced to simple coiling and long-range interactions are greatly reduced . repetitive proteins evolve quicker due to the intrinsically error-prone process connected with the formation of repeating sequences . fourteen percent of all known protein sequences are strictly periodic and it was hypothesized that repeating sequences occur more frequently in eukaryotic proteins . repeating sequences were estimated to occur in around one in three human proteins . classification of repeating proteins is usually achieved in terms of repeat unit length . the length of the repeating unit can be as small as one or two residues for different types of crystallites of unlimited size. at the other extreme are repeating units of entire domains (beads on a string) with a typical repeating unit of over 50 residues. the middle ground comprises solenoid repeats with units of 540 residues. these are elongated structures containing-helices and/or-strands with a large distance between the n and c termini . there has been increasing interest in solenoid proteins over the years, especially their relevance in health and for protein engineering applications . solenoid proteins have also been shown to fold sequentially, one unit at a time, suggesting that the sequence contains all necessary information to determine the local fold . understanding solenoid function and evolution passes through their classification from sequence and structural information, which are two different problems. solenoid sequences evolve quickly while maintaining their fold, thereby hampering detection . several sequence-based methods predicting tandem repeats from self-alignments have been developed over the years, including radar , trust and hhrepid . our previous work repetita uses a fast fourier transform to specifically detect solenoids . in all cases there is still room for improvement, with the best methods still missing out many solenoids, especially with insertions. generally speaking, solenoid repeats tend to be easy to spot through visual inspection in a molecular viewer. however, the manual search of hundreds or thousands of structures to determine if they are solenoid repeats or not is extremely time-consuming and inefficient. moreover, the definition of repeat length, i.e. repeating blocks containing similar residue numbers, and detection of breaks in the periodicity require objective measures. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
