rapid and powerful detection of subtle allelic imbalance from exome sequencing data with haplohseq motivation: the detection of subtle genomic allelic imbalance events has many potential applications. for example, identifying cancer-associated allelic imbalanced regions in low tumor-cellularity samples or in low-proportion tumor subclones can be used for early cancer detection, prognostic assessment and therapeutic selection in cancer patients. we developed haplohseq for the detection of subtle allelic imbalance events from next-generation sequencing data. results: our method identified events of 10 megabases or greater occurring in as little as 16 of the sample in exome sequencing data (at 80) and 4 in whole genome sequencing data (at 30), far exceeding the capabilities of existing software. we also found haplohseq to be superior at detecting large chromosomal changes across a series of pancreatic samples from tcga. availability and implementation: haplohseq is available at scheet.org/software, distributed under an open source mita critical mechanism by which cancer cells operate is through activation of oncogenes or inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. this may happen via acquired chromosomal alterations, such as amplification, deletion or copy-neutral loss-of-heterozygosity (cn-loh), that result in allelic imbalance (ai). because ai provides insights into the progression towards malignancy and metastasis, ai detection can be applied to help in cancer prognosis and therapeutic decision-making . in the last decade, array comparative genomic hybridization (acgh) and single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) array based approaches have become popular technologies for ai detection . more recently, the advent of next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies for studies of cancer genomic variation has brought the potential for finer resolution (detection and boundary refinement) due to a denser marker set and arbitrarily high coverage. however, costs limit depth of coverage through whole-genome sequencing (wgs) and therefore whole-exome sequencing (wes) is often preferred for genomic studies. wes presents a particular challenge for inferring ai, since coverage is variable across regions and the target is limited to $3 of the genome. several tools model expected coverage based on summaries from a wes reference panel to account for technical variability in v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.  
