rapid membrane protein topology prediction state-of-the-art methods for topology of -helical membrane proteins are based on the use of time-consuming multiple sequence alignments obtained from psi-blast or other sources. here, we examine if it is possible to use the consensus of topology prediction methods that are based on single sequences to obtain a similar accuracy as the more accurate multiple sequence-based methods. here, we show that topcons-single performs better than any of the other topology prediction methods tested here, but 6 worse than the best method that is utilizing multiple sequence alignments. availability and implementation: topcons-single is available as a web server from http://single.topcons.net/ and is also included for local installation from the web site. in addition, consensus-based topology predictions for the entire international protein index (ipi) is available from the web server and will be updated at regular intervals.today only 268 unique -helical membrane protein structures are known according to the orientation of proteins in membranes database (opm, http://opm.phar.umich.edu/). the topology of such proteins has proven to be a convenient concept. in essence, the topology specifies the number of transmembrane -helices of the protein together with the location of the n-terminal end of the chain, i.e. whether it is in the cytosol (in) or in the endoplamsatic reticulum (er) lumen or extramembrane space (out). the topcons algorithm computes consensus predictions of membrane protein topology using a hidden markov model (hmm) and input from several topology predictors. the original method is available as a web server (http://topcons.net/) and is based on five state-of-the-art topology prediction methods and typically takes a couple of minutes to run. the bulk of that time is spent running a psi-blast search against a sequence database to obtain evolutionary information that is then used by the underlying predictors. this approach is quite accurate, but woefully inappropriate when running predictions for many sequences, e.g. in studies of whole genomes.homology reduced to 30 sequence identity. the numbers in parenthesis denote the number of protein sequences in the set. time is the time it takes to process the set of 101 protein sequences.page: 1323 13221323we have implemented a reliability score for topcons-single as previously described and also a reliability score for each individual method, as previously described . definitions and descriptions of all reliability scores are listed in the supplementary material. we investigated the reliability scores by ranking the predictions by descending reliability score and plotting the fraction of correct predictions against the coverage in the all benchmark dataset .  
