genome analysis rapidr: an analysis package for non-invasive prenatal testing of aneuploidy non-invasive prenatal testing (nipt) of fetal aneuploidy using cell-free fetal dna is becoming part of routine clinical practice. rapidr (reliable accurate prenatal non-invasive diagnosis r package) is an easy-to-use open-source r package that implements several published nipt analysis methods. the input to rapidr is a set of sequence alignment files in the bam format, and the outputs are calls for aneuploidy, including trisomies 13, 18, 21 and monosomy x as well as fetal sex. rapidr has been extensively tested with a large sample set as part of the rapid project in the uk. the package contains quality control steps to make it robust for use in the clinical setting. availability and implementation: rapidr is implemented in r and can be freely downloaded via cran from here: http://cran.r-project. org/web/packages/rapidr/index.html.since the first demonstration of the use of cell-free dna (cfdna) to detect aneuploidy , many groups around the world have reported large studies showing high sensitivities and specificities for the detection of trisomies 13, 18 and 21 . in contrast to invasive methods such as amniocentesis, non-invasive prenatal testing (nipt) uses cfdna in maternal plasma and does not present a risk of miscarriage. currently, outside the context of research studies, nipt for aneuploidy is only available from commercial providers. to perform nipt, cfdna is extracted from maternal plasma and sequenced using short reads and high-throughput dna sequencing. sequenced reads are aligned to the reference human genome using a short read aligner. aneuploidy is called if the number of reads mapped to each chromosome differs from its expectation based on a comparison with a set of baseline samples. the general approach is usually referred to as a read depth strategy. a number of factors influence test performance, for example the fetal fraction (i.e. the proportion of reads originating from the fetus), and other technical parameters such as read length and coverage . the choice of sequencing parameters needs to be balanced against costs. previous studies have shown that an acceptable level of test sensitivity can be reached with relatively short read lengths (3652 bp) and modest coverage (210 million reads per sample) . here, we present a flexible and robust r package for nipt analysis called rapidr (reliable accurate prenatal noninvasive diagnosis r package). rapidr combines several analytical techniques that have been proposed for nipt analysis and has been tested with a large sample set from the rapid project (nihr funded project to evaluate the use of nipt). rapid validation results can be found in the supplementary material (supplementary figs s1s4, supplementary text s1 and supplementary tables s1 and s2).in this article, we described the rapidr package for nipt of fetal aneuploidies. rapidr has been validated using4700 samples and delivers an acceptable level of specificity and sensitivity for t21, t18, t13 and monosomy x. the system requirement for rapidr is modest (supplementary text s3). future work on rapidr will include evaluating strategies to detect sub-chromosomal abnormalities.  
