genome analysis rbamtools: an r interface to samtools enabling fast accumulative tabulation of splicing events over multiple rna-seq samples the open source environment r isf the most widely used software to statistically explore biological data sets including sequence alignments. bam is the de facto standard file format for sequence alignment. with rbamtools, we provide now a full spectrum of accessibility to bam for r users such as reading, writing, extraction of subsets and plotting of alignment depth where the script syntax closely follows the sam/bam format. additionally, rbamtools enables fast accumulative tabulation of splicing events over multiple bam files. availability and implementation: rbamtools is available on cran and on r-forge.the samtools format specifies various data slots for sequence alignments many of which are difficult to understand when sequencing experiments are to be analyzed. for analysis of sequencing data, detailed access to contents of bam files is needed, especially when technical problems arise. rbamtools allows r users to investigate alignment results by reading the header section or retrieve and view alignments from regions of interest using basic r structures. rbamtools provides functions for creation and modification of bam file header or alignment section contents. rbamtools also facilitates writing of bam files which is not possible in bioconductor . additionally rbamtools contains a framework for sequential and fast extraction of alignment gap positions (see) on rna-seq data which are candidate sites for true splicing events. rbamtools is part of an analysis pipeline for analysis of splicing events in rnaseq data which consists of three r packages: rbamtools and refgenome and splicesites (kaisers, 2013b). the identification of splicing inaccuracies is a non trivial task on bam files, since the positions of alignment gaps must be accounted on billions of reads. with rbamtools, processing data from, e.g. 60 rna-seq samples (containing 8:37 10 9 alignments) can be done in 1.75 h on a standard workstation with minimal working memory demand. current versions of the samtools c library contain misalignment (bus) errors (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/bus_error), which may cause program crashes on some architectures (e.g. sparc). in rbamtools, these misalignment errors are corrected (see supplementary material).  
