databases and ontologies rbiopaxparser—an r package to parse, modify and visualize biopax data motivation: biological pathway data, stored in structured databases, is a useful source of knowledge for a wide range of bioinformatics algorithms and tools. the biological pathway exchange (biopax) language has been established as a standard to store and annotate pathway information. however, use of these data within statistical analyses can be tedious. on the other hand, the statistical computing environment r has become the standard for bioinformatics analysis of large-scale genomics data. with this package, we hope to enable r users to work with biopax data and make use of the always increasing amount of biological pathway knowledge within data analysis methods. results: rbiopaxparser is a software package that provides a comprehensive set of functions for parsing, viewing and modifying biopax pathway data within r. these functions enable the user to access and modify specific parts of the biopax model. furthermore, it allows to generate and layout regulatory graphs of controlling interactions and to visualize biopax pathways. availability: rbiopaxparser is an open-source r package and has been submitted to bioconductor.the past years have seen an enormous increase in biological knowledge about cellular signalling and regulatory pathways, which is stored in numerous databases . however, the fragmentation of the available pathway data led to the need for a standardized language to ease the knowledge exchange between scientists. the biological pathway exchange (biopax) language is an ontology that models biological pathway concepts and their relationships . implemented in the web ontology language (owl), an rdf/xml-based format, it allows the user to encode pathway knowledge in a well-documented and standardized way. the integration of biological knowledge stored in these databases into high level analysis methods for genomics experiments is a fundamental issue. bioinformaticians can integrate pathway knowledge, collected and curated by the scientific community, into statistical analysis as previous knowledge. examples for methods for high-level data analysis that require previous pathway knowledge are gene set enrichment analysis , specialized classification algorithms for personalized medicine or network reconstruction algorithms . many of these algorithms are implemented using the r project for statistical computing. although the packages ncigraph, kegggraph and graphite on bioconductor offer exports of signalling networks from specific databases, no packages exist that allow the user to conveniently work with biopax data in r. we created the r package rbiopaxparser to ease use and integration of pathway data in the biopax format within r. furthermore, the use of r scripts allows reproducible handling and manipulation of pathway data as well as the integration of these data into high-level statistical analysis routines.the rbiopaxparser is a freely available r package that allows the user to parse, modify and visualize biopax models. regulatory graphs can be extracted and used for further analyses. with this r package, we also hope to enable users to apply newly developed algorithms to the always increasing amount of knowledge about biological pathways. by implementing a biopax parser, we offer a tool for r users to ease the task of integrating existing pathway resources in statistical analyses and encourage the use of a standardized way to encode pathway knowledge.  
