structural bioinformatics rchange: algorithms for computing energy changes of rna secondary structures in response to base mutations motivation: measuring the effects of base mutations is a powerful tool for functional and evolutionary analyses of rna structures. to date, only a few methods have been developed for systematically computing the thermodynamic changes of rna secondary structures in response to base mutations. results: we have developed algorithms for computing the changes of the ensemble free energy, mean energy and the thermodynamic entropy of rna secondary structures for exhaustive patterns of single and double mutations. the computational complexities are o(nw 2) (where n is sequence length and w is maximal base pair span) for single mutations and o(n 2 w 2) for double mutations with large constant factors. we show that the changes are relatively insensitive to gc composition and the maximal span constraint. the mean free energy changes are bounded 79 kcal/mol and depend only weakly on position if sequence lengths are sufficiently large. for trna sequences, the most stabilizing mutations come from the change of the 5-most base of the anticodon loop. we also show that most of the base changes in the acceptor stem destabilize the structures, indicating that the nucleotide sequence in the acceptor stem is highly optimized for secondary structure stability. we investigate the 22 trna genes in the human mitochondrial genome and show that non-pathogenic polymorphisms tend to cause smaller changes in thermodynamic variables than generic mutations, suggesting that a mutation which largely increases thermodynamic variables has higher possibility to be a pathogenic or lethal mutation. availability and implementation: the c++ source code of the rchange software is available at http://www.ncrna.org/software/ rchange/measuring the effects of base mutations has long been a standard method for studying relationships between structural rnas and their biological functions. molecular biologists mutate some nucleotides of the rnas of interest in order to alter the structures, and draw various conclusions by observing whether the mutations to whom correspondence should be addressed. disrupt biological functions [see, for example, (. observing mutation patterns in genome evolution has also been important for detecting evolutionarily conserved functional rnas and evolutionarily conserved structural rnas show special types of mutation patterns that preserve their secondary structures. several studies have used such patterns as a major feature for finding novel structural rnas from multiply aligned genomic sequences . investigating the structural changes due to base mutations has potentially important applications in genome-wide association studies, where many disease-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) are located outside the protein coding regions in the human genome . it is possible that part of the disease associations of these snps can be explained by altered structures of the non-coding rnas that are transcribed around those regions. despite the widespread use of mutational analyses and the potential relevance to human diseases, very few studies have developed methods for systematically computing the changes in rna secondary structures in response to base mutations . in our previous paper, we have developed algorithms for computing the thermodynamic variables for a given sequence (kiryu and asai, submitted for publication) [see also the earlier works which developed algorithms for the mean free energy computation. in this article, we present algorithms for computing the changes in the ensemble free energy, mean free energy and the thermodynamic entropy of secondary structures for all the possible single and double mutations, assuming that the rna secondary structures follow the boltzmann distribution p(x) of the turner energy model (tem) :in this article, we have developed algorithms for computing changes in the ensemble free energy, mean free energy and the thermodynamic entropy of rna secondary structures for all possible patterns of single and double mutations. the computational complexities are o(nw 2 ) (where n is sequence length and w is maximal base pair span) for single mutations and o(n 2 w 2 ) for double mutations with relatively large constant factors. we have shown that the changes in the mean free energy and entropy are relatively insensitive to gc composition and the maximal span constraint. the mean energy changes are bounded at 7  
