rck: accurate and efficient inference of sequence-and structure-based protein–rna binding models from rnacompete data motivation: proteinrna interactions, which play vital roles in many processes, are mediated through both rna sequence and structure. clip-based methods, which measure proteinrna binding in vivo, suffer from experimental noise and systematic biases, whereas in vitro experiments capture a clearer signal of protein rna-binding. among them, rnacompete provides binding affinities of a specific protein to more than 240 000 unstructured rna probes in one experiment. the computational challenge is to infer rna structure-and sequence-based binding models from these data. the state-of-the-art in sequence models, deepbind, does not model structural preferences. rnacontext models both sequence and structure preferences, but is outperformed by graphprot. unfortunately, graphprot cannot detect structural preferences from rnacompete data due to the unstructured nature of the data, as noted by its developers, nor can it be tractably run on the full rnacompete dataset. results: we develop rck, an efficient, scalable algorithm that infers both sequence and structure preferences based on a new k-mer based model. remarkably, even though rnacompete data is designed to be unstructured, rck can still learn structural preferences from it. rck significantly outperforms both rnacontext and deepbind in in vitro binding prediction for 244 rnacompete experiments. moreover, rck is also faster and uses less memory, which enables scalability. while currently on par with existing methods in in vivo binding prediction on a small scale test, we demonstrate that rck will increasingly benefit from experimentally measured rna structure profiles as compared to computationally predicted ones. by running rck on the entire rnacompete dataset, we generate and provide as a resource a set of proteinrna structure-based models on an unprecedented scale. availability and implementation: software and models are freely available at http://rck.proteinrna interactions play vital roles in many processes in the living cell . these include modulation and effect of a wide variety of cellular processes, including rna replication, repair, recombination and post-transcriptional regulation . more than 1500 genes in the human genome are thought to code for rna-binding proteins (rbps), making this family one of the largest families in the human proteome . most rbps bind rna through both sequence and structure. thus, better characterization of rbp sequence-and structure-specific binding preferences can improve our understanding of post-transcriptional gene regulation. rna structure is commonly considered at the level of secondary structure . rna secondary structure is represented by base-pairing of nucleotides, and can be efficiently predicted from its sequence when only tree-like structures are allowed. a single rna molecule may fold into different conformations, termed its ensemble of structures, where the most likely one is the minimum free energy structure . these ensembles can be represented as either different combinatorial structures v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.  
