structural bioinformatics rcsb pdb mobile: ios and android mobile apps to provide data access and visualization to the rcsb protein data bank the research collaboratory for structural bioinformatics protein data bank (rcsb pdb) resource provides tools for query, analysis and visualization of the 3d structures in the pdb archive. as the mobile web is starting to surpass desktop and laptop usage, scientists and educators are beginning to integrate mobile devices into their research and teaching. in response, we have developed the rcsb pdb mobile app for the ios and android mobile platforms to enable fast and convenient access to rcsb pdb data and services. using the app, users from the general public to expert researchers can quickly search and visualize biomolecules, and add personal annotations via the rcsb pdbs integrated mypdb service. availability and implementation: rcsb pdb mobile is freely available from the apple app store and google play (http://www.rcsb.org).the popularity of mobile computing devices such as smart phones and tablets ensures that they play significant roles in our daily lives. the cpu speed, memory resources and graphics display capabilities of these devices have become increasingly powerful and sophisticated and can support advanced applications whether at work, home or on the go. an early example of such an app is the hematopoietic expression viewer , which provides access to microarray gene expression data. access to data-and content-rich life science resources such as the protein data bank (pdb) through the research collaboratory for structural bioinformatics (rcsb) pdb web site can, however, prove problematic on tablets, and more so on hand-held devices, such as smart phones. even with adaptively written web sites that auto-format content for the mobile device screen dimensions, web site content can be difficult to navigate using pinch-to-zoom capability of mobile platforms. as a result, customized apps have become popular, using mobile operating systems platform native widgets and capabilities to provide responsive and easily navigable information pathways. another mobile-specific challenge involves biomolecular structure visualization on mobile platforms such as ios and android. a comprehensive feature comparison of available viewers is available . these platforms do not support java applets such as jmol , and their cpu capability is often insufficient to achieve acceptable responsive interactivity with software-based rendering. one possible work-around would be the use of webgl, a mechanism that provides the ability to use hardware-accelerated 3d rendering through a web browser; however, it is not fully supported on all mobile platform browsers. following requests from our users, who have ios and android devices, we initiated the development of native clients.the ios and android clients described provide fast lowbandwidth access to data and services provided by the rcsb pdb. funding: the rcsb pdb is a member of the worldwide protein data bank and is funded by grantprovided by the national science foundation, the national institutes of health, and the department of energy. conflict of interest: none declared.  
