databases and ontologies rdavidwebservice: a versatile r interface to david the rdavidwebservice package provides a class-based interface from r programs/scripts to fully access/control the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery, without the need for human interaction on its web site (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov). the library enhances the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery capabilities for gene ontology analysis by means of gostats-based direct acyclic graph conversion methods, in addition to the usual many-genes-to-many-terms visualization. availability and implementation: rdavidwebservice is available as an r package from the bioconductor project (www.bioconductor.org) and on the authors web site (www.bdmg.com.ar) under gpl-2 license, subjected to the terms of use of davidone of the most accessed systems for functional genomics/proteomics analysis is the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (david), a web-based online bioinformatics resource (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov) that aims to provide tools for functional interpretation of large lists of genes/ proteins . its access is carried mainly through a web site. there is also a uniform resource locator (url)based application programming interface, to query david programmatically, accessible through davidquery r package . however, the url-application programming interface has limited capabilities, such as url length, and only works with the default settings. in 2012, a web service interface was made available allowing full access and control over all its functionalities except visualization . although it is possible to handle david web services (dws) through r, it requires high programming skills. in addition, query results are difficult to manage, as they are xml (soap package, temple lang, 2012) or java objects (rjava package,). here we provide a versatile class-based r interface to access david. it is an r wrapper to all dws functionalities, with several new features such as offline processing (allows using previously queried saved reports) and native r classes data types. additionally, it overcomes dws visualization constraints, providing the usual many-genes-to-many-terms feature, and enhances david capabilities for gene ontology (go,) analysis by means of gostats-based direct acyclic graph (dag) conversion methods. therefore, it expands david features by allowing new developments through one of the most used computer languages in bioinformatics, r (r core).  
