data and text mining r/dwd: distance-weighted discrimination for classification, visualization and batch adjustment r/dwd is an extensible package for classification. it is built based on a recently developed powerful classification method called distance weighted discrimination (dwd). dwd is related to, and has been shown to be superior to, the support vector machine in situations that are fundamental to bioinformatics, such as very high dimensional data. dwd has proven to be very useful for several fundamental bioinformatics tasks, including classification, data visualization and removal of biases, such as batch effects. earlier dwd implementations, however, relied on matlab, which is not free and requires a license. the major contribution of the r/dwd package is an implementation that is completely in r and thus can be used without any requirements for licensing or software purchase. in addition, r/dwd also provides efficient solvers for second-order-cone-programming and quadratic programming. availability and implementation: the package is freely available from cran.rclassification plays an important role in the analysis of bioinformatics data and, as a result, has a significant impact on a broad array of applications. the new freely available package r/dwd (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/dwd/index.html) provides a powerful classification tool for analyzing high dimensional data. it has been shown (both through intuitive explanation and improved classification error rates) to perform better than the popular support vector machine (svm) method in high dimensional situations . svm is a wellknown classification technique and has achieved great success in bioinformatics applications (see byvatov and schmeider 2003 for a review). however, as shown in(a), svm suffers from the data piling problem which leads to suboptimal performance in high dimension, low sample size (hdlss) contexts. this is increasingly relevant as hdlss problems continue to become more and more common in bioinformatics contexts. examples include many types of genetic data (such as microarrays, next gen to whom correspondence should be addressed.superior performance of dwd over svm in a hdlss setting. horizontal axis shows projections, vertical axes are jitter heights, and density. data piling appears in svm (a) but not in dwd (b). the angles from the signal direction also indicate that dwd performs better than svm. sequencing and many more), medical image analysis and chemometrics. hdlss data pose a great challenge to many classical statistical multivariate analysis methods. distance weighted discrimination (dwd) is a recently developed classification method , which was originally motivated by hdlss problems but can be applied in many other cases as well. one of the big advantages of dwd over svm is that it can overcome the data piling problem in high dimensional situations as illustrated in. more discussion about data piling can be found in the supplementary material which also includes the classification performance of dwd in comparison with svm for various real data sets. a simulated toy example is given inwith dimension d = 200, n + = 50 data vectors from class +1 (black plus signs), and n = 50 data vectors from class 1 (grey circles). the data were drawn from two distributions that are each standard normal but the mean in the first dimension is shifted to +3 (3) for class +1 (1). the horizontal coordinates represent the projection of the data points onto the svm and dwd directions. to avoid overplotting of the data points, we use tukeys jitter plot approach, where one adds a random vertical component to each point. also included is a smooth histogram for each class, where the vertical axis shows density per unit length. the plot inshows clear piling up of the datathe main purposes of r/dwd are classification, data adjustment and visualization, which are all very important in bioinformatics fields. a variety of additional features are planned for future r/dwd releases. only the linear discrimination method is considered in the current version. future plans include incorporating some kernel tricks into the dwd method such that it can be used to solve more general non-linear problems.  
