reaction decoder tool (rdt): extracting features from chemical reactions extracting chemical features like atomatom mapping (aam), bond changes (bcs) and reaction centres from biochemical reactions helps us understand the chemical composition of en-zymatic reactions. reaction decoder is a robust command line tool, which performs this task with high accuracy. it supports standard chemical input/output exchange formats i.e. rxn/smiles, computes aam, highlights bcs and creates images of the mapped reaction. this aids in the analysis of metabolic pathways and the ability to perform comparative studies of chemical reactions based on these features. availability and implementation: this software is implemented in java, supported on windows, linux and mac osx, and freely available at https://github.com/asad/reactiondecoderlarge-scale chemical reaction databases such as kegg , brenda , rhea and metacyc link reactions to enzymes and provide data-mining opportunities for novel pathways , and the discovery of drugs, natural products and green chemistry. one of the primary bottlenecks for automated analyses of these chemical reactions comes from the realizations of the imperfect quality of data, such as unmapped or unbalanced reactions. accurate atomatom mapping (aam)the one-to-one correspondence between the substrate and product atoms , will lead to correct prediction of bond changes (bcs) and the ability to locate the fate of interesting atoms or substructure across metabolic networks etc. linking novel pathways or optimizing pathways of biological/commercial relevance demands better understanding of metabolic routes and pathway annotation . we present reaction decoder tool (rdt), a robust open source software for mining reaction features, i.e. bcs, reaction centres and to calculate similarity between reactions etc. the algorithm and competing tools have been published in our previous article . here we present the source code with relevant changes and below mentioned features.reaction decoder is a robust tool to compute aam and extract chemical features and calculate similarity between chemical reactions. this is coded in java and optimized to run as a computationally asynchronous process. it is distributed under gnu-gpl v3 license.  
