reactpred: a tool to predict and analyze biochemical reactions motivation: biochemical pathways engineering is often used to synthesize or degrade target chemicals. in silico screening of the biochemical transformation space allows predicting feasible reactions , constituting these pathways. current enabling tools are customized to predict reactions based on pre-defined biochemical transformations or reaction rule sets. reaction rule sets are usually curated manually and tailored to specific applications. they are not exhaustive. in addition, current systems are incapable of regulating and refining data with an aim to tune specificity and sensitivity. a robust and flexible tool that allows automated reaction rule set creation along with regulated pathway prediction and analyses is a need. reactpred aims to address the same. results: reactpred is an open source flexible and customizable tool enabling users to predict biochemical reactions and pathways. the tool allows automated reaction rule creation from a user defined reaction set. additionally, reaction rule degree and rule tolerance features allow refinement of predicted data. it is available as a flexible graphical user interface and a console application.in silico approaches are increasingly being used to predict biochemical pathways and reactions with an objective to synthesize or degrade chemicals . the approach is often used to identify xenobiotic degradation pathways . its applicability in predicting pathways for chemical synthesis is however, a maturing field . its evolution is similar to click chemistry . the current study presents reactpred a robust, flexible graphical user interface and a console application. the tool predicts reactions and pathways using biochemical transformation rules or reaction rules set. it is enabled to create customizable reaction rule set automatically from an input reaction set. moreover, the tool is able to simulate pathways or reactions in a synthetic or retrosynthetic mode allowing a larger scope of applications for drug metabolism and biochemical engineering.  
