sequence analysis readscan: a fast and scalable pathogen discovery program with accurate genome relative abundance estimation kingdom of saudi arabia readscan is a highly scalable parallel program to identify non-host sequences (of potential pathogen origin) and estimate their genome relative abundance in high-throughput sequence datasets. readscan accurately classified human and viral sequences on a 20.1 million reads simulated dataset in 527 min using a small beowulf compute cluster with 16 nodes (supplementary material).the idea of computational subtraction of human host sequences to identify microbial sequences was first implemented on amazon ec2 (elastic compute cloud) environment in the form of software pathseq . an alternative open source workflow available on desktop computers was recently provided by rapid identification of non-human sequences (rins) . more recently, a platform called capsid to store and visualize the identified non-human sequences was described. we present readscan a highly scalable and efficient tool to analyze ultra-high volume of data produced by the latest sequencers like illumina hiseq (http://www.illumina.com/systems/hiseq_ systems.ilmn) that can produce 36 billion short reads in a single run. readscan uses the data parallelism in the sequenced reads and effectively distributes the processing on multiple central processing unit (cpu)s. readscans core alignment procedure on multiple known references is based on smalt (h. postingl 2012, personal communication; http://www.sanger. ac.uk/resources/software/smalt/) a fast and accurate short read mapper that works for a range of sequencing platforms (e.g. illumina, roche-454, applied biosystems-solid). readscan is highly portable to work on a dual core laptop computer with as small as 2 gb memory to a large beowulf cluster with 100 s of compute nodes. readscan reports the genome relative abundance (gra) of those identified non-host microbial sequences implemented based on a proven finite mixture model and expectation maximization algorithm . the results are ranked in the order of most to least abundant species grouped by national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) taxonomical tree. the software performs an alignment-based assembly to report the length of the region covered by the reads and weighted mean length of such contigs produced as a result. this serves as a useful metric in assessing the truepositive results and also eliminates the need for an assembly program for microbial sequences with known reference genomes.  
