genome analysis readxplorer—visualization and analysis of mapped sequences motivation: fast algorithms and well-arranged visualizations are required for the comprehensive analysis of the ever-growing size of genomic and transcriptomic next-generation sequencing data. results: readxplorer is a software offering straightforward visualiza-tion and extensive analysis functions for genomic and transcriptomic dna sequences mapped on a reference. a unique specialty of readxplorer is the quality classification of the read mappings. it is incorporated in all analysis functions and displayed in readxplorers various synchronized data viewers for (i) the reference sequence, its base coverage as (ii) normalizable plot and (iii) histogram, (iv) read alignments and (v) read pairs. readxplorers analysis capability covers rna secondary structure prediction, single nucleotide poly-morphism and deletioninsertion polymorphism detection, genomic feature and general coverage analysis. especially for rna-seq data, it offers differential gene expression analysis, transcription start site and operon detection as well as rpkm value and read count calculations. furthermore, readxplorer can combine or superimpose coverage of different datasets. availability and implementation: readxplorer is available as open-source software at http://www.readxplorer.org along with a detailednext-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies like the well-established and continuously improved sequencing by synthesis and pyrosequencing or third-generation sequencing technologies like smrt and semiconductor sequencing generate an ever-growing amount of genomic and transcriptomic sequence data. currently, single deep sequencing datasets even for prokaryotic organisms can consist of tens of millions of read sequences. at the same time, sequencing costs have fallen to 41000 dollars for a complete human genome. analyzing differences and commonalities or validating and refining the region annotations of genomes is a task that has become routine in virtually all research institutes in the fields of microbiology and biotechnology because of the affordable costs of such an analysis . the same holds for massive parallel complementary dna (cdna) sequencing (rna-seq) experiments, which isolate a snapshot of the transcriptome of an organism under prevailing or induced environmental conditions. these rna-seq datasets can be studied with respect to the abundance of expressed genes and noncoding rnas under different environmental conditions. besides differential gene expression analysis, the identification of transcription start sites (tsss) can be improved by using 5 0-enriched rna-seq datasets , which contain only the first bases of the sequenced transcripts. without automated analyses, advanced visualization and efficient handling of large datasets, it would be a tedious and interminable task to investigate these data. hence, efficient and scalable algorithms are needed for the automated analysis and evaluation. to quickly browse the tremendous amounts of data and facilitate drawing conclusions, visualization of dna sequence datasets has to be easy to use. analysis results need to be visualized immediately, and important regions of a genome or transcriptome have to be accessible instantly. the list of popular published applications already available for visualizing short read mapping data in a genomic context includes savant , genomeview , igv , igb and artemis . all of these tools are desktop genome viewers, which are mainly designed for interactively displaying and handling various ngs data formats. artemis was first a genome annotation tool, which has been extended to visualize high-throughput read mapping data, variant calls and user-defined input types. igv is a flexible viewer for various ngs data formats but does not include automatic analysis capabilities. igb is a viewer for real-time zooming and panning through genomes. it can display annotations and positionspecific numerical graphs, e.g. calculated from coverage data. genomeview is a dynamic short read and whole genome to whom correspondence should be addressed.there are several more useful published and also unpublished tools, like seqmonk (http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac. uk/projects/seqmonk/), available. many of the published tools are listed in . all currently available applications have in common that they display read mapping data as it is stored in read mapping files. these files, however, provide no information about the quantity and quality of each single read mapping. such a classification of mapped reads, however, is a crucial step toward increasing the reliability of mapping analyses, as reads can map multiple times on the reference either with the same or with different amounts of mismatches. to add this knowledge and allow the user to freely decide upon the read type to be used for an analysis, we developed our software readxplorer. it is an interactive genome browser with broad analytic capabilities built around this read mapping classification. moreover, it contains novel analysis methods and visualization modes for ngs datasets.readxplorer is already widely in use at several sites. some of the conducted experiments and their main results generated by readxplorer are explicated in the following. during a pan-genome analysis of 20 pseudomonas aeruginosa strains (hilker et al., unpublished data), readxplorer was successfully used to analyze the snps and dips of each strain compared with the reference strain pao1 . our read classification has already proven useful here.further, the capabilities of the feature coverage analysis have been demonstrated during investigation of known regions of genomic plasticity (rgp). by using this analysis, it was possible to exactly determine the appearance of each rgp among all strains in percent and in base pairs (hilker et al., unpublished data). the effective handling of medium sized eukaryotes has been demonstrated during an in-house collaboration for the snp and dip analysis of three closely related chlamydomonas reinhardtii strains in a resequencing experiment (data not shown). the tss and operon detection, as well as the differential gene expression analysis tools have effectively been applied to experiments on different c.glutamicum strains (e.g.). the integrated differential gene expression toolkits delivered similar results as corresponding microarray experiments (data not shown). the differences in both assays might be induced by the higher resolution and flexibility of rna-seq in comparison with microarrays. additionally, we have performed an assessment of the performance of all available analysis functions in readxplorer. the results of this benchmark are shown in supplementary table s2. a comparison of the software features implemented in readxplorer to the five other tools mentioned in section 1 is also given in the supplementary material (supplementary).  
