recognition of beta-structural motifs using hidden markov models trained with simulated evolution motivation: one of the most successful methods to date for recognizing protein sequences that are evolutionarily related, has been profile hidden markov models. however, these models do not capture pairwise statistical preferences of residues that are hydrogen bonded in -sheets. we thus explore methods for incorporating pairwise dependencies into these models. results: we consider the remote homology detection problem for -structural motifs. in particular, we ask if a statistical model trained on members of only one family in a scop -structural superfamily, can recognize members of other families in that superfamily. we show that hmms trained with our pairwise model of simulated evolution achieve nearly a median 5 improvement in auc for -structural motif recognition as compared to ordinary hmms.profile hidden markov models (hmms) have been one of the most successful methods to date for recognizing both close and distant homologs of given protein sequences. popular hmm methods such as hmmer and sam have been behind the design of databases such as pfam , prosite and superfamiily . however, a limitation of these hmms is, since there is only finite state information about the sequence that can be held in any particular position, hmms cannot capture dependencies that are far, and variable distance apart, in sequence. on the other hand, in -structural motifs, as was noticed by lifson, sander and others , amino acid residues that are hydrogen bonded in -sheets exhibit strong pairwise statistical dependencies. these residues, however, can be far away and a variable distance apart in sequence, making them impossible to capture in an hmm. early work ofshow that these pairwise correlations help to recognize protein sequences that fold into the right-handed parallel -helix fold. more recent work has used a conditional random field or markov random field framework, both of which generalize hmms beyond linear dependencies, to identify the right-handed parallel -helix fold , the leucine rich repeat fold and the -propeller folds . to whom correspondence should be addressed.while these conditional random field and markov random field models are extremely powerful in theory, in practice, substantial computational barriers remain for template construction, training and computing the minimum energy threading of an unknown sequence onto a template. thus, a general structure software tool designed for -structural folds, in the same manner as hmmer and sam packages recognize all protein structural folds, remains a challenging unsolved problem. in this article, we find an unusual and different way to incorporate pairwise dependencies into profile hmm. in particular, we generalize our recent work on augmenting hmm training data to include these very pairwise dependencies as a part of a larger training set (see below). while this method of incorporating pairwise dependencies is undoubtedly less powerful than mrf methods, it has the advantage of being simple to implement, computationally fast and allows the modular application of existing hmm software packages. we show that our augmented hmms perform better than ordinary hmms on the task of recognizing -structural scop protein superfamilies. in particular, we consider the problem of how well an hmm trained on only one family -structural scop superfamily can learn to recognize members of other scop families in that scop superfamily, as compared to decoys. we show a median auc improvement of nearly 5 for our approach compared to ordinary hmms on this task.we have shown how pairwise dependencies in -sheets can be incorporated into an augmented hmm training set using simulated evolution, resulting in improved recognition of -structural motifs. our datasets, augmented training sets, and our hmms are all available online at http://bcb.cs.tufts.edu/pairwise/. in the present work, it was assumed that the structural information was available for sequences in the training set; thus structural information was used to construct the multiple sequence alignment, to locate -strands, and to determine how the -strands were hydrogen bonded into -sheets. however, ordinary hmms and our earlier, simpler, point mutation model of simulated evolution require only sequence information, not structure. extending our work to the case where no solved protein strcuture is known is an interesting open question. secondary-structure prediction programs could be used to find -strands, but determining how they are paired and hydrogen bonded is a much more difficult issue. computationally predicting how -strands are paired in the absence of structural information is a well-studied problem since 1995 . recent work that has tried to computationally model transmembrane -barels and -amyloids without a structural template may also be relevant.  
