reconciling differential gene expression data with molecular interaction networks motivation: many techniques have been developed to compute the response network of a cell. a recent trend in this area is to compute response networks of small size, with the rationale that only part of a pathway is often changed by disease and that interpreting small sub-networks is easier than interpreting larger ones. however, these methods may not uncover the spectrum of pathways perturbed in a particular experiment or disease. results: to avoid these difficulties, we propose to use algorithms that reconcile case-control dna microarray data with a molecular interaction network by modifying per-gene differential expression p-values such that two genes connected by an interaction show similar changes in their gene expression values. we provide a novel evaluation of four methods from this class of algorithms. we enumerate three desirable properties that this class of algorithms should address. these properties seek to maintain that the returned gene rankings are specific to the condition being studied. moreover, to ease interpretation , highly ranked genes should participate in coherent network structures and should be functionally enriched with relevant biological pathways. we comprehensively evaluate the extent to which each algorithm addresses these properties on a compendium of gene expression data for 54 diverse human diseases. we show that the reconciled gene rankings can identify novel disease-related functions that are missed by analyzing expression data alone.a cells response to its environment is governed by an intricate network of molecular interactions. these interactions dynamically change in response to a myriad of cues. therefore, discovering the response network, i.e. the set of molecular interactions that are active in a given cellular context is a fundamental question in computational systems biology . many response network algorithms integrate molecular interaction networks with treatment-control differential expression data, which quantifies the statistical significance of the difference between the expression of genes under two conditions, e.g. diseased versus healthy cells . given several treatment and control samples, these methods compute a p-value for each gene that indicates the statistical significance of its differential expression between treatment and control. these approaches typically integrate such expression data with the interaction network by directly using each genes p-value or some transformation of the p-value as the weight of the gene in the network.pioneered this type of analysis. after converting per-gene p-values into z-scores, they computed connected subgraphs with high aggregate z-scores.extended the approach ofby solving the prize-collecting steiner problem.identified dysregulated subnetworks by computing state functions that indicate which combination of up-and down-regulated genes within the subnetwork can classify the disease of interest. the goal of many of these approaches is to score genes by combining their expression profiles across multiple samples and subsequently compute a (connected) subgraph such that the genes in it jointly optimize some combination of their scores. a recent trend, exemplified by bionet and degas , is to focus on computing subgraphs with few nodes. the rationale behind these approaches is that small subnetworks enriched with dysregulated genes correspond to parts of the disease-related pathways. such approaches were motivated by the observation that only part of a pathway is often changed by disease and that interpreting small subnetworks is easier than interpreting larger ones . hotnet identifies significantly mutated pathways in cancer by marking mutated genes in an interaction network and propagating this information throughout the network by a method similar to the heat kernel (hk) (see section 2). while these recent methods are powerful at highlighting specific pathways and subnetworks, they have not been designed to uncover the spectrum of processes and pathways that might be perturbed in a particular experiment or disease. applying functional to whom correspondence should be addressed enrichment tests to significantly differentially expressed genes can address this issue, but such analysis typically ignores underlying protein interactions. top-ranking differentially expressed genes are often highly disconnected in the corresponding protein interaction network, making it difficult to discern the precise mechanisms by which enriched pathways affect the disease. furthermore, insignificantly differentially expressed genes may represent crucial components of disease-related pathways, but such genes are often ignored by standard enrichment methods. motivated by these observations, rather than computing condition-specific subgraphs, we propose to use previously published approaches that reconcile differential gene expression p-values with an underlying interaction network to re-rank all genes with respect to the treatment of interest. we describe techniques developed in the machine learning and information retrieval communities to reconcile gene expression data with the interactions in the network by computing smooth functions over neighboring nodes in the underlying network. in this article, we use the negative logarithm of the per-gene p-values (which do not directly incorporate any interaction data) as prior indicators of each genes relevance to a particular treatment; we describe mathematical functions that allow the expression values to change so that two genes connected by an interaction have similar values, while controlling the deviation of those values from their original settings. this modification allows genes with no significant differential expression to be re-ranked highly if their products interact with the products of many significantly differentially expressed genes. this work offers the following three novel contributions. first, we propose that such reconciliation algorithms should strive to maintain the following properties:(i) top-ranking genes after reconciliation should participate in coherent network structures, i.e. interacting genes should receive similar scores. this property can assist in the functional evaluation of top-ranking genes.(ii) reconciled gene rankings given by different treatments should be dissimilar, especially among top-ranking genes. this requirement ensures that the process of reconciliation does not dilute the differences between the transcriptional signatures of distinct diseases or treatments.(iii) top-ranking reconciled genes should be functionally coherent. second, we comprehensively assess the extent to which each algorithm addresses these three properties. third, we evaluate each approach on a large compendium of gene expression data that includes 54 diverse human diseases. we apply a state-of-the-art functional enrichment algorithm to address the functional coherence of the gene rankings provided by the reconciliation algorithms. we demonstrate that the reconciled gene rankings identify disease-related functions that would be missed by analyzing statistically significant differentially expressed genes alone.we divide our results into five parts to address the desirable properties listed in the introduction. first, in section 4.1, we examine topological properties of the final gene rankings given by each algorithm, providing insight on how these approaches address the first property. in section 4.2, we simultaneously address the second and third properties by analyzing how well the gene rankings for seven diseases recover the genes in canonical pathways for those diseases. in section 4.3, we discuss similarities between the gene rankings produced by each algorithm across all diseases. our main concern in these evaluations is the extent to which disease-specific signals are not masked by network-based effects, directly addressing the second desirable property. in section 4.4, we perform functional enrichment tests on the top-ranking genes reported by our reconciliation methods. this analysis further reinforces our conclusions from the previous section and addresses the final desirable property that top-ranking genes should demonstrate functional coherence. lastly, in section 4.5, we investigate the insulin-mediated glucose transport pathway in several diseases related to the brain. we demonstrate that network reconciliation identifies disease-related proteins from this pathway that are missed by differential expression analysis. we performed this analysis over a wide range of values for the input parameter q; we report results for q 2 f0:1, 0:3, 0:5, 0:7, 1g. note that the hk is parametrized by t40. we used the transformation q 2 t to determine values that covered a reasonable range of possible values for t. this transformation has the additional benefit that q tends to 0 (respectively, 1) as t tends to 1 (respectively, 0). because large t increases the dispersion of heat through the network, the interpretation of q remains the same for all algorithms: large q gives more weight to the starting values, while small q emphasizes network topology.we described four approaches to integrate case-control gene expression data with molecular interaction networks. these methods actively modify gene expression measurements to match the constraints imposed by the edges in the network, while controlling the deviation of the modified values from their original settings. we enumerated three desirable biological properties that this class of algorithms should address. these properties aim to balance input from gene expression data with an underlying interaction network while maintaining that the returned gene rankings are specific to the condition being studied. addressing any one of these properties alone may be trivial. for example, to address the first property that top-ranking genes should participate in coherent network structures, one could simply return a list of genes such that each gene in the list is connected to one of its predecessors in the list. thus, any cutoff insulin-mediated glucose transport network beore pr insulin-mediated glucose transport network after prand (b) after applying pr. non-white nodes indicate genes ranked in the top 250, and darker nodes indicate higher ranking. octagonal nodes indicate genes in the 14-3-3 family of proteins. subnetwork visualizations for hk, gm and v are available in the supplementary text (supplementary). (c) ranks of 14-3-3 family proteins before and after applying pr to the hd expression datathe values are the posterior probabilities reported by mgsa, where higher value indicates a higher probability that the pathway is enriched. in parentheses, we report the rank of the pathway among 5273 gene sets. in the gene ranking induces a single connected component. however, addressing all three properties simultaneously is more difficult and warranted further investigation. we analyzed each algorithm using differential gene expression data from a variety of human diseases that interrogate vastly different organs and tissues. ultimately, this work attests to the wide applicability of reconciliation algorithms and suggests reasonable values of their input parameters to address the three desirable properties. we demonstrated that i) pr, gm and hk always outperform vanilla with respect to our primary motivating properties and ii) applying any of these three network reconciliation algorithms then analyzing the resulting gene ranks yields more interpretable results than analyzing the ranking of significantly differentially expressed genes alone. in the future, we plan to consider other biologically relevant formulations of the energy function. an important extension is to situations that violate our assumption that two linked genes should be similarly perturbed in a condition. for instance, a transcription factor may be connected to a target gene that it down-regulates. in this situation, it seems appropriate to ensure that the transcription factor and its target have distinct values. more generally, the expression of a gene may have a complex dependence on those of its interactors. when such relationships are known, it will be useful to incorporate them into our formulation. lastly, our methods use the significance of a genes differential expression while ignoring whether the gene is up-or down-regulated. promising extensions may incorporate the direction of regulation as well as the mechanism of regulatory interactions.  
