reconstruction of genealogical relationships with applications to phase iii of hapmap motivation: accurate inference of genealogical relationships between pairs of individuals is paramount in association studies, forensics and evolutionary analyses of wildlife populations. current methods for relationship inference consider only a small set of close relationships and have limited to no power to distinguish between relationships with the same number of meioses separating the individuals under consideration (e.g. auntniece versus nieceaunt or first cousins versus great auntniece). results: we present carrot (classification of relationships with rotations), a novel framework for relationship inference that leverages linkage information to differentiate between rotated relationships, that is, between relationships with the same number of common ancestors and the same number of meioses separating the individuals under consideration. we demonstrate that carrot clearly outperforms existing methods on simulated data. we also applied carrot on four populations from phase iii of the hapmap project and detected previously unreported pairs of third-and fourth-degree relatives. availability: source code for carrot is freely available atalgorithms for relationship inference can greatly benefit association and linkage studies by detecting undeclared or misspecified relatives, and have applications in forensics and wildlife population management. existing methods based on hidden markov models (hmms) only consider a small number of relationship types. relpair examines eight types of relationships (full siblings, parentchild, avuncular, grandparent grandchild, half siblings, first cousins, monozygotic twins, and unrelated). prest-plus extends this set of alternative relationships to include the relationship types half avuncular, half first cousins and half-siblings first-cousins. algorithms for pedigree reconstruction partition the individuals into sets of sibling and parentchild pairs and are not designed for datasets containing distantly related individuals. additionally, the methods mentioned above cannot differentiate between rotated to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint first authors. relationships, that is, between relationships with the same number of common ancestors and the same number of meioses separating the individuals under consideration (e.g. auntniece versus nieceaunt or first cousins versus great auntniece). distinguishing between such relationships facilitates pedigree reconstruction from relatively distant relationships. we developed carrot (classification of relationships with rotations), a new framework for relationship inference that leverages linkage information to differentiate between rotated relationships. as suggested by, we grouped relationships between outbred individuals into three categories, based on whether the individuals under consideration have one or two common ancestors or whether one of them is the ancestor of the other. building on the ideas of, we defined three sets of hmms, one for each category of relationships. carrot uses a novel heuristic to decide whether one of the two individuals under consideration is closer to the common ancestors than the other and benefits from haplotype phasing in order to distinguish between certain rotated relationships. we demonstrated that carrot achieves higher accuracy than maximum-likelihood approaches, such as relpair and prestplus, using simulated data. we also applied carrot on real data from phase iii of the hapmap project . in addition to validating relationships reported by, we identified previously unreported third-and fourth-degree relationships in this dataset.  
