reference-free cell mixture adjustments in analysis of dna methylation data motivation: recently there has been increasing interest in the effects of cell mixture on the measurement of dna methylation, specifically the extent to which small perturbations in cell mixture proportions can register as changes in dna methylation. a recently published set of statistical methods exploits this association to infer changes in cell mixture proportions, and these methods are presently being applied to adjust for cell mixture effect in the context of epigenome-wide association studies. however, these adjustments require the existence of reference datasets, which may be laborious or expensive to collect. for some tissues such as placenta, saliva, adipose or tumor tissue, the relevant underlying cell types may not be known. results: we propose a method for conducting epigenome-wide association studies analysis when a reference dataset is unavailable, including a bootstrap method for estimating standard errors. we demonstrate via simulation study and several real data analyses that our proposed method can perform as well as or better than methods that make explicit use of reference datasets. in particular, it may adjust for detailed cell type differences that may be unavailable even in existing reference datasets.recently there has been increasing interest in the effects of cell mixture on the measurement of dna methylation, specifically the extent to which small perturbations in cell mixture proportions can register as changes in dna methylation . dna methylation, tightly associated with alterations in the nucleosome dna scaffold (and hence chromatin), is in part responsible for coordination of gene expression in individual cells . it is now appreciated that differentially methylated dna regions (dmrs) distinguish cell lineages with high sensitivity and specificity , and considerable research is now underway to delineate precise dmrs that define and specify a particular cell lineage. a recently published set of statistical methods exploits this association to infer changes in cell mixture proportions solely on the basis of a dna methylation profile . these methods may broadly be conceived as the projection of dna methylation data from a target dataset s 1 onto a reference dataset s 0 consisting of dna methylation profiles for isolated cell types. for example, s 1 may consist of dna methylation measured in whole blood from a casecontrol study , while s 0 may consist of corresponding dna methylation profiles from isolated leukocyte cell types (e.g. cd4 leukocytes, b cell lymphocytes, granulocytes) as provided by. recently, some investigators have used these methods to adjust for cell mixture effect in the context of epigenomewide association studies (ewas,). however, these adjustments require the existence of reference datasets s 0 , and these sets may be laborious or expensive to collect. in addition, for some tissues such as placenta, saliva, adipose or tumor tissue, the relevant underlying cell types may not be known. in this article, we propose a method for conducting ewas analysis when a reference dataset is unavailable, demonstrating that it can perform as well as the methods that make explicit use of a reference dataset.  
