genetics and population analysis regsnps: a strategy for prioritizing regulatory single nucleotide substitutions motivation: one of the fundamental questions in genetics study is to identify functional dna variants that are responsible to a disease or phenotype of interest. results from large-scale genetics studies, such as genome-wide association studies (gwas), and the availability of high-throughput sequencing technologies provide opportunities in identifying causal variants. despite the technical advances, informatics methodologies need to be developed to prioritize thousands of variants for potential causative effects. results: we present regsnps, an informatics strategy that integrates several established bioinformatics tools, for prioritizing regulatory snps, i.e. the snps in the promoter regions that potentially affect phenotype through changing transcription of downstream genes. comparing to existing tools, regsnps has two distinct features. it considers degenerative features of binding motifs by calculating the differences on the binding affinity caused by the candidate variants and integrates potential phenotypic effects of various transcription factors. when tested by using the disease-causing variants documented in the human gene mutation database, regsnps showed mixed performance on various diseases. regsnps predicted three snps that can potentially affect bone density in a region detected in an earlier linkage study. potential effects of one of the variants were validated using luciferase reporter assay.a key goal in human genetics is to identify the functional dna variants that give rise to phenotypic differences among individuals. recent studies of complex diseases and phenotypes have tended to focus on genome-wide association studies (gwas) employing hundreds of thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps). gwas target common dna variants, which could either directly contribute to the clinical phenotype or provide an indirect proxy for functional variants, which are in linkage disequilibrium (ld) with the snp being tested. distinguishing between direct, mechanistic contributions emanating from the functional variants themselves and indirect associations resulting from ld is challenging and improved methods are needed. one feasible solution is to catalog all dna variants in the ld region of the association, both common and rare, by utilizing next-generation sequencing (ngs) technology. the large number of variants that will be identified generates an urgent need for bioinformatics and computational approaches capable of prioritizing the variants most likely to underlie the observed association, for further biological testing. nonsynonymous substitutions within coding regions directly affect protein structure and are likely to affect protein function; a variety of algorithms, including polyphen , sift , toposnp , pmut , ls-snp , snpeffect v2.0 , snps3d and polydoms , were designed to identify functional nonsynonymous substitutions. synonymous coding variants may also exert phenotypic effect by influencing the conformation, splicing and stability of pre-mrnas or by altering the expression level of a given protein . coding sequences make up 2 of the human genome . the regulatory component of the human genome is much less well defined but based upon conservation is 2 to 3 times larger than the coding region . regulatory variants can affect the transcription initiation rate , microrna binding and protein expression , but are far more difficult to identify. it should therefore come as no surprise that many of the variants associated with common, complex disease by gwas do not alter coding sequences but rather occur within the non-coding regions of genes or intergenic regions . tools such as fastsnp , pupasuite and snplogic , have been designed to identify snps residing in known transcription factor binding sites  
