regulatory interactions maintaining self-renewal of human embryonic stem cells as revealed through a systems analysis of pi3k/akt pathway motivation: maintenance of the self-renewal state in human embry-onic stem cells (hescs) is the foremost critical step for regenerative therapy applications. the insulin-mediated pi3k/akt pathway is well appreciated as being the central pathway supporting hesc self-renewal; however, the regulatory interactions in the pathway that maintain cell state are not yet known. identification of these regulatory pathway components will be critical for designing targeted interventions to facilitate a completely defined platform for hesc propagation and differentiation. here, we have developed a systems analysis approach to identify regulatory components that control pi3k/akt pathway in self-renewing hescs. results: a detailed mathematical model was adopted to explain the complex regulatory interactions in the pi3k/akt pathway. we evaluated globally sensitive processes of the pathway in a computationally efficient manner by replacing the detailed model by a surrogate meta-model. our mathematical analysis, supported by experimental validation , reveals that negative regulators of the molecules irs1 and pip 3 primarily govern the steady state of the pathway in hescs. among the regulators, negative feedback via irs1 reduces the sensitivity of various reactions associated with direct trunk of the pathway and also constraints the propagation of parameter uncertainty to the levels of post receptor signaling molecules. furthermore, our results suggest that inhibition of negative feedback can significantly increase p-akt levels and thereby, better support hesc self-renewal. our integrated mathematical modeling and experimental workflow demonstrates the significant advantage of computationally efficient meta-model approaches to detect sensitive targets from signaling pathways. availability and implementation: fortran codes for the pi3k/akt pathway and the rs-hdmr implementation are available from the authors upon request.long-term maintenance of human embryonic stem cells (hescs) in the self-renewal state requires a fine balance of many signaling pathways, including pi3k, tgf, wnt and erk . several earlier studies have reported that the pi3k/akt pathway plays a central role in balancing self-renewal and differentiation but with limited mechanistic details . the pioneering work by singh et al. first recognized the presence of molecular switches controlled by the pi3k/akt pathway that promotes self-renewal in its active state and strengthens the differentiation signals in its inactive state . kinase p-akt is a key effector of the pi3k/akt pathway and participates in critical functions like survival, metabolism, protein synthesis, cell cycle etc. . in addition, in hescs, p-akt regulates the activity of pluripotency factors like c-myc and controls the levels of differentiation molecules like psmad2/3, p-erk, p-gsk3 in the self-renewal state . therefore, maintaining high levels of p-akt is necessary for long-term self-renewal of hescs. in spite of the recognized role of p-akt, there is limited understanding on the maintenance of p-akt levels in hescs by the network of regulatory interactions. the pi3k/akt pathway includes several positive and negative feedback loops and negative regulators like the molecules ptp, pten, ship that together influence its state . analysis of such regulatory interactions will be helpful in the design of targeted molecules to support self-renewal. this, however, requires a quantitative systems-level approach rather than a restricted study of few interactions. therefore, in the current work, we have used an integrated experimental and computational approach to identify regulatory interactions maintaining p-akt levels during hesc self-renewal. this being the first effort toward modeling the pi3k/akt pathway dynamics in hescs, our workflow includes the following critical steps: (i) determine a mathematical structure adequately describing the hesc system, (ii) determine the parameter range over which the model captures hesc behavior, (iii) identify the relative importance of components of the pathway in hescs, and (iv) validate the model-predicted sensitive processes in hescs. these steps result in a validated mathematical representation of the pathway for hescs. however, any modeling effort of a biological system is incomplete without understanding how parameter variability affects its predictions. we treat this as an important requirement because of the notorious cell-to-cell variability in hesc systems. we, therefore, (v) analyze the propagation of uncertainty in the pathway under various states to whom correspondence should be addressed. of the identified sensitive regulators. this will, in turn, allow identification of processes that promote a robust behavior under experimental variability. to accomplish these objectives, we started with a wellestablished, ordinary differential equation (ode) model of insulin-mediated pi3k/akt pathway developed for adipocytes by. the model is a compendium of accepted knowledge of the pathway, and has been successfully tested in many mammalian systems. we developed a systematic procedure to adopt the sedaghat model to a system of self-renewing hescs. we first performed extensive parameter sampling to identify the mechanisms relevant for hescs. we next evaluated the most significant contributors to the active levels of key molecules using global sensitivity analysis (gsa). we adopted random sampling high-dimensional model representation (rs-hdmr)-based meta-modeling approach to overcome the large monte carlo (mc) sampling requirements of the traditional gsa. the model-predicted sensitive processes were successfully validated by a series of perturbation experiments. our workflow, thus, demonstrates the application of computationally efficient techniques for mechanism detection in uncertain systems like hescs.the current work has developed a mathematical structure of the pi3k/akt pathway, validated by experiments, to describe self-renewing hescs. adoption of rs-hdmr, a powerful metamodeling technique, allowed feasible evaluation of gsa of the complex non-linear pathway. an important conclusion from our study is that the maintenance of p-akt levels, and hence the self-renewal state of hescs, is controlled by many of the negative processes of the pathway. additionally, non-linear interactions identified by rs-hdmr show that the existing negative feedback plays an important role of desensitizing the pathway to input perturbations and thus, regulates the steady state distribution of molecules in self-renewing hescs. inhibition of negative feedback can significantly increase p-akt levels and support self-renewal, but with a trade-off associated with increased variability. such mechanistic analysis of new systems like hescs is a critical step toward identification of new targets for optimizing cell culture conditions.  
