rehh : an r package to detect footprints of selection in genome-wide snp data from haplotype structure with the development of next-generation sequencing and genotyping approaches, large single nucleotide polymorphism haplotype datasets are becoming available in a growing number of both model and non-model species. identifying genomic regions with unexpectedly high local haplotype homozygosity relatively to neutral expectation represents a powerful strategy to ascertain candidate genes responding to natural or artificial selection. to facilitate genome-wide scans of selection based on the analysis of long-range haplotypes, we developed the r package rehh. it provides a versatile tool to detect the footprints of recent or ongoing selection with several graphical functions that help visual interpretation of the results. availability and implementation: stable version is available from cran: http://cran.r-project.org/. development version is available from the r-forge repository: http://r-forge.r-project.org/projects/rehh. both versions can be installed directly from r. function documentation and example data files are provided within the package and a tutorial is available as supplementary material. rehh is distributed under the gnu general public licence (gpl 2).in a pioneering work, investigated the genetic footprints of recent positive selection in humans by analyzing longrange haplotypes at several candidate genes using a novel measure called the extended haplotype homozygosity (ehh). ehh is defined as the probability that two randomly chosen chromosomes carrying the same allele at a focal snp (single nucleotide polymorphism) are identical by descent over a given distance surrounding it. if the core allele is under selection, then the ehh is expected to be close to one over a large distance upstream and downstream the focal snp. however, testing the departure of ehh from neutral expectation remains difficult without making strong assumptions about the population demographic history.therefore proposed an empirical test based on the integral of the observed decay of ehh, which they defined as integrated ehh (ihh). they further defined a test statistic (ihs) as the log-ratioidentifying genomic regions with unexpectedly high local haplotype homozygosity relatively to neutral expectation is a powerful strategy to ascertain candidate genes responding to natural or artificial selection. the availability of large snp haplotype datasets in a growing number of both model and non-model species makes it possible to apply such a strategy. in this context, rehh provides a all-in-one user-friendly tool to detect the footprints of recent or ongoing selection using ehh-related statistics.  
