genetics and population analysis relateadmix: a software tool for estimating relatedness between admixed individuals motivation: pairwise relatedness plays an important role in a range of genetic research fields. however, currently only few estimators exist for individuals that are admixed, i.e. have ancestry from more than one population, and these estimators fail in some situations. results: we present a new software tool, relateadmix, for obtaining maximum likelihood estimates of pairwise relatedness from genetic data between admixed individuals. we show using simulated data that it gives rise to better estimates than three state-of-the-art software tools, reap, king and plink, while still being fast enough to be applicable to large datasets.genetic relatedness between pairs of individuals plays an important role within several fields of genetic research including forensic and medical genetics. for example, most genome-wide association studies are based on the assumption that all individuals analyzed are unrelated and if related individuals are not removed or controlled for they can lead to highly inflated false-positive rates. relatedness between a pair of individuals is usually described using the concept of identity-by-descent (ibd), which is genetic identity due to recent common ancestry. more specifically relatedness between two non-inbred individuals is often described by the fractions, k 0 , k 1 and k 2 , of the genome in which the two individuals share 0, 1 or 2 alleles ibd, respectively. further, relatedness is sometimes summarized as the coefficient of relatedness r or the kinship coefficient r=2, which can both be calculated from k 0 , k 1 and k 2 as r k 1 =2 k 2. there are numerous estimators for k 0 , k 1 , k 2 , r and based on genetic data from individuals whose potential family relations are unknown, both method of moments estimators and maximum likelihood (ml) estimators . additionally, there are several hidden markov model-based methods that estimate ibd sharing locally along the genome (e.g.), which if applied to whole genomes also provide relatedness estimates. however, all of these estimators are based on an assumption that the analyzed individuals are from a homogeneous population, and it has been shown that when this assumption is violated it can lead to a marked misestimation of their relatedness . motivated by this,recently proposed a method of moments estimator for pairwise relatedness in admixed populations, implemented in the software reap and an estimator for the kinship coefficient in structured populations was included in the software king . here we present a new ml-based software tool, relateadmix, for estimating k 0 , k 1 and k 2 from single nucleotide polymorphism data, estimated admixture proportions and allele frequencies assuming no inbreeding. we obtain more accurate results than both reap, king and the often used software plink , which does not take admixture into account.  
