relating drug–protein interaction network with drug side effects motivation: identifying the emergence and underlying mechanisms of drug side effects is a challenging task in the drug development process. this underscores the importance of systemwide approaches for linking different scales of drug actions; namely drug-protein interactions (molecular scale) and side effects (phenotypic scale) toward side effect prediction for uncharacterized drugs. results: we performed a large-scale analysis to extract correlated sets of targeted proteins and side effects, based on the co-occurrence of drugs in protein-binding profiles and side effect profiles, using sparse canonical correlation analysis. the analysis of 658 drugs with the two profiles for 1368 proteins and 1339 side effects led to the extraction of 80 correlated sets. enrichment analyses using kegg and gene ontology showed that most of the correlated sets were significantly enriched with proteins that are involved in the same biological pathways, even if their molecular functions are different. this allowed for a biologically relevant interpretation regarding the relationship between drug targeted proteins and side effects. the extracted side effects can be regarded as possible phenotypic outcomes by drugs targeting the proteins that appear in the same correlated set. the proposed method is expected to be useful for predicting potential side effects of new drug candidate compounds based on their protein-binding profiles. supplementary information: datasets and all results are available at http://web.kuicr.kyoto-u.ac.jp/supp/smizutan/target-effect/. availability: software is available at the above supplementarypredicting and countering the side effects of a new drug during its developmental phase remain important to the drugs overall commercial success. side effects are responsible for a significant number of cases where premarketed drugs fail during clinical trials. identifying the underlying mechanisms of side effects is a challenging task, often because of the drugs pleiotropic effects on a biological system. most drugs are small compounds that target and interact with proteins to induce perturbations in the proteins network. this underscores the need of system-wide approaches for predicting to whom correspondence should be addressed. drug side effects by linking different scales of drug actions; drug protein interactions (molecular scale) and relationships between drugs and side effects (phenotypic scale) . the most widely used approach to identify possible side effects for a drug is to use its chemical structure information, based on the observation that drug chemical structures can direct the ligand promiscuity toward protein targets . for example,investigated correlations between drug chemical substructures and side effects, although they do not provide any prediction frameworks for new drug molecules.proposed a method to predict the pharmacological effects of drugs using their chemical structures. they then inferred drug-target interactions, but their method cannot be directly applied to the prediction of high-dimensional side effect profiles. atias andproposed a method to predict side effects from chemical structure data using canonical correlation analysis (cca). this work was pioneering in terms of simultaneous prediction of many side effects.proposed a method to relate drug chemical fragments with side effects using sparse cca (scca), and used the chemical fragments to predict side effect profiles. however, these chemical structure-based methods cannot provide any biological interpretations regarding the underlying mechanisms at a molecular interaction level. chemically unrelated drugs may present similar side effects because they happen to share common off-target proteins . on the basis of this observation,used side effect similarity of marketed drugs to predict drug pairs with common protein targets.identified drug off-targets by docking the drug into protein binding pockets similar to that of its primary target, followed by mapping the proteins with the best docking scores to known biological pathways, thus predicting potential side effects. using a similar docking approach,searched for correlated pairs of side effects and biological pathways. these docking-based methods depend heavily on the availability of protein 3d structures, which presents serious limitations as many useful drug targets are membrane proteins, for which very few structures are available. from a system-wide viewpoint,performed a biological spectra-based approach to investigate the correlation between drug-targeted proteins and their side effects. they clustered drugs based on their biological spectra (i.e. their ability to inhibit each of 92 selected proteins) and revealed a correlation between the chemical structures of the corresponding drugs and their biological activity in terms of protein inhibition profile. they further showed that drugs with similar protein inhibition profiles tend to cause similar side effects . however, it remains difficult to experimentally determine the link between drug-targeted proteins and side effects in a large-scale datasets in a cost-effective and efficient manner . therefore, there is a strong incentive to develop computational approaches for analyzing and predicting drug side effects. in this article, we examine the correlation between drugprotein interactions and their side effects on a large scale, without limiting ourselves to proteins of known 3d structures. we identify correlated sets of proteins and side effects based on the co-occurrence of drugs in protein-binding profiles and in side effect profiles using scca. results demonstrate that proteins in the same correlated set tend to be involved in only a few biological pathways even if their molecular functions are different. we also address that the side effects in each correlated set present possible outcomes from drug perturbations of corresponding proteins. the originality of the proposed method lies in the integration of drugprotein interactions at a molecular scale and drug side effect relationships at a phenotypic scale. performance evaluation showed that this method works better than the case where chemical structure profiles are used in the scca framework. we also conduct a comprehensive side effect prediction for drug molecules stored in drugbank without side effect information and confirm interesting predictions using independent source of information.in this article, we proposed a novel scca-based approach to relate drug targeted proteins with drug side effects. using a crossvalidation scheme, we found that the proposed approach displays better performance than chemical-structure-based methods for the prediction of drug side effects. results suggest that side effect of drugs are more correlated to their mechanism of action, rather than to their chemical structure, which presents an interesting result. in most drug discovery projects, a therapeutic target playing a role in a given disease is searched for, and once identified, the corresponding pathways can be identified. the components that are enriched in these pathways provide a list of potential side effects that one can expect for future drugs acting on the target of interest. we constructed a statistical model for the prediction of side effect profiles from protein-binding profiles, primarily because the number of drugs with side effect information is much less than those with targeted protein information. indeed, it is unlikely in a practical situation that detailed side effect profiles are known for newly arriving drug candidate molecules. one limitation of our proposed method is that targeted protein information is not always obtainable; however, increasing information regarding proteinligand interactions is becoming available from various biological assays. thus, we envisage scenarios where a drug candidate moleculesf targeted protein information is available, but not side effect information. in this context, we believe that our proposed method presents itself as a powerful and informative tool for use within the drug discovery process.  
