databases and ontologies relating genes to function: identifying enriched transcription factors using the encode chip-seq significance tool motivation: biological analysis has shifted from identifying genes and transcripts to mapping these genes and transcripts to biological functions. the encode project has generated hundreds of chip-seq experiments spanning multiple transcription factors and cell lines for public use, but tools for a biomedical scientist to analyze these data are either non-existent or tailored to narrow biological questions. we present the encode chip-seq significance tool, a flexible web application leveraging public encode data to identify enriched transcription factors in a gene or transcript list for comparative analyses. implementation: the encode chip-seq significance tool is written in javascript on the client side and has been tested on google chrome, apple safari and mozilla firefox browsers. server-side scripts are written in php and leverage r and a mysql database.identifying gene or transcript signatures associated with development, disease and drug efficacy has been a focal point of biology and medicine since the release of the human genome sequence; however, focus has only recently shifted to relating these signatures to function on a genome-wide scale. thanks to next-generation sequencing assays such as chip-seq that query an entire genome, transcription factor-binding sites that may explain the underlying biochemical function behind these signatures can be identified . the encode consortium, in particular, has spent over us$123 million producing and analyzing functional assays for public use. as part of this effort, encode has generated 843 chip-seq experiments (including histone modifications and control experiments) across 490 cell lines from various tissues, treatments and conditions (encode project). although encode chip-seq experiments represent an invariable treasure trove of data to intersect against gene/transcript signatures and identify enriched transcription factors (tfs), the consortium does not provide a simple tool for this purpose short of downloading and parsing each results file individually. other tools, such as cscan, have tried to fill this void, but their configuration options focus only on transcription start sites . additionally, cscan uses the set of all genes from the entire human genome as a background set, rendering it impractical for signatures derived from expression microarrays or from array-capturebased sequencing experiments. we present the encode chip-seq significance tool, a simple, flexible single-page web application that addresses these gaps in existing tools, leverages public chip-seq data from the encode production phase and provides biomedical researchers the ability to conduct comparative analyses with their list of gene/transcript signatures. also kept separate (e.g. untreated cells versus cells stimulated with interferon-).  
