data and text mining remark: an automatic program for clustering orthologs flexibly combining a recursive and a markov clustering algorithms remark is a fully automatic tool for clustering orthologs by combining a recursive and a markov clustering (mcl) algorithms. the remark detects and recursively clusters ortholog pairs through reciprocal blast best hits between multiple genomes running software program (recursiveclustering.java) in the first step. then, it employs mcl algorithm to compute the clusters (score matrices generated from the previous step) and refines the clusters by adjusting an inflation factor running software program (markovclustering.java). this method has two key features. one utilizes, to get more reliable results, the diagonal scores in the matrix of the initial ortholog clusters. another clusters orthologs flexibly through being controlled naturally by mcl with a selected inflation factor. users can therefore select the fitting state of orthologous protein clusters by regulating the inflation factor according to their research interests. availability and implementation: source code for the orthologous protein clustering software is freely available for non-commercial use at http://dasan.sejong.ac.kr/wikim/notice.html, implemented in java 1.6 and supported on windows and linux. contact:identifying orthologs automatically is very useful for functional annotation, and studies on comparative and evolutionary genomics. an orthology group identified by a semi-automated method is the clusters of orthologous group (cog) database in national center for biotechnology information (ncbi). it first identifies groups of three proteins with best reciprocal blast hits, and then performs case-by-case manual analysis to eliminate false-positives.introduces inparanoid, a fully automatic program to detect orthologs and inparalogs between two species.developed orthomcl, which generates orthologs from multiple species using the mcl algorithm . the mcl algorithm is known to be effective for detecting protein families with especially complicated domain structure . it is a graph partitioning algorithm, based on network flow, which is to simulate the flow to whom correspondence should be addressed. within a graph such that the flow is encouraged where the current is strong, but it is discouraged where the current is weak. we here introduce the remark tool that clusters orthologs flexibly through adjusting a parameter according to the users interest. the fundamental algorithms and its evaluation were introduced in the previous work . based on reciprocal blast best hits of gene pairs between two genomes, the method utilizes, to get more reliable results, the diagonal scores in the matrix of the initial ortholog clusters and clusters orthologs flexibly through being controlled naturally by mcl with a selected inflation factor. users can therefore select the fitting state of orthologous protein clusters by regulating the inflation factor according to their research interests.  
