data and text mining a novel representation of genomic sequences for taxonomic clustering and visualization by means of self-organizing maps downloaded from motivation: self-organizing maps (soms) are readily available bioinformatics methods for clustering and visualizing high-dimensional data, provided that such biological information is previously transformed to fixed-size, metric-based vectors. to increase the usefulness of som-based approaches for the analysis of genomic sequence data, novel representation methods are required that automatically and bijectively transform aligned nucleotide sequences into numeric vectors, dealing with both nucleotide ambiguity and gaps derived from sequence alignment. results: six different codification variants based on euclidean space, just like som processing, have been tested using two som models: the classical kohonens som and growing cell structures. they have been applied to two different sets of sequences: 32 sequences of small sub-unit ribosomal rna from organisms belonging to the three domains of life, and 44 sequences of the reverse transcriptase region of the pol gene of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 belonging to different groups and sub-types. our results show that the most important factor affecting the accuracy of sequence clustering is the assignment of an extra weight to the presence of alignment-derived gaps. although each of the codification variants shows a different level of taxonomic consistency, the results are in agreement with sequence-based phylogenetic reconstructions and anticipate a broad applicability of this codification method.genomic sequence data is continuously produced and processed in fields ranging from biomedicine to biotechnology. over the last decade, the completion of several genome sequence projects and the advent of next generation, high-throughput sequencing techniques have dramatically increased the amount of sequence data stored in databases. as a consequence, fast algorithms and methods are being developed for converting the growing number of nucleotide sequences into useful information, such as data classes and clusters, sets of the most relevant features or hidden relationships among data, to cite the most common ones. within this framework, the need for automatic massive sequence classification techniques is becoming more acute, requiring methods that are able to efficiently process and classify genomic data. one commonly used technique for data clustering and visualization is kohonens self-organizing map (som;), which allows processing a variety of biological data . som performs an unsupervised clustering process, i.e. during the training the patterns are spatially organized considering only their homology, without knowing the class to which they belong . therefore, the use of an unsupervised method like som seems very appropriate for genomic sequence clustering and, thus, representation, since it is able to conduct exploratory data analysis and visualization without the need for calibration or classification of the information to be processed. in comparison with other clustering methods, som adds the feature of spatially ordering the sequences on a two-dimensional (2d) map, thus, providing not only the clustering of the sequences into groups, but also the similarity or dissimilarity with all other groups of sequences. this could be very useful for organizing large sequence databases, as well as for quickly and accurately ordering newly obtained sequences. som creates a model composed of neurons, each with a prototype vector. the neurons are organized into a grid, which optimally represents the set of input data included into the training set . this model is selforganized by a training algorithm based on two fundamental concepts: the neighborhood relationship among the prototype vectors placed in such a grid, and the smooth adaptation of prototype vectors over the vectors in the training set. traditional som works with continuous numeric input space and euclidean distances, and it cannot be directly used for processing strings of symbols such as nucleotide or amino acid sequences. different authors, including kohonen and somervuo (2002) have highlighted this fact as a major limitation of the method. two alternative approaches have been suggested in the literature to solve this problem: to transform the training algorithm to be able to work with a discrete input space, and to convert the character sequences into numeric vectors and then use a traditional som. the string som model is comprised within the first option. it relies on the fasta method to compute similarity between sequences, and either the generalized median or the set median is used to adapt the string prototype vectors. however, this model presents several limitations. on the one hand, the algorithm for calculating the generalized median, i.e. the sequence (over the set of all possible sequences) that minimizes the sum of distances to every sequence of the set, is extremely time-consuming . on the other hand, the set median, where string prototype values are restricted to the set of training sequences, constitutes a severe restriction, in particular for small data sets, because it can infer non-representative prototype strings. furthermore, string som is highly sensitive to prototype initialization , forcing the prototype vectors to be roughly ordered in advance. transforming sequences into numeric vectors and training a traditional som is the second option. the conversion of sequences into same-length vectors in a meaningful way is a computational challenge, and two types of approaches are possible to accomplish this goal. the first type transforms sequences of variable length into fixed-length numeric vectors without a preliminary alignment (; fankhauser and m ser, 2005). however, most of the sequence-vector pairs are not bijective, i.e. the position of the nucleotide in the original (dna or rna) sequence is not embedded in the final vector, since it often represents either a frequency histogram or a picture. thus, the information residing in the succession of elements in the sequence of characters is lost and it is not possible to fully reconstruct the original sequence from the numeric vector sequence. this can constitute a constraint when som method is used to process these numeric vectors, because in traditional som, based on a continuous numeric space, prototype vectors virtually never match any of the training vectors. som prototype and training vectors share the same nature and dimension, and conceptually each prototype vector symbolizes the centroid of the training vectors that are within its influence region. therefore, when a som is trained using nucleotide sequences previously transformed into numeric vectors, a bijective transformation algorithm becomes desirable to analyse the prototype vectors of the som in their nucleotide sequence format. the second type of methods for transforming sequences into numeric vectors requires a preliminary alignment of the sequences. they are usually bijective, but typically produce very long numeric vectors .presented an analysis of some bijective numerical representation methods of dna sequences, highlighting the final length of the numerical vectors. the combination of the bijective dna transformation methods with traditional soms is reinforced by the following facts: (i) som prototype vectors are not limited to the set of training vectors; (ii) the training algorithm is computed efficiently since it works with numeric vectors instead of strings; (iii) given its bijective nature, it can alternatively work with nucleotide sequences or numeric vectors. the work reported here presents a new bijective method with six different variants for coding nucleotide sequences. these have been tested using two numeric som models: the classical kohonen som , as well as an improved version of growing cell structures (gcs;). the former is known for its usefulness in graphical exploratory data analysis, and the latter for providing better clustering results due to its flexible architecture. two sets of dna sequences have been used to validate the coding variants of the method: 32 small sub-unit ribosomal rna (ssu rrna) from organisms belonging to the three domains of life, and 44 sequences of the reverse transcriptase region of the pol gene of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (hiv-1) belonging to different groups and sub-types. the six variants of the proposed transforming method have been compared. we found that the two som models distribute the encoded sequences according to their taxonomic diversity and phylogenetic relationships. in particular, two of the six coding variants have produced highly accurate results.  
