genome analysis repfdr: a tool for replicability analysis for genome-wide association studies motivation: identification of single nucleotide polymorphisms that are associated with a phenotype in more than one study is of great scientific interest in the genome-wide association studies (gwas) research. the empirical bayes approach for discovering whether results have been replicated across studies was shown to be a reliable method, and close to optimal in terms of power. results: the r package repfdr provides a flexible implementation of the empirical bayes approach for replicability analysis and meta-analysis, to be used when several studies examine the same set of null hypotheses. the usefulness of the package for the gwas community is discussed. availability and implementation: the r package repfdr can be downloaded from cran. contact:replicating findings in genome-wide association studies (gwas) research is important for two main reasons. first, gwas are observational studies, and therefore there is always a danger that bias may explain away the discoveries. if a finding is replicated in more than one study, it is more convincingly not due to bias. second, finding the associations that are common in more than one population is scientifically interesting. a replicability analysis is primarily useful in the situation where a gwas meta-analysis is used at a primary (or discovery) stage to suggest single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) to test in additional follow-up studies. the snps that exhibit a strong evidence for replicated associations across the studies in the primary stage, need not be followed up, as the replicability of association has already been established. for example, in, the associations of snps in gene tcf7l2 with type 2 diabetes in the studies considered in the primary stage produced a strong evidence of replicability, even when faced with the many snps examined at this stage, and therefore there was no need to follow-up on this gene. the meta-analysis in the primary stage may identify snps that have not been discovered in the replicability analysis of the primary stage studies. this does not imply the absence of true replicated association, as it could be the result of small effect size and/or limited sample size (i.e. lack of statistical power). on the other hand, it could also be because of the effect not being replicated, as a discovered association in a meta-analysis may be entirely driven by a single study: if a p-value is close to zero in one study, the association will be significant in a metaanalysis even if there is no association in all the other studies. using a follow-up study (or replication stage), the replicability of association may be verified. seefor methods to establish replicability from follow-up studies. heller and yekutieli (2014) present an empirical bayes approach to replicability analysis. they estimate the probability that the association was replicated in the same direction in at least two studies, and declare as having replicated associations the snps with estimated probability small enough so that the estimated bayes fdr is at most q (e.g. q = 0.05). for each snp, the null state is that the association is replicated in the same direction in at most one study. more generally, heller andshow how to test different null states according to the interest of the user, where meta-analysis corresponds to the null state of no association in all the studies. they verify the optimality and fdr control of this approach in extensive simulations and demonstrate its usefulness and power in detecting snps that are associated with type 2 diabetes in several studies. here, we present the r package repfdr that provides a flexible and efficient implementation of the method in heller and yekutieli (2014).  
