genome analysis repitools: an r package for the analysis of enrichment-based epigenomic data epigenetics, the study of heritable somatic phenotypic changes not related to dna sequence, has emerged as a critical component of the landscape of gene regulation. the epigenetic layers, such as dna methylation, histone modifications and nuclear architecture are now being extensively studied in many cell types and disease settings. few software tools exist to summarize and interpret these datasets. we have created a toolbox of procedures to interrogate and visualize epigenomic data (both array-and sequencing-based) and make available a software package for the cross-platform r language. availability: the package is freely available under lgpl from the r-forge web site (http://repitools.r-forge.r-project.org/) contact:epigenetics is the study of the phenotypic changes unrelated to dna sequence. epigenomics is the large-scale study of epigenetics, with various genome-wide assays having been introduced in the past few years and with many epigenome mapping projects on the horizon . dna methylation is one of the best studied epigenetic marks and can be assayed genomewide using restriction enzyme, bisulphite or enrichment-based approaches (reviewed in). another significant class of epigenetic regulators is histone modifications, typically studied using chromatin immunoprecipitation (chip) in combination with microarrays (chip-chip) or next-generation sequencing (chip-seq). there are limited general tools available for the exploratory analysis and summarization of enrichment-based epigenomics data (seeof laird, 2010). we present repitools, a software package for the r environment that is focused on the analysis of enrichment-based epigenomic data. examples are shown to illustrate the diversity of tools within the package; many further examples can be found in the comprehensive users guide. the routines have been tested on affymetrix and nimblegen tiling microarrays and illumina genome analyzer sequencing data; generic data types are used so that other platforms can be easily supported. to whom correspondence should be addressed.there are relatively few tools currently available for the analysis of epigenomic data. we have developed repitools, a software package for the r environment; it contains many useful functions for quality assessment, visualization, summarization and statistical analysis of epigenomics experiments. the package makes use of aroma.affymetrix and several bioconductor packages for various preprocessing steps and may require an intermediate understanding of r for some features. a comprehensive user manual is available and examples can be run using supplied data. the analysis of large affymetrix tiling array datasets is facilitated through the memory efficiency afforded by the aroma.affymetrix package .  
