genome analysis a novel signal processing approach for the detection of copy number variations in the human genome motivation: human genomic variability occurs at different scales, from single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) to large dna segments. copy number variations (cnvs) represent a significant part of our genetic heterogeneity and have also been associated with many diseases and disorders. short, localized cnvs, which may play an important role in human disease, may be undetectable in noisy genomic data. therefore, robust methodologies are needed for their detection. furthermore, for meaningful identification of pathological cnvs, estimation of normal allelic aberrations is necessary. results: we developed a signal processing-based methodology for sequence denoising followed by pattern matching, to increase snr in genomic data and improve cnv detection. we applied this signal-decomposition-matched filtering (sdmf) methodology to 429 normal genomic sequences, and compared detected cnvs to those in the database of genomic variants. sdmf successfully detected a significant number of previously identified cnvs with frequencies of occurrence 10, as well as unreported short cnvs. its performance was also compared to circular binary segmentation (cbs). through simulations. sdmf had a significantly lower false detection rate and was significantly faster than cbs, an important advantage for handling large datasets generated with high-resolution arrays. by focusing on improving snr (instead of the robustness of the detection algorithm), sdmf is a very promising methodology for identifying cnvs at all genomic spatial scales. availability: the data are available at http://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/ the software and list of analyzed sequence ids are available at http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/betensky/ a matlab code for empirical mode decomposition may be found at:genome-wide dna aberrations (duplications, deletions and rearrangements) are part of the normal human genetic variability. copy number variations (cnvs) occur at thousands of loci across to whom correspondence should be addressed. the genome . to date, over 66 000 dna aberrations at 16 000 loci have been identified), and pairwise comparisons of human genomes suggest that they may differ by at least 1, a 10-fold higher percentage than the previously estimated 0.1 based on single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) incidence . cnvs have also been associated with many diseases and disorders , and may specifically play an important role in sporadic diseases . array comparative genomic hybridization (acgh) is a highresolution technology that enables simultaneous interrogation of the entire genome. it involves hybridization of differentially fluorescent dye-labeled reference and test sequences on a microarray, and estimation of relative allelic changes as the log 2-ratio of the two fluorescence intensities. cnv detection is often limited by the resolution of the microarray and the data signal-to-noise ratio (snr). current platforms with 1 million probes enable the detection of shorter cnvs (1025 kb), and consequently capture the finer scale of genomic variability . in practice, detection of short cnvs is still limited by high noise levels in the data. consequently, methodologies that explicitly increase snr to improve cnv detection are needed. several detection methods have been proposed and applied to genomic data with variable success . they include smoothing procedures , hidden markov models (hmm) , circular binary segmentation (cbs) , a change-point method that segments a chromosome into regions of constant copy number, and the genome alteration detection algorithm (gada) , based on bayesian learning. these methods aim to improve the true positive detection rate, not to increase snr. their performance also depends on the selection of appropriate thresholds for calling cnvs. the false discovery rate or the genomic identification of significant targets in cancer (gistic) approach are often used to establish these thresholds . genomic and measurement noise, as well as impurities and artifacts may contaminate acgh data, decrease their snr and introduce spurious spatial correlations . dimensionality reduction methods, including principal component analysis (pca), independent component analysis (ica) and wavelet decomposition , have been applied for denoising and artifactwe have developed sdmf, a computationally efficient methodology that combines the signal processing tools of signal decomposition and matched filtering for cnv detection in array cgh data. the latter are inherently noisy and robust cnv detection is difficult at low snr. sdmf treats genomic sequences as spatially continuous, non-stationary signals, which are denoised through elimination of noise-related components. spatially localized matched filtering is then applied to identify regions of pairwise match/mismatch. through these two processes, sdmf increases snr and improves the specificity of cnv detection. note that sdmf requires the selection of the matched-filter length and thresholds for match/mismatch and loss/gain for cnv detection. these were not explicitly optimized in this study. the choices of filter length and match/mismatch thresholds are dataset dependent. the log2 ratio threshold depends on the goal of the study, e.g. for detection of pathological cnvs it may be based on the log2 ratios of normal cnvs. sdmf was applied to 429 normal sequences from the  
