resicon: a method for the identification of dynamic domains, hinges and interfacial regions in proteins motivation: structure of most proteins is flexible. identification and analysis of intramolecular motions is a complex problem. breaking a structure into relatively rigid parts, the so-called dynamic domains, may help comprehend the complexity of proteins mobility. we propose a new approach called resicon (residue contacts analysis), which performs this task by applying a data-mining analysis of an ensemble of protein configurations and recognizes dynamic domains, hinges and interfacial regions, by considering contacts between residues. results: dynamic domains found by resicon are more compact than those identified by two other popular methods: pisqrd and geostas. the current analysis was carried out using a known reference set of 30 nmr protein structures, as well as molecular dynamics simulation data of flap opening events in hiv-1 protease. the more detailed analysis of hiv-1 protease dataset shows that resicon identified dynamic domains involved in structural changes of functional importance. availability and implementation: the resicon server is available at url: http://dworkowa.imdik. pan.pl/ep/resicon.proteins are not static. nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) spectroscopy and the spin-echo spectroscopy experiments show that in several cases it was proven that flexibility may be crucial to protein functionality . although experimental methods provide only general clues about intramolecular motions, molecular dynamics (md) simulations extend their reach by giving a higher-resolution pictureboth in space and timeof protein mobility. by studying an nmr ensemble or md trajectory one may notice that it is composed of relatively rigid structural parts, often referred to as dynamic domains . domains in traditional sense are regarded as parts of the protein which are: conserved (in terms of evolution), autonomous (in terms of folding) and/or compact (in terms of tertiary structure). such static domains are identified through sequence homology, structural analysis of a single configuration or both. (for conventional methods of identifying protein domains based on multiple sequences or a single structure see e.g.conversely, dynamic domains depend on structural transitions performed by the protein. a number of methods for identification of dynamic domains have been developed. the simplest procedures are based on normal mode analysis, which assumes a harmonic approximation of the potential energy function . more advanced approaches v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com use the gaussian network model and analyze correlations in motions between the residues of the protein . many other approaches have also been developed , but all of them anticipate dynamic domains by analyzing a single structure of a protein. another class of methods for dynamic domains assignment requires exactly two configurations (see). however, the assumption that two representative structures encompass all relevant motions is rather speculative. experimental and in silico methods reach beyond single-structure representation, and are capable of producing numerous configurations of a given protein. rather than inferring dynamic domains from one or two structures, a more natural approach would be to determine them based on an ensemble of configurations. geostas is the only method known to us that analyzes a whole ensemble of configurations and assigns each residue to a dynamic domain . although geostas can analyze not only proteins, but also nucleic acids, it fails to discover dynamic domains whenever they rotate with respect to each other. alternative methods of analyzing ensembles of configurations assign residues to a static core or unstructured bundle (see). the purpose of this study was to develop a novel methodology named resicon, capable of extracting dynamic domains from an ensemble of proteins configurations. resicon analyzes strengths of contacts between residues based exclusively on geometrical changes occurring in the provided set of structures. the set may be an nmr ensemble of configurations, or snapshots produced in the course of an md simulation. resicons main functionality is to identify dynamic domains, but it can also find hinges and interfacial (interdomain) regions.  
