gene expression a novel significance score for gene selection and ranking motivation: when identifying differentially expressed (de) genes from high-throughput gene expression measurements, we would like to take both statistical significance (such as p-value) and biological relevance (such as fold change) into consideration. in gene set enrichment analysis (gsea), a score that can combine fold change and p-value together is needed for better gene ranking. results: we defined a gene significance score -value by combining expression fold change and statistical significance (p-value), and explored its statistical properties. when compared to various existing methods, -value based approach is more robust in selecting de genes, with the largest area under curve in its receiver operating characteristic curve. we applied -value to gsea and found it comparable to p-value and t-statistic based methods, with added protection against false discovery in certain situations. finally, in a gene functional study of breast cancer profiles, we showed that using -value helps elucidating otherwise overlooked important biological functions.in this article, we introduce a gene significance score, -value, for robust selection of differentially expressed (de) genes, and demonstrate its application in gene set enrichment analysis (gsea). in developing the concept, we are inspired by two facts. first, there is discrepancy between the statistical and biological meanings of differential expression. second, a proper score is required to evaluate and rank genes in gsea. it was pointed out in mccarthy and smyth 2009 that statistically speaking, genes showing systematic difference between two conditions are considered de, whereas in biological term, de means the difference in gene expression is sufficiently large. in some biological applications, de genes were selected by gene expression level change (such as using 2-fold change as to whom correspondence should be addressed. cutoff), and the variability of gene expression was not taken into account. meanwhile, some statistical methods consisted of finding informative genes whose expression levels correlate with or are predictive of class labels, such as in ambroise and. these approaches usually found not all de genes, but a subset of de genes that distinguished sample classes. to detect all de genes, we usually conduct hypothesis testing of 0 = 1 against 0 = 1 or the like, such as methods based on expression ratio statistic, distinctness by kolmogorovsmirnov distance and similarity of expression profiles by pearsons correlation coefficient, t-statistic and its variants. in hypothesis test-based statistical methods, p-value of the test statistic is the basis of gene selection, as a result of which, we face the following two issues: @bullet the small fold change, small variance (sfsv) issue. when a genes variance is small, a slight expression level change may result in significant p-value and conclusion of statistical significance. however, a small expression change has questionable biological justification, which frequently leads to false discovery.@bullet the large fold change, large variance (lflv) issue. a gene with considerable fold change (fc) may possess a large variance, such as dysregulated genes in a disease condition. in such a situation, a large expression change may be accompanied by a non-significant p-value, making it possible for us to miss biologically meaningful but highly volatile changes.since variance estimation is part of the issues, which is often worsened by small sample size, improvements were proposed to adjust estimated variance, such as. meanwhile, methods that incorporate or improve the original fc criterion were proposed, such as a better defined fc limit, orpage: 802 801807we defined -value as a gene significance score combining fc and p-value, and derived its distribution. to identify de genes by -value, we can specify a significance level and use the corresponding critical value as threshold. under certain assumptions, critical values can be obtained theoretically; otherwise, they can be estimated from simulation, as shown in the supplementary materials. one may choose ad hoc threshold of 1.3 or 2.0, noting that at 2-fold change, p = 0.05,0.01 translate to = 1.3,2.0, and the thresholds are also close to the dependent cvs at = 0.05,0.01 . moreover, the definition of -value in equation (1) implies that 2-fold change is a neutral position: a smaller fc will penalize p-value, and a larger fc will boost p-value. as an extension to this concept, if we consider n-fc as a reasonable decision boundary for de genes, we can adopt an alternative definition of = (/log 2 n)(log 10 p), and choose decision threshold accordingly. further comparison of -value, p-value and fc to serve as de gene selection criteria is discussed in the supplementary materials. among various selection criteria for identifying de genes, -value is the most robust. we have found that @bullet -value performs well at the high specificity region, and its roc curve stays above all other criteria in the region. -value also has the lowest fdr when the number of selected genes increases. @bullet overall, outperforms other criteria by having the largest auc (area under curve) of roc.in the simulations, -value was computed based on regular t-test, therefore its computational complexity is less than moderated t-test, treat, or some other improvements to the regular t-test. in generalized gsea, -based enrichment score is also more robust than t-statistic and p-value based scores. in the experiments, we designed half of the genes in a gene set to be de, to mimic the real world scenario. we have found that @bullet es has comparable detection rate of enriched gene sets as es t and es p when differential gene expression 0.4, although it is less sensitive when 0.4. @bullet es has a robust high detection rate when de genes in an enriched gene set have increased variance. @bullet es protects against false discovery when is close to zero, especially when part of the genes have low variance.  
