reverse engineering of logic-based differential equation models using a mixed-integer dynamic optimization approach motivation: systems biology models can be used to test new hypotheses formulated on the basis of previous knowledge or new experimental data, contradictory with a previously existing model. new hypotheses often come in the shape of a set of possible regulatory mechanisms. this search is usually not limited to finding a single regulation link, but rather a combination of links subject to great uncertainty or no information about the kinetic parameters. results: in this work, we combine a logic-based formalism, to describe all the possible regulatory structures for a given dynamic model of a pathway, with mixed-integer dynamic optimization (mido). this framework aims to simultaneously identify the regulatory structure (represented by binary parameters) and the real-valued parameters that are consistent with the available experimental data, resulting in a logic-based differential equation model. the alternative to this would be to perform real-valued parameter estimation for each possible model structure, which is not tract-able for models of the size presented in this work. the performance of the method presented here is illustrated with several case studies: a synthetic pathway problem of signaling regulation, a two-component signal transduction pathway in bacterial homeostasis, and a signaling network in liver cancer cells.in recent years, there has been a growing interest in the application of logic formalisms to systems biology, and in particular to model signal transduction . the basis of this model formalism lies in the assumption that cells process information of certain stimuli approximately by logic circuits, and their simplicity makes them particularly amenable to model large networks and integrate pathway knowledge from databases with high-throughput data . logic models were first introduced byto model gene regulatory networks. since then, diverse modifications from the original formalism were developed. in particular various extensions have been developed to accommodate continuous values (e.g.).in this contribution, we apply a mixed-integer global optimization approach to reverse engineer logic-based ode models from timecourse data. the problem is stated as simultaneously finding the binary variables that determine the model structure and its associated continuous parameters. further, to improve computational efficiency, we present a relaxed non-linear programming reformulation of the problem that allows us to find good initial points for the mixed-integer nonlinear programming problem.  
