data and text mining a novel specific edge effect correction method for rna interference screenings motivation: high-throughput screening (hts) is an important method in drug discovery in which the activities of a large number of candidate chemicals or genetic materials are rapidly evaluated. data are usually obtained by measurements on samples in microwell plates and are often subjected to artefacts that can bias the result selection. we report here a novel edge effect correction algorithm suitable for rna interference (rnai) screening, because its normalization does not rely on the entire dataset and takes into account the specificities of such a screening process. the proposed method is able to estimate the edge effects for each assay plate individually using the data from a single control column based on diffusion model, and thus targeting a specific but recurrent well-known hts artefact. this method was first developed and validated using control plates and was then applied to the correction of experimental data generated during a genome-wide sirna screen aimed at studying hivhost interactions. the proposed algorithm was able to correct the edge effect biasing the control data and thus improve assay quality and, consequently, the hit-selection step.in high-throughput screening (hts) campaign, although most repetitive errors can be controlled, some biases, such as edge effects (also called border effects), which appear after a long incubation period, cannot easily be corrected due to well-to-well discrepancies inherent in the spatial structure of each plate. in these cases, a number of post-screening correction methods have been developed to normalize the data and are currently applied to small molecule-based screens. recently, the emergence of genome-wide rna interference (rnai) hts has raised experimental complications such as the requirement for more incubation time than compoundbased screens. however, because of the specificity of the small interfering rna (sirna) library format and the diversity of phenotypes induced after sirna treatment, the classical methods developed for post-processing in compound screens cannot be efficiently implemented in rnai screens. within this framework, the relevance of the positive results, or hits, is highly linked to the consistency of each test within the complete screening campaign . thus, every experimental parameter is a potential source of variation and can lower the accuracy of the entire screen. consequently, the entire process must be designed to maximize the similarity between each individual experiment. in such a context, each spatial or time-dependent dissimilarity can also be considered to be a possible source of response variability. the most widely used platform for biological experiments in hts is the microtitre plate (hereinafter referred to simply as plate); it is basically a rectangular rigid support containing an array of wells, each containing a single experiment. this type of support displays intrinsic heterogeneity in its spatial design: each well has a unique physical location, making it different from the others in terms of its immediate neighbours. thus, the surrounding properties of a given well can have consequences for its response (usually a cellular phenotype) in the biological experiment; this is especially true for wells that are located at the border of the plate. therefore, this locational variability can cause a differential in response across the plate. in practice, locationdependent variations in observed phenotypes can be due to many physical causes such as temperature and evaporation differences, inhomogeneous cell or agent dispensing, cross-contamination or plate-reader edge effects . in many applications, these factors are either neglected or prevented by the use of specific countermeasures . nevertheless, because of the expense and technology involved in a screening campaign, such preventive measures are not always feasible or applicable. in these cases, post-correction of the data is mandatory. in compound-based screening, methods for correcting spatial patterns of variation in plate responses have been widely studied and described in the literature . these methodologies relypage: 262 261268  
