structural bioinformatics ribfind: a web server for identifying rigid bodies in protein structures and to aid flexible fitting into cryo em maps motivation: to better analyze low-resolution cryo electron microscopy maps of macromolecular assemblies, component atomic structures frequently have to be flexibly fitted into them. reaching an optimal fit and preventing the fitting process from getting trapped in local minima can be significantly improved by identifying appropriate rigid bodies (rbs) in the fitted component. results: here we present the ribfind server, a tool for identifying rbs in protein structures. the server identifies rbs in proteins by calculating spatial proximity between their secondary structural elements. availability: the ribfind web server and its standalone program are available at http://ribfind.ismb.studying the structure and function of macromolecular assemblies using cryo electron microscopy (cryo em) techniques is becoming increasingly popular . interpreting the resulting 3d maps, which are typically at a resolution range of 5 to 25 a , is almost always performed by first fitting atomic structures of assembly components (e.g. proteins, domains and rna segments) into them . however, when the assembly components in the density map are in a different conformation from their corresponding atomic structures , fitting the components rigidly may not result in a satisfying pseudo-atomic model. to alleviate this problem, assembly components can be treated flexibly during the fitting process (flexible fitting) , i.e. by allowing changes in their conformation. in principle, flexible fitting can be applied in a hierarchical fashion at any level of representation of the structure, such as domains, secondary structural elements (sses), amino acids and even individual atoms . in practice, due to the increasing size of the search space, as the level of representation becomes finer, identifying appropriate rigid bodies (rbs) can be vital in reaching the optimal fit. a prior knowledge of the rigid and flexible regions of the components can prevent the fitting process from getting trapped into many of the local minima (; pandurangan and). there have been many program tools reported in the literature to identify rigid and flexible regions in proteins. most of these tools attempt to identify compact units in proteins with strong spatial relationship within them . these compact units can be arranged hierarchically, which can lead to the prediction of a comprehensive set of protein dynamic pathways . one such program uses a graph theory-based approach to model the atomic structure of the molecule as a bond-bending network and applies a fast combinatorial algorithm to determine the rigidity of this network, thereby the rbs of the molecule (first) . other approaches to predict flexible hinge regions in proteins include elastic network models (e.g. hingeport) , energetic interactions within protein fragments (e.g. flexoracle) and the identification of rigid blocks in proteins by comparing inter residue distances of two different conformations (e.g. rigidfinder) . we recently introduced ribfind, a method that identifies rbs by using spatial proximity between sses . using the method to aid flexible fitting of protein components in low-resolution (15 a ) cryo em maps was shown to improve the accuracy of the initial fits by 41 on average . here, we present a web server and a standalone tool for ribfind.  
