structural bioinformatics ribomaker: computational design of conformation-based riboregulation motivation: the ability to engineer control systems of gene expression is instrumental for synthetic biology. thus, bioinformatic methods that assist such engineering are appealing because they can guide the sequence design and prevent costly experimental screening. in particular, rna is an ideal substrate to de novo design regulators of protein expression by following sequence-to-function models. results: we have implemented a novel algorithm, ribomaker, aimed at the computational, automated design of bacterial riboregulation. ribomaker reads the sequence and structure specifications, which codify for a gene regulatory behaviour, and optimizes the sequences of a small regulatory rna and a 5 0-untranslated region for an efficient intermolecular interaction. to this end, it implements an evolutionary design strategy, where random mutations are selected according to a physicochemical model based on free energies. the resulting sequences can then be tested experimentally, providing a new tool for synthetic biology, and also for investigating the riboregulation principles in natural systems. availability and implementation: web server is available at http:// ribomaker.jaramillolab.org/. source code, instructions and examples are freely available for download at http://sourceforge.net/projects/ ribomaker/.regulatory rnas have been identified at the core of many cellular processes in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes (;). among all possible mechanisms, here we focus on regulatory rnas that interact with a given mrna to control protein expression. by applying engineering principles, we can design synthetic regulatory rnas to create genetic modules from which to program novel functions in the cell . in bacteria, this can be achieved by means of a small rna (srna), whose length varies from tens to hundreds nucleotides and which is highly structured. the srna interacts with the 5 0-untranslated region (5 0-utr) of a given mrna, as this region controls the ability to interact with the ribosome . this control of gene expression only relies on structural changes in the 5 0-utr, without any rna processing, which makes it independent of any additional cellular machinery. this riboregulatory mechanism allows harnessing physicochemical models to predict rna interaction and function. we take advantage of rna folding prediction methods , as well as methods for predicting rna interactions , to perform the de novo design of srnas and 5 0-utrs with a base-pair energy model. then, the designed rna systems can be exploited, for instance, to control metabolic pathways in bioproduction applications . in this work, we present an evolutionary method to design nucleic acid sequences implementing riboregulatory modules. for that, a multi-objective, combinatorial optimization algorithm is implemented, where the free energies and secondary structures of the system are considered. importantly, fully synthetic sequences obtained by computational design have been already verified for functionality in vitro and in bacterial cells . in contrast to our previous method , the present is not restricted to a neutral evolution within the inverse folding of predefined rna secondary structures . therefore, the full specification of the intramolecular structures of the species is not essential. this dramatically speeds up the optimization.ribomaker is devised for the computational design of conformation-based riboregulation, and in particular of bacterial riboregulation. it designs the riboregulator (srna) and the targeted 5 0-utr of a given mrna . moreover, srnas can be designed to activate or repress protein expression. it can also design only one element (5 0-utr or srna) provided the other is fixed. the resulting sequences can then be tested experimentally in a living cell, provided promoter sequences. ribomaker could be expanded to account for the computational design of further riboregulatory mechanisms . to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
