databases and ontologies rightfield: embedding ontology annotation in spreadsheets motivation: in the life sciences, guidelines, checklists and ontologies describing what metadata is required for the interpretation and reuse of experimental data are emerging. data producers, however, may have little experience in the use of such standards and require tools to support this form of data annotation. results: rightfield is an open source application that provides a mechanism for embedding ontology annotation support for life science data in excel spreadsheets. individual cells, columns or rows can be restricted to particular ranges of allowed classes or instances from chosen ontologies. the rightfield-enabled spreadsheet presents selected ontology terms to the users as a simple drop-down list, enabling scientists to consistently annotate their data. the result is semantic annotation by stealth, with an annotation process that is less error-prone, more efficient, and more consistent with community standards. availability and implementation: rightfield is open source under a bsd license and freely available fromthe quantity and complexity of biological data produced during standard laboratory projects has increased with the availability of high-throughput technologies. advances in areas, such as, transcriptomics and proteomics, enable scientists to produce high volumes of data in single experiments. in order to compare and reuse this data, however, rich metadata annotation is required. the biocuration and data standards communities have been addressing this issue by providing recommendations for annotation requirements. minimum information models with associated controlled vocabularies or ontologies that define the terms that should be used to describe metadata elements are being developed. in some cases, publication submissions are not accepted unless the accompanying data is compliant with the relevant minimum information model (for microarrays, this is miame, the minimum information about a microarray experiment). however, despite this drive to standardization, there are few tools to help scientists manage this process. rightfield was created to allow data curators (informaticians and ontologists) to augment standardsrightfield provides a simple and unobtrusive way of using semantic web technologies to improve and standardize data annotation. the novel part of this work lies in shielding the use of ontologies from laboratory scientists, allowing them to continue working in familiar native spreadsheets. other applications, such as the isa tools , provide similar functionality, but operate from bespoke client applications and are designed for more expert users. the anzo commercial platform has similar goals (http://www.cambridgesemantics.com/). the introduction of high-throughput, omics technologies has revolutionized experimental biology. the data produced in these experiments, however, is difficult to interpret or reuse without the use of common vocabularies. rightfield is an application that bridges this gap. it restricts the choices of annotation terms to a manageable set, which is accessible and understandable to the scientists.  
