gene expression rigorous assessment of gene set enrichment tests motivation: several statistical tests are available to detect the enrichment of differential expression in gene sets. such tests were originally proposed for analyzing gene sets associated with biological processes. the objective evaluation of tests on real measurements has not been possible as it is difficult to decide a priori, which processes will be affected in given experiments. results: we present a first large study to rigorously assess and compare the performance of gene set enrichment tests on real expression measurements. gene sets are defined based on the targets of given regulators such as transcription factors (tfs) and micrornas (mirnas). in contrast to processes, tfs and mirnas are amenable to direct perturbations, e.g. regulator over-expression or deletion. we assess the ability of 14 different statistical tests to predict the perturbations from expression measurements in escherichia coli, saccharomyces cerevisiae and human. we also analyze how performance depends on the quality and comprehensiveness of the regulator targets via a permutation approach. we find that anova and wilcoxons test consistently perform better than for instance kolmogorovsmirnov and hypergeometric tests. for scenarios where the optimal test is not known, we suggest to combine all evaluated tests into an unweighted consensus, which also performs well in our assessment. our results provide a guide for the selection of existing tests as well as a basis for the development and assessment of novel tests.the interpretation of gene expression studies is difficult because a large number of genes or other expressed sequences are profiled. instead of individual genes, it has been proposed to analyze the expression of gene sets that correspond to biological processes. the gene ontology (go;) is an example source for biological process definitions and process-associated gene sets. the analysis of expression data in the context of gene sets can be performed by many different enrichment tests . these tests aim to detect gene sets exhibiting significant differential expression. however, it is not known a priori, which processes will be affected in a given expression experiment. this lack of a dependable standard-of-truth has prevented an objective selection and evaluation of enrichment tests on real data. to whom correspondence should be addressed. targets of gene expression regulators such as transcription factors (tfs) and micrornas (mirnas) can also be treated as gene sets. tfs are regulatory proteins that bind to the promoter regions of target genes (tgs) to regulate their levels of expression . mirnas are short (22 nucleotides) non-coding rnas that are incorporated into the rna-induced silencing complex (risc) to regulate the stability and translation of messenger rna (mrna) transcripts . the activity of such regulators is not visible on the mrna level: tfs are frequently modulated at the post-transcriptional level and mirnas are usually not profiled. it is thus important to indirectly determine the activity of regulators by analyzing their tgs . here, the same tests are employed that were devised for analyzing biological processes . we propose tfs and mirnas and their associated sets of tgs for the rigorous evaluation of gene set enrichment tests. the experimental perturbation of regulators offers the required standard-of-truth that is not available for biological processes. given regulator deletion or over-expression experiments, we consider the experimentally perturbed and the remaining regulators (with their corresponding sets of tgs) as positives and negatives, respectively. we thus evaluate the ability of statistical tests to infer the perturbed regulator from the expression of its tgs. the present study, thereby conducts the first large comparison and rigorous assessment of 14 gene set enrichment tests on real data. we applied start-of-the-art statistical methods to test whether expression changes in regulator target sets might be due to chance. in the following sections, we review the field of gene set enrichment tests and describe our approach to rank enrichment tests.  
