structural bioinformatics ring: networking interacting residues, evolutionary information and energetics in protein structures motivation: residue interaction networks (rins) have been used in the literature to describe the protein 3d structure as a graph where nodes represent residues and edges physicochemical interactions, e.g. hydrogen bonds or van-der-waals contacts. topological network parameters can be calculated over rins and have been correlated with various aspects of protein structure and function. here we present a novel web server, ring, to construct physicochemically valid rins interactively from pdb files for subsequent visualization in the cytoscape platform. the additional structure-based parameters secondary structure, solvent accessibility and experimental uncertainty can be combined with information regarding residue conservation, mutual information and residue-based energy scoring functions. different visualization styles are provided to facilitate visualization and standard plugins can be used to calculate topological parameters in cytoscape. a sample use case analyzing the active site of glutathione peroxidase is presented. availability: the ring server, supplementary methods, examples and tutorials are available for non-commercial use at url: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/ring/.the last 15 years have seen the advent of network representation to tackle the complexity inherent in many problems in biology. by focusing on the network properties of a system it is often possible to gain a new level of insight into apparently unpredictable systems . the most studied example in biology is protein interaction networks, where nodes represent proteins and connections between nodes (physical) interactions. tools have been developed to visualize and analyze such networks, with cytoscape probably being the most widely accepted standard platform due to its open structure and extendibility. more recently, there has been a growing interest in representing protein structures as so-called residue interaction networks (rins) . rins consider single amino acids in the protein structure as nodes and connections as physicochemical interactions, such as covalent bonds and non-covalent contacts (e.g. hydrogen bonds). the intuitive idea is to analyze a structure with the same approach as a protein. ring allows the user to limit the generated network to buried residues, conserved residues or both. intuitively, limiting rin analysis to a network of conserved residues will help to focus on the essential interactions for a protein active site as shown in the following case study.  
