ripper: a framework for ms1 only metabolomics and proteomics label-free relative quantification ripper is a framework for mass-spectrometry-based label-free relative quantification for proteomics and metabolomics studies. ripper combines a series of previously described algorithms for pre-processing, analyte quantification, retention time alignment, and analyte grouping across runs. it is also the first software framework to implement proximity-based intensity normal-ization. ripper produces lists of analyte signals with their unnormalized and normalized intensities that can serve as input to statistical and directed mass spectrometry (ms) methods for detecting quantitative differences between biological samples using ms.biological studies using liquid chromatography (lc) and highresolution mass spectrometry (ms) have the potential to aid the investigation of molecular mechanisms by discovering biological markers. two important omics research areas utilizing lc-ms are metabolomics and proteomics; both face similar challenges in producing repeatable and reproducible data . to address these challenges, we recently introduced proximitybased intensity normalization (pin) . to implement pin, we created a new quantitative framework, ripper, for label-free quantification (lfq). ripper has since become a valuable in-house tool for new ms-based quantitative method development. because ripper does not rely on analyte identification before quantification, users can process ms1-only data for proteomic ms-based studies and generate an inclusion list for directed ms-based identification. by simply adjusting properties through a graphical user interface, users can also use ripper to extract analyte information for metabolomic studies, statistically analyze the results, and conduct further fragmentation experiments on metabolites of interest. here, we describe ripper, a java-based framework that takes in mzxml files, extracts analyte features from ms1 spectral data and reports validated analyte signal intensities. because it allows user-specified options and is written in java, ripper accommodates a wide array of users on various platforms (osx, window and linux). finally, we compare ripper to other freely available software, namely maxquant , xcms and mzmine . maxquant couples lfq to identified peptides and proteins and is therefore not suitable to process ms1-only data. furthermore, maxquant cannot process metabolomic data. xcms is an online service for metabolomic data and is not well suited for proteomic data. mzmine can process both proteomic and metabolomic dataand does not rely on identification prior to quantification. we therefore chose mzmine as a benchmark for ripper. we benchmarked ripper versus mzmine 2.18.1 using high-resolution metabolomic data and found that ripper identified six times as many analytes six times faster (see supplementary materials).ripper is the first framework implementing pin and enabling the proportionality paradigm for lc-ms compositional lfq workflows. also, ripper is extensible and, therefore, easily maintained and updated. finally, we have used ripper for numerous lc-ms omics experiments, most notably, differential proteomics (directed ms) and metabolomics (tracer analysis) with success. in sum, rippers introduction is an important step in advancing lfq workflows for investigating molecular machinery and biomarker discovery.  
