data and text mining rnacommender: genome-wide recommendation of rna-protein interactions motivation: information about rna-protein interactions is a vital prerequisite to tackle the dissection of rna regulatory processes. despite the recent advances of the experimental techniques, the currently available rna interactome involves a small portion of the known rna binding proteins. the importance of determining rna-protein interactions, coupled with the scarcity of the available information, calls for in silico prediction of such interactions. results: we present rnacommender, a recommender system capable of suggesting rna targets to unexplored rna binding proteins, by propagating the available interaction information taking into account the protein domain composition and the rna predicted secondary structure. our results show that rnacommender is able to successfully suggest rna interactors for rna binding proteins using little or no interaction evidence. rnacommender was tested on a large dataset of human rbp-rna interactions, showing a good ranking performance (average auc roc of 0.75) and significant enrichment of correct recommendations for 75 of the tested rbps. rnacommender can be a valid tool to assist researchers in identifying potential interacting candidates for the majority of rbps with uncharacterised binding preferences. availability and implementation: the software is freely available at http://rnacommender.post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression is mediated by interactions between transcripts and regulatory molecules, mainly rnabinding proteins (rbps) and non-coding rnas (ncrnas), creating ribonucleoprotein complexes (rnps). rbps are one of the most numerous protein classes, crucial in driving multiple complex mechanisms, from splicing to translation. many proteins with previously unsuspected rnabinding properties are still being discovered, increasing the range of rna interactors . each rbp binds to a population of transcripts with diverse affinity and specificity, recognizing rna targets by elements of sequence or structure . rbps often exert versatile roles in multiple cellular compartments, working in context with other rbps or regulatory molecules . many of the rules underlying this complexity are still unknown: information about rna-protein interactions is a vital prerequisite to tackle the dissection of rna regulatory processes. from an experimental point of view, this field witnessed great advances. initially, rna-protein interactions were determined with lowthroughput experimental techniques, testing the interaction of a single rbp with a single transcript. the development of high-throughput techniques, such as cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (clip) coupled with deep sequencing , allowed to identify, in a 1in this work we proposed rnacommender, a tool for rna-protein interaction recommendation. by representing rnas and proteins with features extracted from rna secondary structure and protein domains and combining them with existing interaction information, we enabled the recommendation of targets for rbps with little or no experimental evidence of interaction. we validated rnacommender on a large dataset of human rbp-rna interactions, showing an overall good ranking performance (average auc roc of 0.75) and a significant enrichment in correct targets in the top 50 predictions for 75 of the tested rbps. considering the successful results obtained by rnacommender we also recommended rna targets to 25 rbps with low-throughput evidence (from) and 18 completely unknown proteins (from). the recommendations are available as supplementary data. surely, the complexity of rna regulation requires further efforts to optimise the predictions, but our tool can be a valid companion to assist experimental research, especially for the majority of rbps whose interactors have not yet been experimentally identified. in future work, we will address the integration of the interactions suggested by rnacommender with other tools to provide a more robust and comprehensive analytical pipeline; in particular we plan to localise the interaction sites within the rnas leveraging graphprot models , and to integrate interaction predictions within the ptrcombiner system in order to improve the identification of groups of rbps binding similar sets of targets.  
