rna-enrich: a cut-off free functional enrichment testing method for rna-seq with improved detection power tests for differential gene expression with rna-seq data have a tendency to identify certain types of transcripts as significant, e.g. longer and highly-expressed transcripts. this tendency has been shown to bias gene set enrichment (gse) testing, which is used to find over-or under-represented biological functions in the data. yet, there remains a surprising lack of tools for gse testing specific for rna-seq. we present a new gse method for rna-seq data, rna-enrich, that accounts for the above tendency empirically by adjusting for average read count per gene. rna-enrich is a quick, flexible method and web-based tool, with 16 available gene annotation databases. it does not require a p-value cutoff to define differential expression, and works well even with small sample-sized experiments. we show that adjusting for read counts per gene improves both the type i error rate and detection power of the test. availability and implementation: rna-enrich is available at http://lrpath.ncibi.org or from supplemental material as r code.functional enrichment testing is one of the most common downstream analyses for transcriptomics experiments, facilitating a deeper interpretation of results. examples of gene set databases used for testing are gene ontology (go) which includes biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions, and the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes which places genes in metabolic and other pathways. most current gene set enrichment (gse) methods, such as david , were developed for microarray data. these methods often only make use of differential expression (de) p-values or ranks, or simply a list of significant genes. with rna-seq, which uses whole transcriptome sequencing to quantify gene expression, tests for de often exhibit a relationship between read count and likelihood of detecting de. for example, when power is greater to detect longer and/or higher expressed genes, gene sets that have long genes or that are highly expressed are more likely to be detected as significant, violating common test assumptions. thus, accounting for read count per gene may improve standard gse methods, which may otherwise not be appropriate for rna-seq data. rna-seq achieves a very high dynamic range, with gene read counts often varying across six or more orders of magnitude. readcount-based methods such as those using a negative binomial model (e.g. edger and deseq2) can be more likely to identify longer and highly expressed transcripts as significant. methods that can account for this bias in gse testing are goseq which requires a p-value cut-off, and gsaaseqsp and seqgsea , which require permutations and moderate to large sample sizes to obtain a sufficient number of unique permutations of phenotype labels. we have developed rna-enrich, a gse method that empirically adjusts for average read count per gene, and does not require a cut-off to define differentially expressed genes (degs), time-consuming permutations or regression models. similarcut-off free methods for microarray data have shown improved ability to detect gene sets enriched with either a few very strong degs or many only moderate degs .  
