gene expression rna-express annotates novel transcript features in rna-seq data next-generation sequencing is rapidly becoming the approach of choice for transcriptional analysis experiments. substantial advances have been achieved in computational approaches to support these technologies. these approaches typically rely on existing transcript annotations, introducing a bias towards known genes, require specific experimental design and computational resources, or focus only on identification of splice variants (ignoring other biologically relevant transcribed features contained within the data that may be important for downstream analysis). biologically relevant transcribed features also include large and small non-coding rna, new transcription start sites, alternative promoters, rna editing and processing of coding transcripts. also, many existing solutions lack accessible interfaces required for wide scale adoption. we present a user-friendly, rapid and computation-efficient feature annotation framework (rna-express) that enables identification of transcripts and other genomic and transcriptional features independently of current annotations. rna-express accepts mapped reads in the standard binary alignment (bam) format and produces a study-specific feature annotation in gtf format, comparison statistics, sequence extraction and feature counts. the framework is designed to be easily accessible while allowing advanced users to integrate new feature-identification algorithms through simple class extension, thus facilitating expansion to novel feature types or identification of study-specific feature types. availability and implementation: rna-express software, source code, user manuals, supporting tutorials, developer guides and example data are available at http://www.rnaexpress.org.recent advances in next-generation sequencing (ngs) technology have revolutionized many aspects of biology. applications range from genomic and metagenomic projects through to wide scale condition-specific whole transcriptome sequence . within the field of whole transcriptome sequencing, the primary benefit over traditional microarray is the capacity to read all expressed transcripts, yielding unbiased highly sensitive measurements, without the dependence on prior knowledge to specify probes. this capacity facilitates the discovery and quantification of novel genes, splice variants and non-coding rnas in addition to known features. the present challenge lies in extracting all biologically meaningful information from the vast amounts of data produced by ngs in a time-and resource-efficient manner. the assignment of biological significance relies on identification of transcriptional features, their analysis and quantitation of induced changes in expression. many ngs studies reveal expressed features that are not annotated in the reference genomes, either because they are novel genes, transcripts or splice variants, or because they are composed of reads from precursor transcripts or intronic regions. whole transcriptome analysis initially relies upon either prior knowledge of the genome for direct mapping or computationally and sequencing intensive de-novo transcript assembly (using tools such as tranabyss and oases). although comprehensive, these transcript reconstruction techniques are dependent on specific experimental designs, thus limiting application. current genome-guided techniques for feature identification range from considering only gene annotation databases through to transcript assembly based on novel gene and splice variant identification directly from read information (such as performed with scripture and cufflinks) . although these features may identify novel splice variants, other transcribed features such as upstream transcribed regions, introns, downstream utr regions and unprocessed rna may not be considered. although understanding the transcriptional response of protein-coding genes is critical, identifying and understanding the additional transcribed features can also provide significant insights into the regulatory controls and networks induced in the condition of study. although present in many ngs datasets, this information is not widely analysed, thus excluding potentially important biologically relevant information. in this light, we developed rna-express, a user-friendly computationally efficient analysis approach to perform flexible feature annotation, comparison, sequence extraction and read counting using ngs data from any experimental condition.  
