sequence analysis rnag: a new gibbs sampler for predicting rna secondary structure for unaligned sequences motivation: rna secondary structure plays an important role in the function of many rnas, and structural features are often key to their interaction with other cellular components. thus, there has been considerable interest in the prediction of secondary structures for rna families. in this article, we present a new global structural alignment algorithm, rnag, to predict consensus secondary structures for unaligned sequences. it uses a blocked gibbs sampling algorithm, which has a theoretical advantage in convergence time. this algorithm iteratively samples from the conditional probability distributions p(structure alignment) and p(alignment structure). not surprisingly, there is considerable uncertainly in the high-dimensional space of this difficult problem, which has so far received limited attention in this field. we show how the samples drawn from this algorithm can be used to more fully characterize the posterior space and to assess the uncertainty of predictions. results: our analysis of three publically available datasets showed a substantial improvement in rna structure prediction by rnag over extant prediction methods. additionally, our analysis of 17 rna families showed that the rnag sampled structures were generally compact around their ensemble centroids, and at least 11 families had at least two well-separated clusters of predicted structures. in general, the distance between a reference structure and our predicted structure was large relative to the variation among structures within an ensemble. availability: the perl implementation of the rnag algorithm and the data necessary to reproduce the results described in sections 3.1 and 3.2 are available atrna secondary structure plays a key role in the function of many types of rna, including structural rnas, non-coding rnas (ncrna) and regulatory motifs in mrnas (e.g. riboswitches). accordingly, structural features of rna molecules are often characterized by evolutionarily conserved secondary structures that are critical to their functions. furthermore, there are often to whom correspondence should be addressed. multiple occurrences of these structural elements within one species (e.g. trna). given the recent recognition of many important additional roles that rnas play in cellular functions, predicting the common structural features of a set of rna sequences is more important than ever.following, we picked 17 -centroid estimators, where 2 k :5 k 10, k z6 from which to interpolate the curve on the ppvsen plane.our results comparing rnag predictions to those from several additional recently published methods show that the existing procedures yield a combination of sensitivity and ppv that is considerably below the rnag frontier. some features of rnag suggest an explanation for this behavior. rnag not only inherits the advantages of the sampling method, but also enjoys a theoretical convergence advantage over the metropolishastings algorithm, which employs local moves. since rnag samples full, valid secondary structures, it enjoys an advantage over iterative algorithms that sample only stems. also, since the two recursive steps sample from the full space of alignments and structures directly, we avoid the need to use a reduced model; a concession that is common to several extant procedures. however, since rnag is an mcmc procedure, there are no means to assure that it has converged to its target distribution.in this study, we introduce a blocked gibbs sampler (rnag) to predict secondary structure for unaligned rna sequences. rnag confronts the high time complexity of the align-fold problem by capitalizing on lius findings on blocked gibbs sampling.show that the new algorithm delivers substantial improvement, as measured by ppvsen curves. however, as with any mcmc procedure, evidence of convergence during the burn-in cannot be guaranteed. also, in the current implementation of this algorithm, little has been done ensure fast code or an efficient stopping rule. we found that the running times of rnag are in the range of  
