sequence analysis rnasalign: rna structural alignment system motivation: structural alignment of rna is found to be a useful computational technique for idenitfying non-coding rnas (ncrnas). however, existing tools do not handle structures with pseudoknots. although algorithms exist that can handle structural alignment for different types of pseudoknots, no software tools are available and users have to determine the type of pseudoknots to select the appropriate algoirthm to use which limits the usage of structural alignment in identifying novel ncrnas. results: we implemented the first web server, rnasalign, which can automatically identify the pseudoknot type of a secondary structure and perform structural alignment of a folded rna with every region of a target dna/rna sequence. regions with high similarity scores and low e-values, together with the detailed alignments will be reported to the user. experiments on more than 350 ncrna families show that rnasalign is effective.structural alignment is an important topic in studying rnas especially for non-coding rnas (ncrnas) which are found to be evolutionary conserved in terms of primary sequences and secondary structures. to check if a given sequence (target) contains regions that are possibly candidates of a particular ncrna family, a useful computational approach is to compute the structural alignment between a folded ncrna (query) of the family and every unfolded region in the target sequence where the alignment score represents their sequence and structural similarity. the approach has been shown to be effective . some existing software such as rsearch and fastr belongs to this category. however, the approach is not being widely used partially due to the followings. first, the available tools (rsearch and fastr) do not support query with pseduoknots. the secondary structure of an ncrna is said to contain a pseudoknot if there are two base pairs at positions (i,j) and (i ,j ), where i j and i j , such that i i j j or i i j j. secondary structures including pseudoknots are found to be critical in some biological functions . secondly, although there  
