bioinformatics discovery note gene expression rna-seq differential expression studies: more sequence or more replication? motivation: rna-seq is replacing microarrays as the primary tool for gene expression studies. many rna-seq studies have used insufficient biological replicates, resulting in low statistical power and inefficient use of sequencing resources. results: we show the explicit trade-off between more biological rep-licates and deeper sequencing in increasing power to detect differentially expressed (de) genes. in the human cell line mcf7, adding more sequencing depth after 10 m reads gives diminishing returns on power to detect de genes, whereas adding biological replicates improves power significantly regardless of sequencing depth. we also propose a cost-effectiveness metric for guiding the design of large-scale rna-seq de studies. our analysis showed that sequencing less reads and performing more biological replication is an effective strategy to increase power and accuracy in large-scale differential expression rna-seq studies, and provided new insights into efficient experiment design of rna-seq studies.rna-seq has been widely used for differential expression studies . despite the large number of studies performed for transcriptome comparisons, little empirical optimization has been made for rna-seq-based experimental designs. critical issues include biological replication and sequencing depth , and inefficient designs of rna-seq studies can lead to suboptimal power and waste of resources, especially in large-scale treatment-control studies. although for most rna-seq studies high technical reproducibility means that technical replicates are not necessary , this fact does not ameliorate the need for biological replicates in making statistical inferences . yet frequently large-scale rna-seq studies with extensive differential expression analyses have used limited biological replication, instead favoring a strategy of low level biological replication with deep sequencing (e.g.). in addition to replication number, the choice for sequencing depth is often unguided. it is clear that higher sequencing depth generates more informational reads, which increases the statistical power to detect differentially expressed (de) genes . however, high-sequencing depth comes with cost, and resources will be wasted in scenarios where more sequencing brings diminishing returns as a saturation level is approached. to achieve maximum power to detect de genes within a budget, a compromise must be made between sequencing depth and biological replication. there are a few previous studies on experimental design issues for rna-seq studies , but they do not empirically address the specific question raised here of the trade-offs in power between replication, sequencing depth and cost: should we sequence more samples with low depth, or should we sequence fewer samples with high depth?we conclude that in a typical de study using rna-seq, sequencing deeper for each sample generates diminishing returns for power of detecting de genes once beyond a certain sequencing depth. instead, increasing the number of biological replications consistently increases the power significantly, regardless of sequencing depth. additionally, estimation accuracy for logfc and absolute expression levels greatly improve across the board when more biological replicates are added, whereas sequencing depth improves the accuracy of these estimations only in some situations, so, when possible, using more biological replication with lower sequencing depth, instead of sequencing few samples in great depth, is a more efficient strategy for rna-seq de studies. in the specific case of mcf7 breast cancer cell samples, our cost metric suggests that sequencing 410 m reads/sample gives diminishing returns compared with adding replication. obviously, for other species and perhaps other samples such as heterogeneous tumor samples, the exact sequencing depth will be different, but the overall guideline of replication rather than deeper sequencing should still remain. a similar set of standard curves could be constructed for each type of sample to guide experimental designs, particularly for large-scale genomic studies where optimization for cost effectiveness can have a significant impact. almost all individual laboratories are mindful of budgets, but the stakes are particularly high in studies such as encyclopedia of dna elements (encode) or the cancer genome atlas (tcga) where millions of dollars are being spent on sequencing. we have focused on differential expression studies using rnaseq with the aim to improve a single target: power to detect de genes between samples. of course, there are cases where sequencing deeply is advantageous (such as differential expression of exons and transcript-specific expression). in these applications, much higher sequencing depths are required because the informative genomic regions are much shorter. however, if gene differential expression is the primary goal, it would be a sensible choice to optimize sequencing depth and number of biological replicates according to the simple guidelines we propose here.  
