gene expression rnaseqexpressionbrowser—a web interface to browse and visualize high-throughput expression data motivation: rna-seq techniques generate massive amounts of expression data. several pipelines (e.g. tophat and cufflinks) are broadly applied to analyse these datasets. however, accessing and handling the analytical output remain challenging for non-experts. results: we present the rnaseqexpressionbrowser, an open-source web interface that can be used to access the output from rna-seq expression analysis packages in different ways, as it allows browsing for genes by identifiers, annotations or sequence similarity. gene expression information can be loaded as long as it is represented in a matrix-like format. additionally, data can be made available by setting up the tool on a public server. for demonstration purposes, we have set up a version providing expression information from the barley genome. availability and implementation: the source code and a show case are accessible at http://mips.helmholtz-muenchen.de/plant/ rnaseqexpressionbrowser/. contactcurrent high-throughput technologies, such as rna-seq, allow researchers to generate massive amounts of gene expression data in short time. however, data analysis and intuitive visualization often remain a bottleneck for making the efficient use of generated data. for biologists with limited programming experience, accessing data output from rna-seq pipelines in a meaningful manner poses a challenge: manual search for genes of interest is time intensive if feasible at all, and generating non-automated visualizations for a list of genes of interest is a painstaking task. this task has become even more challenging for highly repetitive genomes like barley (the international barley sequencing consortium, 2012) or wheat , where de novo transcriptome assemblies result in hundred thousands of transcripts. the tophat and cufflinks workflow presents one of the standard workflows for analysing rna-seq data and is broadly applied in life sciences research. packages to analyse data from these workflows that help to reduce the efforts for accessing the output data are available, e.g. cummerbund , robina or star . however, accessing genes by sequence-information or annotations still requires some programming skills. additionally, most tools work only locally, which makes sharing of the results difficult in cooperative research projects. in this article, we present the rnaseqexpressionbrowser, a web-based tool that can be used to easily access the results of expression analysis.  
