gene expression rnaseqviewer: visualization tool for rna-seq data with the advances of rna sequencing technologies, scientists need new tools to analyze transcriptome data. we introduce rnaseqviewer, a new visualization tool dedicated to rna-seq data. the program offers innovative ways to represent transcriptome data for single or multiple samples. it is a handy tool for scientists who use rna-seq data to compare multiple transcriptomes, for example, to compare gene expression and alternative splicing of cancer samples or of different development stages.the development of next-generation sequencing allows largescale transcriptome studies, using massively parallel sequencing of complementary dna reverse transcribed from rna (rnaseq) technologies . scientists now face the challenge of analyzing the unprecedented amount of available sequencing data. in addition to the use of automated tools, such analysis needs human review and interpretation of the data to gain insight into them, verify consistency of programs results, understand intricate cases and structures and reveal underlying patterns. as data files generated by automated tools for rna-seq analysis are formatted for computational treatments and can exceed gigabytes, they are improper for easy direct human reading. this calls for effective visualization tools, capable of displaying big datasets in intuitive ways. genomic visualization software can be divided into two categories: web-based genome browsers like those from ucsc and ensembl and standalone software including the integrative genomics viewer and savant . only the latter category is adapted to the visualization of the large locally stored datasets usually manipulated in rna-seq analysis, as web upload is prohibitive. however, existing solutions are limited to a few tracks visualized simultaneously, and it is not possible to compare the multiple samples of medium or large rna-seq experiments.here we introduce rnaseqviewer, a desktop program to visualize the data from the rna-seq analyzing process, for single or multiple samples. by focusing on expression of genes and transcript isoforms, the program offers innovative ways to present the transcriptome data in a quantitative and interactive manner.  
