structural bioinformatics rnasnoop: efficient target prediction for h/aca snornas motivation: small nucleolar rnas are an abundant class of non-coding rnas that guide chemical modifications of rrnas, snrnas and some mrnas. in the case of many orphan snornas, the targeted nucleotides remain unknown, however. the box h/aca subclass determines uridine residues that are to be converted into pseudouridines via specific complementary binding in a well-defined secondary structure configuration that is outside the scope of common rna (co-)folding algorithms. results: rnasnoop implements a dynamic programming algorithm that computes thermodynamically optimal h/aca-rna interactions in an efficient scanning variant. complemented by an support vector machine (svm)-based machine learning approach to distinguish true binding sites from spurious solutions and a system to evaluate comparative information, it presents an efficient and reliable tool for the prediction of h/aca snorna target sites. we apply rnasnoop to identify the snornas that are responsible for several of the remaining orphan pseudouridine modifications in human rrnas, and we assign a target to one of the five orphan h/aca snornas in drosophila. availability: the c source code of rnasnoop is freely available atbox h/aca snorna facilitates the conversion of uracil to pseudouracil in a specific sequence context . the specificity for a particular target site is the consequence of the hybridization of snorna and target rna, in most cases a ribosomal rna. the target u is positioned by two specific interactions of the flanking target rna sequence with the complementary sequence of the recognition loop of the snorna , see. the correct secondary to whom correspondence should be addressed. structures of snornas are typically hard to predict. thus, the exact structure of the interior loop, and hence the sequence motifs complementary to the binding site, are unknown. we employ here the idea of thermodynamic matchers to determine the energetically optimal structure of an h/aca snorna that is bound to a given putative target sequence. the implementation of thermodynamic matchers is not directly applicable, however, since the snornatarget interaction corresponds to a complex pseudoknot (in the conceptual concatenation of snorna and mrna) that is beyond the scope of existing rna folding software. the prediction of putative snorna target sites is an integral part of two programs [snogps and fisher ] that attempt to detect h/aca snornas in genomic dna. both programs search for sequence complementarities between a list of possible target sites and the binding region of the snorna candidate. in these models, mismatches between the target and the snorna are not allowed. furthermore, neither program provides information on the energetics of the interaction or the stability of the stems, two factors that were recently shown to be important for correctly predicting snornatarget interactions . we present here a dynamic programming algorithm named rnasnoop, that specifically captures the structure of the snorna target interaction and is optimized for scanning speed. the thermodynamic considerations are combined with a machine learning component to increase the specificity of target predictions, which can be improved even further by including comparative information.we presented here rnasnoop, a tool specifically designed to predict complex h/aca snornarna interactions that are outside the scope of conventional rnarna prediction tools. in contrast with previous tools, it uses a dynamic programming approach coupled with a nearest-neighbor energy model to identify putative targets. this allows rnasnoop to capture structural andenergetic features essential for correctly predicting snornatarget interactions . coupled with a svm classification, snoopy achieves good performance ranking first 11 out of 12 confirmed snornamrna interactions in human and excluding all experimentally rejected interactions. these good results should, however, not be overestimated as both the training and test datasets are small and were extracted from only two species. the run time of rnasnoop is comparable with that of snogps, and scales linearly with the length of the target sequence. together with the improved accuracy, this makes rnasnoop not only suitable for target search in rrna and snrna sequences or in specific putative mrna candidates, but also for large-scale genome-wide surveys. funding: european union under the auspices of the fp-6 synlet and the fp-7 quantomics project (in part); the austrian genau project regulatory noncoding rna (in part).  
