structural bioinformatics rna structure framework: automated transcriptome-wide reconstruction of rna secondary structures from high-throughput structure probing data the rapidly increasing number of discovered non-coding rnas makes the understanding of their structure a key feature toward a deeper comprehension of gene expression regulation. various enzymatic-and chemically-based approaches have been recently developed to allow whole-genome studies of rna secondary structures. several methods have been recently presented that allow high-throughput rna structure probing (cirs-seq, structure-seq, shape-seq, pars, etc.) and unbiased structural inference of residues within rnas in their native conformation. we here present an analysis toolkit, named rna structure framework (rsf), which allows fast and fully-automated analysis of high-throughput structure probing data, from data pre-processing to whole-transcriptome rna structure inference. availability and implementation: rsf is written in perl and is freely available under the gplv3 license from http://rsf.the advent of high-throughput methods has rapidly led to the annotation of thousands of novel transcripts , mostly lacking coding capabilities . as for large ribonucleoprotein complexes , these rnas are thought to regulate gene expression through interactions mediated by their structure . in the last years, a variety of methods have been developed to interrogate rna secondary structures on a genome-wide scale , but no tool has been developed to enable efficient analysis of the large amount of data generated by these methods, with the exception of the seqfold package, which has been developed to analyze pars data . because the analysis of these data and the subsequent inference of rna structures constitute a bottle-neck of these protocols, we here provide the rna structure framework (rsf), an open-source framework to analyze highthroughput structure probing data (spd), and to minimize the efforts to get from raw sequencing reads to secondary structures.the advent of high-througput rna structure probing methods has provided a large amount of transcriptome-wide scale structural data, although robust tools for the rapid elaboration of this information are currently missing. rsf is a user-friendly toolkit that enables automated inference of rna secondary structures on a transcriptome-wide scale, in a few steps. it can use data derived from many different structure probing methods, both chemical (cirs-seq, shape-seq, structure-seq) and enzymatic (pars). due to the rapid evolution of the field, and to the absence of a golden standard in the analysis of high-throughput spd, the implementation of several different scoring, normalization and structure prediction methods enables a high degree of analysis flexibility to the user. the use of high-throughput structure probing methodologies coupled to rsf provides an important toolkit for the genome-wide analysis of rna structures.conflict of interest: none declared.  
