rnf: a general framework to evaluate ngs read mappers motivation: read simulators combined with alignment evaluation tools provide the most straightforward way to evaluate and compare mappers. simulation of reads is accompanied by information about their positions in the source genome. this information is then used to evaluate alignments produced by the mapper. finally, reports containing statistics of successful read alignments are created. in default of standards for encoding read origins, every evaluation tool has to be made explicitly compatible with the simulator used to generate reads. results: to solve this obstacle, we have created a generic format read naming format (rnf) for assigning read names with encoded information about original positions. futhermore, we have developed an associated software package rnftools containing two principal components. mishmash applies one of popular read simulating tools (among dwgsim, art, mason, curesim, etc.) and transforms the generated reads into rnf format. lavender evaluates then a given read mapper using simulated reads in rnf format. a special attention is payed to mapping qualities that serve for parametrization of roc curves, and to evaluation of the effect of read sample contamination. availability and implementation: rnftools: http://karel-brinda.github.io/rnftools spec. of rnf:the number of next-generation sequencing (ngs) read mappers has been rapidly growing during the last years. then, there is an increasing demand of methods for evaluation and comparison of mappers to select the most appropriate one for a specific task. the basic approach to compare mappers is based on simulating ngs reads, aligning them to the reference genome and assessing read mapping accuracy using a tool evaluating if each individual read has been aligned correctly. there exist many read simulators [art , curesim , dnemulator , dwgsim (http://github.com/nh13/dwgsim), fastqsim , flowsim , gemsim , mason , pbsim , pirs , sinc , wgsim (http://github. com/lh3/wgsim), xs ] as well as many evaluation tools [curesimeval, dwgsim_eval, rabema , seg-suite (http://cbrc3.cbrc.jp/martin/seg-suite/), wgsim_. however, each read simulator encodes information about the origin of reads in its own manner. this makes combining tools complicated and makes writing ad-hoc conversion scripts inevitable. here we propose a standard for naming simulated ngs reads, called read naming format (rnf), that makes evaluation tools for read mappers independent of the tool used for read simulation. furthermore, we introduce rnftools, an easily configurable v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.we designed rnf format and propose it as a general standard for naming simulated ngs reads. we developed rnftools consisting of mishmash, a pipeline for read simulation, and lavender, an evaluation tool for mappers, both following the rnf convention (thus inter-compatible). currently, mishmash has a built-in interface with the following existing read simulators: art, curesim, dwgsim, mason and wgsim. we expect that authors of existing read simulators will adopt rnf naming convention as it is technically simple and would allow them to extend the usability of their software. we also expect authors of evaluation tools to use rnf to make their tools independent of the used read simulator.  
