structural bioinformatics a novel web server predicts amino acid residue protection against hydrogen–deuterium exchange motivation: to clarify the relationship between structural elements and polypeptide chain mobility, a set of statistical analyses of structures is necessary. because at present proteins with determined spatial structures are much less numerous than those with amino acid sequence known, it is important to be able to predict the extent of proton protection from hydrogendeuterium (hd) exchange basing solely on the protein primary structure. results: here we present a novel web server aimed to predict the degree of amino acid residue protection against hd exchange solely from the primary structure of the protein chain under study. on the basis of the amino acid sequence, the presented server offers the following three possibilities (predictors) for users choice. first, prediction of the number of contacts occurring in this protein, which is shown to be helpful in estimating the number of protons protected against hd exchange (sensitivity 0.71). second, probability of h-bonding in this protein, which is useful for finding the number of unprotected protons (specificity 0.71). the last is the use of an artificial predictor. also, we report on mass spectrometry analysis of hd exchange that has been first applied to free amino acids. its results showed a good agreement with theoretical data (number of protons) for 10 globular proteins (cor-relation coefficient 0.73).because flexible sequence regions frequently play an important functional role, they are currently in the focus of numerous studies. the functional properties of a protein molecule are a compromise between flexibility and rigidity. it was demonstrated that loops and-turns showed a higher mobility than other structural elements . flexibility is also characteristic of epitopes and binding sites of a number of enzymes modulating the life span of proteins in vivo . the method combining hydrogendeuterium (hd) exchange and mass spectrometry data (hdms) is widely used to study conformational changes in protein structures. hd exchange studies are mostly focused on the exchange of protons involved in h-bonding, which contributes to stabilization of secondary and spatial structures of proteins . hdms results have proved to be useful in improving prediction of de novo protein structures . recently, it was demonstrated that the direct contact of an amino acid residue with solvent did not guarantee a rapid hd exchange , which pointed to the necessity of taking into account the structurerate relationships . it should be noted that to predict rigid/flexible regions and hd exchange rates, a 3d structure was typically used as the subject matter of, for example, the pebble game/first method . the camp server made for prediction of protection factors solely from an amino acid sequence and previously available at http://wwwalmost.ch.cam.ac.uk/camp.php now does not exist, but in 2008 we had a chance to make predictions for 6 of 14 proteins . the fraction of amino acid residues with the correctly camp-predicted degree of protection was 50. in spite of the fact that camp was a complex neural network-based method, it heavily overpredicted the number of hd exchange-protected residues, and thus, with 97 accuracy of prediction of protected regions, that of unprotected ones was as low as 13. we believe that the absence of protection may be explained mostly by large amplitude of fluctuations of the protein chain regions between packed elements of the secondary structure, which promotes contacts of the fluctuating region with solvent. hence, prediction of unfolded and flexible regions can reveal those prone to large structural fluctuations, and therefore, to hd exchange. some structural aspects of local flexibility are outlined in this work. we concentrated on the possibility of prediction of polypeptide chain protection against hd exchange, which resulted in the presented here server made for prediction of residues protected/unprotected against hd exchange. additionally, we report on the pioneer use of mass spectrometry analysis of hd exchange for free amino acids and good correlation of its results with theoretical data for 10 globular proteins. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
