roary: rapid large-scale prokaryote pan genome analysis a typical prokaryote population sequencing study can now consist of hundreds or thousands of isolates. interrogating these datasets can provide detailed insights into the genetic structure of prokaryotic genomes. we introduce roary, a tool that rapidly builds large-scale pan genomes, identifying the core and accessory genes. roary makes construction of the pan genome of thousands of prokaryote samples possible on a standard desktop without compromising on the accuracy of results. using a single cpu roary can produce a pan genome consisting of 1000 isolates in 4.5 hours using 13 gb of ram, with further speedups possible using multiple processors. availability and implementation: roary is implemented in perl and is freely available under an open source gplv3 license from http://sanger-pathogens.github.io/roarythe term microbial pan genome was first used in 2005 to describe the union of genes shared by genomes of interest . since then, availability of microbial sequencing data has grown exponentially. aligning wholegenome-sequenced isolates to a single reference genome can fail to incorporate non-reference sequences. by using de novo assemblies, non-reference sequences can also be analyzed. microbial organisms can rapidly acquire genes from other organisms that can increase virulence or promote antimicrobial drug resistance . gaining a better picture of the conserved genes of an organism, and the accessory genome, can lead to a better understanding of key processes such as selection and evolution. the construction of a pan genome is np-hard with additional difficulties from real data due to contamination, fragmented assemblies and poor annotation. therefore, any approach must employ heuristics to produce a pan genome (reviewed in). the most complete standalone pan genome tools are panoct , which uses a conserved gene neighborhood in addition to homology to accurately place proteins into orthologous clusters; ls-bsr which uses a preclustering step before running blast to rapidly assign genes to families and pgap which takes annotated assemblies, performs an all-against-all blast, clusters the results and produces a pan genome . panoct and pgap require an all-against-all comparison using blast, with the running time growing approximately quadratically with the size of input data and are computationally infeasible with large datasets. they also have quadratic memory requirements, quickly exceeding the ram available in high performance servers for large datasets. ls-bsr introduces a pre-clustering step that makes it an order of magnitude faster than pgap; however, it is less sensitive . we have developed a method to generate the pan genome of a set of related prokaryotic isolates. it works v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.we evaluated the accuracy, running time and memory usage of roary against three similar standalone pan genome applications. in each case, we performed the analysis using a single processor (amd opteron 6272) and provided 60 gb of ram. we constructed a simulated dataset based on salmonella enterica serovar typhi (s.typhi) ct18 (acc. no. al513382), allowing us to accurately assess the quality of the clustering. we created 12 genomes with 994 identical core genes and 23 accessory genes in varying combinations. all the applications created clusters that are within 1 of the expected results, with roary correctly building all genes as shown in. the overlap of the clusters is virtually identical in all applications except ls-bsr, which over clusters in 2 of cases. in addition, a set of 1000 real annotated assemblies of s.typhi genomes was used. subsets of the data were provided to each application, and the running time and memory usage were noted. the running time of pgap and panoct increases substantially, making only small datasets computationally feasible (and supplementary figs s1s8). roary scales consistently as more samples are added (supplementary figs s1s8) and has been shown to work on a dataset of 1000 isolates as shown in. the memory usage of pgap and panoct also increases rapidly as more samples are added, quickly exceeding 60 gb for even small datasets. the memory usage of roary scales consistently as more samples are added, making it feasible to process large datasets on a standard desktop computer within a few hours. we conducted similar experiments with more diverse datasets including streptococcus pneumonia, staphylococcus aureus and yersinia enterocolitica and the results exhibit similar speed-ups as shown in supplementary figures s7 and s8. the performance in a multi-processor environment iscore is defined as a gene being in at least 99 of samples, which allows for some assembly errors in very large datasets. where there are no results, the applications failed to complete within 5 days or used more than 60 gb of ram. the first column is the number of unique s.typhi genomes in the input set with a mean of 54 contigs over all 1000 assemblies.shown in supplementary figs s11 and s12, with roary achieving a speedup of 3.7x using 8 cpus and gnu parallel .we have shown that roary can construct the pan genomes of large collections of bacterial genomes using a desktop computer, where it was not previously computationally possible with other methods. further speedups in running time are possible by providing more processors to roary. on simulated data, roary is the only application to correctly identify all clusters. this increased accuracy comes from using the context provided by conserved gene neighborhood information. roary scales well on large real datasets, identifying large numbers of core genes, even in the presence of a varied open pan genome.  
