roast: rotation gene set tests for complex microarray experiments motivation: a gene set test is a differential expression analysis in which a p-value is assigned to a set of genes as a unit. gene set tests are valuable for increasing statistical power, organizing and interpreting results and for relating expression patterns across different experiments. existing methods are based on permutation. methods that rely on permutation of probes unrealistically assume independence of genes, while those that rely on permutation of sample are suitable only for two-group comparisons with a good number of replicates in each group. results: we present roast, a statistically rigorous gene set test that allows for gene-wise correlation while being applicable to almost any experimental design. instead of permutation, roast uses rotation, a monte carlo technology for multivariate regression. since the number of rotations does not depend on sample size, roast gives useful results even for experiments with minimal replication. roast allows for any experimental design that can be expressed as a linear model, and can also incorporate array weights and correlated samples. roast can be tuned for situations in which only a subset of the genes in the set are actively involved in the molecular pathway. roast can test for uni-or bi-direction regulation. probes can also be weighted to allow for prior importance. the power and size of the roast procedure is demonstrated in a simulation study, and compared to that of a representative permutation method. finally, roast is used to test the degree of transcriptional conservation between human and mouse mammary stems.a gene set test is a differential expression analysis in which a set of putatively co-regulated genes is treated as a unit. a single p-value is evaluated for the set rather than evaluating individual p-values for individual genes. typically, the gene set is chosen to represent to whom correspondence should be addressed. a particular molecular pathway. in this way, gene set testing can simplify and organize differential expression analyses by focusing attention on larger and more biologically meaningful processes than individual genes. gene set tests are valuable for relating expression patterns across different studies, even across different platforms or species . gene set tests can be statistically more powerful than genewise tests as evidence is accumulated from many genes. there are a number of gene set testing methodologies with different aims. this article is concerned with what might be called focused gene set testing, in which interest focuses on one or more gene sets of special relevant to the experiment at hand . this approach contrasts with what might be called battery gene set testing, in which a large database of gene sets is evaluated on a microarray dataset, to see whether any sets stand out from the others . battery gene set testing was made popular by the gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) method ofand. in focused gene set testing, each set is evaluated on its own terms. in battery gene set testing, sets are evaluated relative to the other sets in the database. for this reason, methods designed for battery testing cannot be applied to individual gene sets. focused gene set tests can be classified into those which evaluate p-values by permuting samples and those which permute genes. methods that permute genes are limited by the fact that they treat genes as if statistically independent. this assumption is usually suspect, particularly when the set is specifically chosen to contain co-regulated genes. moreover, gene permutation p-values are very sensitive to inter-gene correlations, potentially leading to dangerously over-stated statistical significance . this has led some authors to conclude that statistically rigorous testing is only possible by permuting samples . the need to permute samples to obtain p-values severely limits the experimental designs which can be analysed. permutation is basically limited to two-group comparisons, with a moderate to large number of replicates in each group. some authors have adapted permutation to the needs of one-or two-way anova designs.suggested permuting sample labels while holding all covariates fixed except the covariate of interest.permuted sample labels within each level of a blocking factor. however, these stratified permutationroast is the first focused gene set test that correctly allows for inter-gene correlation and gives statistically rigorous p-values for small or complex microarray experimental designs. like, we use rotation to evaluate p-values, but our methodology is for self-contained tests with specially targeted gene sets, whereas they considered competitive tests between a large database of gene sets. roast is the only existing software that could have been used for our mammary stem cell data example. the use of rotation offers many advantages over permutation. it is computationally much faster. it yields exact p-values, so that roast holds its nominal size correctly even for small samples. the number of rotations can be chosen large enough to avoid any problem with granularity of p-values.considered one or two-group t-tests, whereas we take full advantage of the possibilities of linear models. roast is applicable to any experiment that can be analysed using an linear model, i.e. to arbitrarily complex experiments. the gene set can be tested in any contrast between the coefficients, not necessarily a simple comparison between two groups. indeed, our development could easily be extended to test gene sets in two or more contrasts simultaneously. in that case, we would replace our moderated t-statistics with f-statistics. our implementation allows for correlations between rna samples and for array quality weights, assuming that the correlations or weights can be estimated from the entire ensemble of probes on the arrays. in all cases, the test takes advantage of all available residual degrees of freedom. our implementation uses empirical bayes test statistics, which should add additional stability in small samples, especially when the gene set contains only a few genes. rotation theoretically depends on multivariate normality, but simulations with grossly non-normal data shows that roast is page: 2182 21762182  
