genome analysis robust adjustment of sequence tag abundance motivation: the majority of next-generation sequencing technologies effectively sample small amounts of dna or rna that are amplified (i.e. copied) before sequencing. the amplification process is not perfect , leading to extreme bias in sequenced read counts. we present a novel procedure to account for amplification bias and demonstrate its effectiveness in mitigating gene length dependence when estimating true gene expression. results: we tested the proposed method on simulated and real data. simulations indicated that our method captures true gene expression more effectively than classic censoring-based approaches and leads to power gains in differential expression testing, particularly for shorter genes with high transcription rates. we applied our method to an unreplicated arabidopsis rna-seq dataset resulting in disparate gene ontologies arising from gene set enrichment analyses.one cause of technical variation in next-generation sequencing (ngs) studies is amplification bias. fragmented complementary dna is subjected to amplification via polymerase chain reaction in all ngs applications . the amplification process is not perfect, and reads can suffer from amplification bias . this means that there may be extra copies of certain reads, perhaps tens of thousands of extra copies. the typical statistical procedure to correct for this bias is to ignore any duplicate reads by limiting the number of reads starting at the same base to be one read. this censoring procedure, herein referred to as censoring, ignores the possibility of natural read duplication (multiple copies of the same read that is not due to amplification bias) and thus underestimates true read count. for example, in the human liver samples analyzed by, 1015 of the genic bases exhibited duplication, accounting for $30 of the observed reads. although approximately only 1 of the bases exhibited 410 duplicated reads, the number of reads starting at these bases comprised $10 of the total reads. the prevalence of duplicated reads in these samples illustrates the need for statistical methods that are able to correct for amplification bias without needlessly censoring natural duplication. the effects of censoring on gene expression depend primarily on gene length and rate of transcription. under censoring, at most only one read is considered to originate from each nucleotide in a gene. this artificially limits the estimate of gene expression to values less than or equal to gene length. assuming that the sonication process randomly fractionates the messenger rna (mrna), the expected occurrence of natural read duplication decreases as gene length increases for a given level of gene expression. thus, the effects of censoring decrease as gene length increases. conversely, for a given gene, the effects of censoring are more pronounced when gene transcription increases or when the total number of reads increases. in these cases, the sensitivity to detect differences between genes of short length is typically lower than that for longer genes when reads are censored. this length bias can be dramatically reduced when natural read duplication is allowed, as the dependence on gene length is mitigated. we present a novel approach to correct for amplification bias while allowing for natural duplication. the proposed method, robust adjustment of sequence tag abundance (rasta), accurately estimates true tag abundance by separating legitimate reads from incorrectly amplified reads through a novel application of hierarchical clustering. further, it sets appropriate thresholds for the amplified reads through a novel application of the zero-truncated poisson (ztp) distribution. the impact of properly accounting for amplification bias using rasta when testing for differential gene expression testing, both in terms of power and ranking of results, are investigated.the presence of dna methylation typically serves as a transcriptional regulator in eukaryote species; when depleted, gene transcription typically increases . the rasta and no correction approaches yielded many more statistically significant differentially expressed genes than the censoring method (8912, 9366 and 2855 genes, respectively). this increase is in concordance with the biological knowledge that when comparing the two arabidopsis lines, met1-3 is deficient in methylation maintenance that reduces the degree of gene regulation . the differentially expressed genes vary between the three approaches, though nearly all of significant genes yielded by the censoring approach were also found in the other two approaches. in addition, the rasta and uncorrected approaches yielded more significant genes with shorter length than did the censoring approach . the agrigo gsea results based on the three gene lists display a stark contrast in enriched gene ontologies, indicating that appropriate amplification bias control is important for discovery and downstream confirmation studies. in fact, of the top ten significant ontologies produced by each approach, only two are similar between the censoring and rasta, and only six are similar between rasta and no correction.accurately estimating dge, and subsequently differential gene expression, is a primary challenge in next-generation rna sequencing studies. one of the key sources for technical variation between samples, and between or within treatments, is amplification bias. controlling for this bias not only improves the accuracy of dge estimates, it dramatically changes downstream analyses. because confirmatory studies often target the most statistically significant differentially expressed genes (i.e. the genes with the lowest p-values), the ordering of results plays an important role in downstream analyses. as the costs for sequencing decrease, we anticipate that researchers will want a greater number of sequenced reads to more accurately detect differences in expression levels between treatments. this scenario provides some cause for caution, asblindly seeking high read counts invites the possibility of overamplification to achieve a particular observed sequencing depth or coverage. if sequenced reads are systematically over-amplified, as is the case in, the hierarchical clustering used in rasta erroneously classifies many amplified reads as legitimate, therein overestimating true read counts. in these cases, researchers are relegated to only two approaches: digital rna sequencing [drs, (, when the additional amplification is expected before sequencing, and censoring, when the amplification is not planned. drs is a promising biological approach to account for amplification bias, but its use comes at significant cost to the researcher. first, it requires greater sequencing depth than conventional rna-seq studies to effectively sample read/barcode pairs. secondly, drs prohibits barcoding for efficient sequencing. where several samples could be sequenced in the same lane using sample-specific barcodes normally, the drs procedure requires separate lanes for each sample. finally, at least in the escherichia coli data from, the extra time and sequencing costs associated with drs could be eliminated by just using the censoring approach, as both approaches yield similar results in these data. this would be true when reads are systematically over-amplified in general. however, the censoring approach is insensitive to natural read duplication, which in turn results in an underestimation of true dge when reads are actually naturally duplicated. achieving greater sequencing depth can be done correctly, without limiting the choice in amplification bias control procedures, simply by using a larger sample of mrna from subjects. as sequencing depth increases due to larger biological samples of mrna, the occurrence of legitimately duplicated reads will increase. assuming that reasonable amplification is used before sequencing, the proposed rasta approach is well suited to account for amplification bias even in the context of increased natural read duplication. in these settings, the censoring approach will consistently underestimate the true dge; on the other hand, the drs approach is likely to produce similar results to rasta, though with greater restrictions and increased sequencing cost. the clustering and distributional considerations made in rasta assume that the mrna fragmentation process is random, and the amplification process is unbiased to genomic content. these assumptions may be violated under gc amplification bias, differential isoform expression or genomic sonication bias. in these cases, the ztp distribution used in rasta could be replaced by a similarly formed zero-truncated negative binomial (ztnb) distribution. when the ztnb distribution was applied to simulated data and thearabidopsis data, the resulting model fits were similar to the ztp model fits, and the analyses took nearly three times longer when using the ztnb parameterization. however, the negative binomial approach may be more applicable in other datasets and is a straightforward extension to rasta. in addition, the hierarchical clustering and ztp/ztnb estimation procedures used in rasta could serve as a precursor to subsequent isoform discovery and abundance estimation analyses proposed by. as a statistical procedure, rasta costs little to the researcher, as it is computationally efficient and requires no additional sequencing or sequencing reagents. at the same time, the hierarchical clustering and ztp estimation procedures used in rasta are powerful and are able to accurately classify legitimate and erroneous reads when both exist for a given gene.note: the go term and description columns represent the gene ontologies enriched in the significant gene lists when compared with all arabidopsis gene ontologies. the p-values are based on the hypergeometric distribution and are adjusted via fdr under dependence . the resulting enriched ontologies for the censoring and rasta approaches are disparate, whereas the rasta and no correction approach several similar ontologies. these results indicate that the control procedure is highly influential in downstream analyses.  
