gene expression robust biclustering by sparse singular value decomposition incorporating stability selection motivation: over the past decade, several biclustering approaches have been published in the field of gene expression data analysis. despite of huge diversity regarding the mathematical concepts of the different biclustering methods, many of them can be related to the singular value decomposition (svd). recently, a sparse svd approach (ssvd) has been proposed to reveal biclusters in gene expression data. in this article, we propose to incorporate stability selection to improve this method. stability selection is a subsampling-based variable selection that allows to control type i error rates. the here proposed s4vd algorithm incorporates this subsampling approach to find stable biclusters, and to estimate the selection probabilities of genes and samples to belong to the biclusters. results: so far, the s4vd method is the first biclustering approach that takes the cluster stability regarding perturbations of the data into account. application of the s4vd algorithm to a lung cancer microarray dataset revealed biclusters that correspond to coregulated genes associated with cancer subtypes. marker genes for different lung cancer subtypes showed high selection probabilities to belong to the corresponding biclusters. moreover, the genes associated with the biclusters belong to significantly enriched cancer-related gene ontology categories. in a simulation study, the s4vd algorithm outperformed the ssvd algorithm and two other svd-related biclustering methods in recovering artificial biclusters and in being robust to noisy data. availability: r-code of the s4vd algorithm as well as a documentation can be found at http://s4vd.r-forge.r-project.org/. contact: m.sill@dkfz.declustering methods belong to the most commonly used statistical tools in the analysis of high-dimensional datasets. if additional information about the sample class labels is lacking, other types of analysis like supervised classification methods or testing for differentially expressed genes cannot be performed. in this case, unsupervised clustering allows to reveal unknown structures that are to whom correspondence should be addressed. possibly hidden in the gene expression data matrix. these structures may be characterized by groups of genes that are coregulated by a common transcription factor and thus belong to the same pathway or samples that share a similar gene expression pattern. one disadvantage of commonly used clustering algorithms like hierarchical clustering or k-means clustering is that the cluster assignment of objects are based on the complete feature space, e.g. in case of clustering the samples, the resulting clusters are derived with respect to all genes. but groups of genes may only be coregulated within a subset of the samples and samples may share a common gene expression pattern only for a subset of genes. such clusters that exist only in a subspace of the feature space can hardly be detected by these classical one-way clustering algorithms. to find such clusters, other clustering concepts are needed. in the past decade, the concept of biclustering has emerged in the field of gene expression analysis. biclustering which is also known as coclustering or two-way clustering describes the simultaneous clustering of the rows and the columns of a data matrix. the first biclustering algorithm, the so-called block clustering, has been developed by. cheng andproposed the first biclustering algorithm for the analysis of high-dimensional gene expression data. since then, many different biclustering algorithms have been developed. currently, there exists a diverse spectrum of biclustering tools that follow different strategies and algorithmic concepts. among others, popular algorithms are the coupled two-way clustering (ctwc) by, order preserving sub matrix (opsm) algorithm by, the iterative signature algorithm (isa) by, the plaid model byand the improved plaid model , samba by, biclustering by non-smooth non-negative matrix factorization by, the bi-correlation clustering algorithm (bcca) by bhattacharya and de (2009) and factor analysis for bicluster acquisition (fabia;).developed a fast divide-and-conquer algorithm (bimax) and conducted a systematic comparison of different biclustering algorithms.published an article on validation indices for the evaluation of biclustering results and the comparison for biclustering algorithms. comprehensive reviews about the concept of biclustering and the different biclustering approaches have been written byand van. in a more theoretical review,emphasized the mathematical concepts behind several biclustering algorithms and pointed out that the svd represents a capable tool for finding biclusters. furthermore, most existing biclustering algorithms use the svd directly or have a strong association with it. to keep track of the huge diversity, regarding the mathematical properties of the existing biclustering algorithms,suggest to relate new and existing biclustering algorithms to the svd. a major drawback of many biclustering methods is that they rely on random starting seeds and thus are inconsistent and results may vary even when the algorithm is applied to the same dataset. as often in unsupervised clustering it is difficult to judge the biclustering results regarding their stability. for one-way clustering, several resampling approaches to validate the stability of the clustering results are known, e.g. multiscale bootstrap hierarchical clustering and consensus clustering . in case of biclustering, similar methods that take the stability of the results into account are not yet available. recently,proposed a sparse svd (ssvd) method to find biclusters in gene expression data. singular vectors of an svd are interpreted as regression coefficients of a linear regression model. the ssvd algorithm alternately fits penalized regression models to the singular vector pair to obtain a sparse matrix decomposition. the sparseness of the resulting singular vectors strongly depends on the choice of the penalization parameter. in this article, we propose to choose the penalization parameters by stability selection , which is a subsampling procedure that can be applied to penalized regression models to select stable variables. in addition, stability selection offers the possibility to control type i error rates , e.g. the per-family error rate (pfer) or the per-comparison wise error rate (pcer). applying the new combined algorithm, the sparse svd algorithm with nested stability selection (s4vd) to a lung cancer gene expression dataset reveals biclusters that represent lung cancer subtypes characterized by relevant sets of coregulated genes. in a simulation study, we compare the s4vd with the ssvd algorithm as well as the improved plaid model and the isa .in order to demonstrate that the here proposed s4vd algorithm is able to find biologically relevant biclusters, we applied it to a knownthat the heatmap shows only those genes that have been selected in at least one bicluster. the rectangles indicate the genes and samples that correspond to the three biclusters (the rectangle on the left side corresponds to bicluster 1, the two rectangles in the middle correspond to bicluster 2 and the two rectangles on the right side to bicluster 3). lung cancer gene expression dataset . furthermore, to examine the influence of increasing levels of noise regarding the performance of the s4vd algorithm, we performed a simulation study. the s4vd algorithm was compared with the ssvd method, the improved plaid model and the isa . the isa and the plaid model are known to be closely related to the svd.  
