systems biology robust design of microbial strains motivation: metabolic engineering algorithms provide means to optimize a biological process leading to the improvement of a biotechnological interesting molecule. therefore, it is important to understand how to act in a metabolic pathway in order to have the best results in terms of productions. in this work, we present a computational framework that searches for optimal and robust microbial strains that are able to produce target molecules. our framework performs three tasks: it evaluates the parameter sensitivity of the microbial model, searches for the optimal genetic or fluxes design and finally calculates the robustness of the microbial strains. we are capable to combine the exploration of species, reactions, pathways and knockout parameter spaces with the pareto-optimality principle. results: our framework provides also theoretical and practical guidelines for design automation. the statistical cross comparison of our new optimization procedures, performed with respect to currently widely used algorithms for bacteria (e.g. escherichia coli) over different multiple functions, reveals good performances over a variety of biotechnological products.metabolic engineering is becoming central in basic and applied biological fields and requires mathematical models for accurate design purposes. the aim is overproducing desired metabolites by operating on genetic manipulations, as well as identifying novel and non-native synthesis pathways. many organisms are used to analyze the metabolite production potential and identify the metabolic interventions needed to produce the metabolite of interest. thus, strains have been systematically designed through in silico analysis to overproduce target metabolites, such as lycopene , ethanol and isobutanol . the efforts are particularly focused on predicting flux distributions and network capabilities, most notably flux balance analysis (fba) . recent fba models incorporate also information on enzymes and genome, and integrate the relationships among genes, enzymes and reactions. this makes it well suited to studies that characterize many different perturbations such as different substrates or genetic manipulations (knockouts). in the past years, a variety of methods has been implemented to search for the genetic manipulations that optimize a cellular function of interest. these methods, such as optknock , optflux , optgene and gdls , have been tested in fba organism models. however, all these methods require high computational efforts: the execution times grow exponentially or linearly as the number of manipulations allowed in the final designs increases. because of the large number of reactions occurring in the cellular metabolism, the dimension of the solution space is very large and finding genetic manipulations is quite expensive. in this work, we use a multi-objective optimization algorithm to seek the genetic manipulations that optimize multiple cellular functions. the algorithm implements a global search with a heuristic and combinatorial method called genetic design through multi-objective optimization (gdmo). the idea is to use and improve the pareto-optimal solutions. pareto optimality is important to obtain not only a wide range of pareto-optimal solutions but also the best trade-off design, as reported byfor the protein structure prediction problem. moreover, the multi-objective optimization turns out to aid in the automatic design in several biological problems . the area underlying the pareto curve and the first derivative, and in particular the presence of jumps (i.e. quick variations in the objective functions during the optimization procedure), carry valuable biotechnological information. for the first time, we use the -dominance analysis so as to consider all the solutions obtained by gdmo that are dominated with a tolerance by the pareto-optimal solutions. we report that multi-objective optimization provides more insights than single-objective optimization on the capability of these organisms to adapt to the simultaneous presence of different conditions and constraints. we combine multiple-target optimization with knockout parameter space to investigate the most complete available metabolic data and search for the optimal nutrients in strains that allow the maximization or minimization of metabolic targets, namely escherichia coli , geobacter sulfurreducens (additionally, we relate pathways to sensitivity analysis (sa). in modeling, sa is a method used to discover the main inputs, that is the inputs that have a substantial influence on the outputs of the model. in the last years, sa indices have been adopted in systems biology interrogating the reactions space (rosareactions oriented sa) and species space (sosaspecies oriented sa) to find their influence on the outputs of the system . in this work, we perform sa to find the most sensitive pathways in the fba model of e.coli. in particular, we present the novel pathway-oriented sa (posa), to find the genetic manipulations that have the largest influence on the output of the model. unlike other sa methods applied in biological modeling, whose inputs (reactions or species) are valued in a real region of interest, posa is applied when inputs are valued in a binary region of interest. posa investigates the knockout solution space and determines the influence of the pathways on the outputs of an fba model. since our search-and-optimize algorithm provides a set of feasible solutions with different genetic manipulations, it is worth seeking a relationship between the sensitivity indices and the proposed manipulations. in this way, we are able to select only the best manipulations. in particular, thanks to the information provided by posa, we can choose the gdmo knockout strategies that affect genes belonging to insensitive pathways. each point of the pareto front represents a strain, i.e. an e.coli with specific genetic manipulations, and it is also associated with three robustness analysis (ra) indices that we compute. the robustness estimates how robust is a strain obtained by gdmo when it undergoes small perturbations, which can be external (changes in the nutrients) or internal (changes in the metabolism). among the strains proposed by gdmo, we are able to choose the most robust one. in particular, we use three robustness methods to evaluate different components of the model.  
