data and text mining robust rank aggregation for gene list integration and meta-analysis motivation: the continued progress in developing technological platforms, availability of many published experimental datasets, as well as different statistical methods to analyze those data have allowed approaching the same research question using various methods simultaneously. to get the best out of all these alternatives, we need to integrate their results in an unbiased manner. prioritized gene lists are a common result presentation method in genomic data analysis applications. thus, the rank aggregation methods can become a useful and general solution for the integration task. results: standard rank aggregation methods are often ill-suited for biological settings where the gene lists are inherently noisy. as a remedy, we propose a novel robust rank aggregation (rra) method. our method detects genes that are ranked consistently better than expected under null hypothesis of uncorrelated inputs and assigns a significance score for each gene. the underlying probabilistic model makes the algorithm parameter free and robust to outliers, noise and errors. significance scores also provide a rigorous way to keep only the statistically relevant genes in the final list. these properties make our approach robust and compelling for many settings. availability: all the methods are implemented as a gnu r package robustrankaggreg, freely available at the comprehensive r archive network http://cran.r-project.org/.data integration plays an important role in the analysis of highthroughput data. as the outputs of individual experiments can be rather noisy, it is essential to look for findings that are supported by several pieces of evidence to increase the signal and lessen the fraction of false positive findings. the structure of the data and specific research questions largely dictate the methods used in integration. still, some very general techniques for aggregation of genomic data have been proposed such as the bayesian networks and the kernel methods . in this work, we limit ourselves to the situation where all the data sources are represented as prioritized lists of genes. this is to whom correspondence should be addressed. a very natural way to represent a result of a genome-wide study and, therefore, ubiquitous in different types of analyzes. finding a meaningful combination of different data sources is often a non-trivial task. for example, differences in measurement platforms and lab protocols can render gene expression levels incomparable. hence, it might be better to analyze different datasets separately and then aggregate the resulting gene lists. such a strategy has been employed to finding gene co-expression networks and for defining more robust sets of cancer-related genes . another example is the study by, where the authors combined different kinds of data sources to find disease-related genes. for this they ranked genes by similarity to the disease genes in the gene ontology (go), pathways, transcription factor binding sites, sequence and literature and subsequently aggregated these rankings to get the final result.used an analogous methodology to combine results of differential expression analysis. combining preference lists into a single ranking is known as rank aggregation. this problem has a rich history in the fields of information retrieval and theory of social choice . in these contexts, the main focus is on the correctness of the resulting ranking. for example, in elections it is critical that each vote gets counted and represented in the final result. however, finding the best ranking is often computationally very expensive, for example the one that minimizes the misplacement or so-called bubble sort distance, and thus applicable only for a relatively small class of problems. . data from high-throughput genomic experiments usually contains a significant proportion of noise and thus correctness is not right objective for these kinds of studies. for such settings, a good rank aggregation method must be robust enough to find a relevant ranking even in the presence of unreliable or irrelevant inputs. since it possible that all rankings are meaningless in the context of a particular study, the method should also quantify the reliability or significance of the results. finally, the method should be applicable also for partial or top rankings only, since full rankings are often unavailable, e.g. gene lists derived from articles or various tools and databases. in this article, we propose a novel rank aggregation method based on order statistics that achieves all described objectives.were the first to utilize order statistics in rank aggregation. the computational scheme for their method was further optimized by. this algorithm compares the actual rankings with the expected behavior of uncorrelatedpage: 574 573580  
