systems biology robust synthetic gene network design via library-based search method motivation: synthetic biology aims to develop the artificial gene networks with desirable behaviors using systematic method. these networks with desired behaviors could be constructed using diverse biological parts, which may limit the development to complex synthetic gene networks. fortunately, some well-characterized promoter libraries for engineering gene networks are widely available. thus, a synthetic gene network can be constructed by selecting adequate promoters from promoter libraries to achieve the desired behaviors. however, the present promoter libraries cannot be directly applied to engineer a synthetic gene network. in order to efficiently select adequate promoters from promoter libraries for a synthetic gene network, promoter libraries are needed to be redefined based on the dynamic gene regulation. results: based on four design specifications, a library-based search method is proposed to efficiently select the most adequate promoter set from the redefined promoter libraries by a genetic algorithm (ga) to achieve optimal reference tracking design. as the number and size of promoter libraries increase, the proposed method can play an important role in the systematic design of synthetic biology. contact:synthetic biology seeks the improvement of rational design and reprogramming of biological systems based on design principles. during the past decade, synthetic biology had significant progress in designing biological parts. synthetic biologists have assembled these parts into genetic circuits to achieve basic functions such as toggle switches , oscillators , pulse generators , genetic counters , logic evaluators , filters (, b), sensors and cellcell communicators . recently, the design concepts of next-generation gene networks, such as to whom correspondence should be addressed. tunable filters, analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters, adaptive learning networks and protein-based computational circuits, have been proposed to enable the construction of more complex biological systems . with the full understanding of biological parts and modules, synthetic biologists can construct useful next-generation synthetic gene networks with real-world applications in medicine, biotechnology, bioremediation and bioenergy . at present, engineered organisms contain only very simple genetic circuits since there are problems for assembling biological parts into more complex genetic circuits. for example, although standard biological parts can be obtained from the registry of standard biological parts (http://partsregistry.org), only a few parts have measured characteristics describing quantitative behavior in the composed devices . there is still lack of an efficient method to select adequate biological parts from usable libraries to engineer a genetic circuit to track the desired reference trajectory . in this article, we first redefine the presented promoter libraries based on promoter activity, and then a proposed library-based search method is used to efficiently select adequate promoters through their promoter activities in order to engineer a synthetic gene network with desired behaviors despite intrinsic fluctuations and environmental disturbances on the host cell. the proposed librarybased search method can solve the global optimization problem by employing genetic algorithm (ga) . hence, the most adequate promoters from redefined promoter libraries can be efficiently selected to achieve a desired reference trajectory. finally, two design examples are given to illustrate the design procedure of the proposed method in silico. in the future, synthetic biologists can employ the proposed library-based search method to select the most adequate promoter set from redefined promoter libraries to construct a predictable synthetic gene network.in this section, two in silico design examples are given to illustrate the design procedure of the proposed library-based search method. first of all, synthetic biologists need to engineer a genetic circuit topology, and then a dynamic model could be constructed. finally, the proposed library-based search method is used to obtain the most adequate promoter setthe main challenge in genetic circuit design lies in selecting wellmatched genetic parts that combine and produce the desired behavior reliably. some studies have proposed to engineer a synthetic gene network to achieve a desired steady state or an h 2 optimal tracking of a desired oscillator . however, the above design methods need to tune some kinetic parameters to achieve the desired steady or oscillatory state. in fact, tuning intrinsic parameters of biological devices to fit the designed parameter is currently quite a difficult or even unfeasible task for biotechnology. further, it is still hard to select adequate biological parts to implement a desired cellular function with quantitative value. to overcome this problem, synthetic biologists usually create many versions of synthetic circuits with diverse characteristic by directed evolution, point mutation or random combinational of dna components, and the functions of these versions are investigated to engineer the gene circuit with the desired behavior . but when the design of the genetic circuit is complex, the number of mutated versions needed to be created and tested is dramatically increased. hence, these experimental steps become tedious and time consuming due to the significant amount of trail-and-error experiments. our method is to select the existent promoters from promoter libraries and will be more appealing to synthetic biologists in the future. in this study, the present promoter libraries are first redefined based on the dynamic gene regulation from experimental data, and a library-based search method is then introduced to engineer a synthetic gene network with desired behaviors by satisfying four design specifications. through re-characteristic biological part datasheets, we can design a synthetic gene network with a new function in the existing libraries without having to perform a large number of trail-and-error experiments. using ga operators, the library-based search method is used to mimic the realistic gene network evolution under natural selection to fit four design specifications but with much fast evolution needed for synthetic gene networks to achieve their desired behaviors. hence, the proposed method can efficiently engineer a synthetic gene network to perform its desired behaviors despite intrinsic parameter fluctuations and environmental disturbances. in design examples of the synthetic gene network, the most adequate promoter set c is selected to achieve the minimum tracking error between the desired reference trajectory and the observed output (i.e. fluorescence) despite intrinsic parameter fluctuations and environmental disturbances in vivo, as shown in supplementary. it is worth to notice that this method is also useful for constructing a synthetic oscillator . after constructing the synthetic gene network and providing four design specifications, the library-based search method can efficiently select the most adequate promoter set to track the desired trajectory, as shown in supplementary. for the oscillator design in, only 71.4 of the promoter sets selected fromhave oscillatory behavior, and only a few set of these can track the reference trajectory. furthermore, by the proposed method, the design procedure of a synthetic gene network can be simplified for in vivo experiments.in this study, promoter libraries are redefined based on their promoter activities so that they are more suitable for the gene circuit design of synthetic biology. the library-based search method can produce biological insights for how to design a synthetic gene network with prescribed functions. a ga-based search method is proposed to mimic the gene network evolution under natural selection to select adequate promoters to fit four design specifications with more fast evolution speed. the proposed design method to select the most adequate promoter set from promoter libraries will help synthetic biologists to simplify the design procedure of synthetic gene networks and accelerate the progress of synthetic biology. with advances in modern dna synthesis technologies, together with well-defined characteristics of promoters and other standard biological parts, in the future our systematic method could be widely applied for the faster design cycle of synthetic gene networks.  
