gene expression an r package suite for microarray meta-analysis in quality control, differentially expressed gene analysis and pathway enrichment detection with the rapid advances and prevalence of high-throughput genomic technologies, integrating information of multiple relevant genomic studies has brought new challenges. microarray meta-analysis has become a frequently used tool in biomedical research. little effort, however, has been made to develop a systematic pipeline and user-friendly software. in this article, we present metaomics, a suite of three r packages metaqc, metade and metapath, for quality control, differentially expressed gene identification and enriched pathway detection for microarray meta-analysis. metaqc provides a quantitative and objective tool to assist study in-clusion/exclusion criteria for meta-analysis. metade and metapath were developed for candidate marker and pathway detection, which provide choices of marker detection, meta-analysis and pathway analysis methods. the system allows flexible input of experimental data, clinical outcome (casecontrol, multi-class, continuous or survival) and pathway databases. it allows missing values in experimental data and utilizes multi-core parallel computing for fast implementation. it generates informative summary output and visualization plots, operates on different operation systems and can be expanded to include new algorithms or combine different types of genomic data. this software suite provides a comprehensive tool to conveniently implement and compare various genomic meta-analysis pipelines.many high-throughput genomic technologies have advanced dramatically in the past decade. microarray experiment is one example that has evolved into maturity with generally consensus experimental protocols and data analysis strategies. its extensive application in the biomedical field has led to an explosion of gene expression profiling studies publicly available. meta-analysis methods for combining multiple microarray studies have been widely applied to increase statistical power and provide validated conclusions . in this article, we present the metaomics software suite that contains three unified r packagesmetaqc, metade and metapathfor systematic microarray meta-analysis pipeline. the metaqc package provides a quantitative and objective tool for determining the inclusion/exclusion criteria for meta-analysis. metade contains many state-of-the-art genomic meta-analysis methods to detect differentially expressed genes. finally, the metapath package provides a unified meta-analysis framework and inference to detect enriched pathways associated with outcome.  
