romulus: robust multi-state identification of transcription factor binding sites from dnase-seq data motivation: computational prediction of transcription factor (tf) binding sites in the genome remains a challenging task. here, we present romulus, a novel computational method for identifying individual tf binding sites from genome sequence information and cell-typespecific experimental data, such as dnase-seq. it combines the strengths of previous approaches, and improves robust-ness by reducing the number of free parameters in the model by an order of magnitude. results: we show that romulus significantly outperforms existing methods across three sources of dnase-seq data, by assessing the performance of these tools against chip-seq profiles. the difference was particularly significant when applied to binding site prediction for low-information-content motifs. our method is capable of inferring multiple binding modes for a single tf, which differ in their dnase i cut profile. finally, using the model learned by romulus and chip-seq data, we introduce binding in closed chromatin (bcc) as a quantitative measure of tf pioneer factor activity. uniquely, our measure quantifies a defining feature of pioneer factors, namely their ability to bind closed chromatin. availability and implementation: romulus is freely available as an r package at http://github.com/ ajank/romulus.eukaryotic transcription is an extremely complex process, controlled by transcription factor (tf) binding to regulatory elements in multiple locations in the genome. the traditional method of analyzing individual active regulatory elements in the genome involves the digestion by dnase i and subsequent identification of regions where tfs are bound to the dna fragment and protect the dna from degradation by the enzyme. these protected sites, or tf footprints, can be identified on a large scale by a more recent protocol, dnase i digestion followed by high-throughput sequencing (dnase-seq) . centipede was the first algorithm aimed at combining sequence information with chromatin state data to identify the sites where a particular tf was bound in the genome. this method relied on the presence of a dna sequence motif at candidate binding sites. a logistic regression model allowed for multiple types of prior information to be incorporated, e.g. position weight matrix (pwm) score, distance to the nearest transcription start site and sequence evolutionary conservation. the posterior component consisted of a combination of negative binomial and multinomial positional models for each type of experimental data, such as dnase-seq or histone modification chip-seq. overall, the main strength of v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.in this study, we comprehensively compared the predictive performance of three tools aimed at predicting tf binding sites from dnase-seq data. two of them, centipede and wellington, used completely different approaches to address this problem. in our method proposed here, romulus, we combined the benefits of both of the two other tools, and showed that romulus significantly outperformed centipede and wellington, regardless of the dnase-seq protocol used (single hit or double hit). the advantage of romulus was observed especially when applied to binding site prediction for low-information-content motifs. it is likely that romulus gained in robustness and predictive power by limiting the number of free parameters in the multinomial component to 2 (motif width 9). in contrast, centipede used 2 (motif width 400) 1 free parameters in the multinomial component, and wellington does not estimate any model parameters from the data.  
