roundup 2.0: enabling comparative genomics for over 1800 genomes roundup is an online database of gene orthologs for over 1800 genomes, including 226 eukaryota, 1447 bacteria, 113 archaea and 21 viruses. orthologs are inferred using the reciprocal smallest distance algorithm. users may query roundup for single-linkage clusters of orthologous genes based on any group of genomes. annotated query results may be viewed in a variety of ways including as clusters of orthologs and as phylogenetic profiles. genomic results may be downloaded in formats suitable for functional as well as phylogenetic analysis, including the recent orthoxml standard. in addition, gene ids can be retrieved using fasta sequence search. all source code and orthologs are freely available. availability: http://roundup.orthologs are genes from different organisms that descend from a single ancestral gene in the most recent common ancestor . in comparative genomics, they are used to infer the function of novel genes from the function of well-studied ones, to construct phylogenies and explore the evolution of genes and species, and to study sequence conservation and change. they are also valuable in analyzing gene networks, studying gene gain and loss, and finding genes in model organisms that correspond to human disease genes . advances in high-throughput genomic sequencing have made it possible to produce many datasets in a relatively short time period. for example, from 2006 to 2011, the number of complete proteomes listed in uniprotkb , a repository of annotated protein sequences, has increased from around 300 to over 2500. to overcome the engineering challenges of computing and publishing orthologs for such a large number of genomes, we redesigned the comparative genomics tool, roundup , to scale with the rate of genome sequencing and to enable increasingly more sophisticated comparative genomics analyses. roundup 2.0 contains orthology data for over 1800 genomes, providing one of the largest diversities among similar  
