genetics and population analysis r/qtl: high-throughput multiple qtl mapping motivation: r/qtl is free and powerful software for mapping and exploring quantitative trait loci (qtl). r/qtl provides a fully comprehensive range of methods for a wide range of experimental cross types. we recently added multiple qtl mapping (mqm) to r/qtl. mqm adds higher statistical power to detect and disentangle the effects of multiple linked and unlinked qtl compared with many other methods. mqm for r/qtl adds many new features including improved handling of missing data, analysis of 10 000 s of molecular traits, permutation for determining significance thresholds for qtl and qtl hot spots, and visualizations for cistrans and qtl interaction effects. mqm for r/qtl is the first free and open source implementation of mqm that is multi-platform, scalable and suitable for automated procedures and large genetical genomics datasets. availability: r/qtl is free and open source multi-platform software for the statistical language r, and is made available under the gplv3 license. r/qtl can be installed from http://www.rqtl.org/. r/qtl queries should be directed at the mailing list, see http://www.rqtl.org/list/.r/qtl is an extensible, interactive environment for the mapping of quantitative trait loci (qtl) in experimental crosses. it is implemented as an add-on package for the freely available and widely used statistical language/software r (r development core). since its introduction, r/qtl has become a reference implementation with an extensive guide on qtl mapping . r/qtl development is continuous, with input from multiple collaborators and users. we have introduced a full testing environment with regression testing, updated the license to the gpl version 3 and hosted the source code repository on github, which gives r/qtl software development high visibility and transparency. the development of r/qtl reflects trends in quantitative genetics, in particular the use of larger datasets, larger calculations and requirements for controlling the false discovery rate (fdr). these developments are partly driven by high-throughput genetical genomicsthe name coined for the study of gene expression qtl (eqtl;), metabolite qtl (mqtl) and protein qtl (pqtl).mqm for r/qtl is a significant addition to the qtl mappers toolbox. r/qtl provides the user with the most frequently used statistical analysis methods: single-marker analysis, interval mapping, haley knott regression , cim and mqm . mqm has improved handling of missing data and allows more powerful and precise detection of qtl, compared with many other methods. not only is this new implementation of mqm available in the statistical r environment, which allows scripting for pipe-lined setups, but it is also highly scalable through parallelization and paves the way for high-throughput qtl analysis. with mqm, r/qtl is a free and high-performance comprehensive qtl mapping toolbox for the analysis of experimental populations. r/qtl now includes permutation strategies for determining thresholds page: 2992 29902992  
