structural bioinformatics rrdistmaps: a ucsf chimera tool for viewing and comparing protein distance maps motivation: contact maps are a convenient method for the structural biologists to identify structural features through two-dimensional simplification. binary (yes/no) contact maps with a single cutoff distance can be generalized to show continuous distance ranges. we have developed a ucsf chimera tool, rrdistmaps, to compute such generalized maps in order to analyze pairwise variations in intramolecular contacts. an interactive utility, rrdistmaps, visualizes conformational changes, both local (e.g. binding-site residues) and global (e.g. hinge motion), between unbound and bound proteins through distance patterns. users can target residue pairs in rrdistmaps for further navigation in chimera. the interface contains the unique features of identifying long-range residue motion and aligning sequences to simultaneously compare distance maps.the rapid improvement of technology in recent decades has enhanced our knowledge of protein structure, as visualization software has revolutionized our understanding of molecular mechanisms. recent applications such as cmview examine the nature of structural differences or changes in proteins through the use of residueresidue (rr) contact maps . rr contact maps are powerful two-dimensional (2d) representations of protein 3d structure that plot patterns of spatial interactions, e.g. pairs of amino acids with a-carbons 8 a apart . 2d contact maps provide a complementary view to 3d molecular visualization as they are unaffected by rotation or translation and can be easily compared and superimposed. contact maps are typically shown as square plots with markers denoting interactions between residues; residue pairs that fall outside of the interaction threshold are completely unmarked. however, longer-range interactions may be used to identify largerscale motions such as hinge movements. instead of using a single cutoff threshold for contacts, displaying a color-coded distance map can help users visualize longer-range interactions. as an extension to the molecular visualization application ucsf chimera , we developed rrdistmaps, a tool to interactively compute and display distance maps for individual proteins and to compare the distance maps of pairs of similar proteins.in the legend marks the distances for which the color-coding is applied; residue pairs whose rr distances fall outside of the rectangle are displayed in dark gray. when only short distances are used for color-coding, the distance maps are effectively contact maps. for multi-protein comparison, rrdistmaps identifies corresponding amino acids in the different chains using sequence alignment. this limits use of proteins with sequences similar enough to be aligned correctly, and without topological rearrangements. in general, however, distance map comparisons are only appropriate for proteins with the same basic architecture. for two chains, rrdistmaps uses the needlemanwunsch algorithm ; for more than two chains, rrdistmaps uses muscle via an online rbvi web service . in both cases, the sequence alignment is displayed using chimeras multalign viewer tool. only positions in the sequence alignment where amino acids are present for all chains are used. for corresponding amino acid pairs, the average a-carbon distance and standard deviation are computed using values from all chains. the user can choose to display only the average distance or standard deviation, but the most useful display is the plot which color-codes on both attributes, with residue pairs with high standard deviation shown in color and low in grayscale. as with the singlechain interface, the user can manipulate both the distance map and the color-coding legend using the mouse.  
