genome analysis rseg—an r package to optimize segmentation of snp array data the use of high-density snp arrays for investigating copy number alterations in clinical tumor samples, with intra tumor heterogeneity and varying degrees of normal cell contamination, imposes several problems for commonly used segmentation algorithms. this calls for flexibility when setting thresholds for calling gains and losses. in addition, sample normalization can induce artifacts in the copy-number ratios for the non-changed genomic elements in the tumor samples. results: we present an open source r package, rseg, which allows the user to define sample-specific thresholds to call gains and losses. it also allows the user to correct for normalization artifacts.affymetrix snp arrays have been used to estimate genomic copy numbers in tumor samples . different methods have been developed to segment the genome into contiguous regions that share the same copy number on average. these include cbs, glad and more recently ultrasome . ultrasome is the fastest method and gives similar output as cbs. however, ultrasome does not allow to correct for artifacts induced by the normalization of the arrays. in fact, when there is an imbalance between gains and losses, commonly used normalization methods like quantile and invariant set normalization introduce a systematic shift in the copy numbers estimated for normal regions so that they appear as if they have an altered copy number. that is, if a sample contains only two different copy numbers, then normalization will make the regions with no change in copy number appear as being slightly lost or gained (cf patient a in). while this problem could potentially be overcome using a different normalization procedure, an alternative would be to use the intensities distribution to correct for it. generally, segmentation algorithms apply a common threshold for calling gains and losses for all investigated samples. however, when applied to tumor samples this often imposes a problem, as several to whom correspondence should be addressed. sample specific factors like the level of normal cell contamination, intra tumor heterogeneity, and technical noise affects the resolution with which different copy number levels can be discerned. this calls for an option to set sample specific thresholds. in this article, we describe an r package that guides the user through the segmentation of each sample. histograms of the log ratio copy number between a tumor and its matched germline sample can distinguish between different copy numbers (represented by different peakscf). therefore, by modeling each peak and by selecting the peak representing segments with no copy number change and its neighbors, correction for the normalization induced copy number and optimal thresholds for calling gains and losses can be statistically defined.  
