rseqc: quality control of rna-seq experiments motivation: rna-seq has been extensively used for transcriptome study. quality control (qc) is critical to ensure that rna-seq data are of high quality and suitable for subsequent analyses. however, qc is a time-consuming and complex task, due to the massive size and versatile nature of rna-seq data. therefore, a convenient and comprehensive qc tool to assess rna-seq quality is sorely needed. results: we developed the rseqc package to comprehensively evaluate different aspects of rna-seq experiments, such as sequence quality, gc bias, polymerase chain reaction bias, nucleotide composition bias, sequencing depth, strand specificity, coverage uniformity and read distribution over the genome structure. rseqc takes both sam and bam files as input, which can be produced by most rna-seq mapping tools as well as bed files, which are widely used for gene models. most modules in rseqc take advantage of r scripts for visualization, and they are notably efficient in dealing with large bam/sam files containing hundreds of millions of alignments. availability and implementation: rseqc is written in python and c. source code and a comprehensive users manual are freely available atdeep transcriptome sequencing (rna-seq) provides massive and valuable information concerning all transcribed elements in the genome. using rna-seq, researchers are able to, for instance, profile gene expression, interrogate alternative splicing, identify novel transcripts and detect aberrant transcripts and coding variants. rna-seq experiments should ideally be able to directly identify and quantify all rna species, regardless of their size or frequency. however, current rna-seq protocols still possess several intrinsic biases and limitations, such as nucleotide composition bias, gc bias and pcr bias. these biases directly affect the accuracy of many rna-seq applications and can be directly checked from raw sequences using tools like fastqc. however, these raw sequence-based metrics are not sufficient to ensure the usability of rna-seq data; other rna-seq-specific quality control (qc) metrics, such  
