gene expression rseqtools: a modular framework to analyze rna-seq data using compact, anonymized data summaries the advent of next-generation sequencing for functional genomics has given rise to quantities of sequence information that are often so large that they are difficult to handle. moreover, sequence reads from a specific individual can contain sufficient information to potentially identify and genetically characterize that person, raising privacy concerns. in order to address these issues, we have developed the mapped read format (mrf), a compact data summary format for both short and long read alignments that enables the anonymization of confidential sequence information, while allowing one to still carry out many functional genomics studies. we have developed a suite of tools (rseqtools) that use this format for the analysis of rna-seq experiments. these tools consist of a set of modules that perform common tasks such as calculating gene expression values, generating signal tracks of mapped reads and segmenting that signal into actively transcribed regions. moreover, the tools can readily be used to build customizable rna-seq workflows. in addition to the anonymization afforded by mrf, this format also facilitates the decoupling of the alignment of reads from downstream analyses. availability and implementation: rseqtools is implemented in c and the source code is available at http://rseqtools.the advent of next-generation sequencing technologies has revolutionized the study of genomes and transcriptomes. in particular, the application of deep sequencing approaches to transcriptome profiling (rna-seq) is increasingly becoming the method of choice for studying the transcriptional landscape of cells . typically, the first step in this analysis is the alignment of thethe resulting mrf files can be divided in two files: one with the alignment only and another with the corresponding sequence reads. the read identifiers provide a mapping between the two files. then, several modules perform the downstream analyses independently from the mapping step, such as expression quantification, visualization of the mapped read and the calculation of annotation statistics, etc. other tools have been developed based on this framework to perform more sophisticated analyses such as transcript assembly, isoform quantification (iqseq, http://rnaseq.gersteinlab.org/iqseq), fusion transcript identification (fusionseq, http://rnaseq.gersteinlab.org/fusionseq), as well as aggregation and correlation of signal tracks (act, http://act.gersteinlab.org).  
