genome analysis rsvsim: an r/bioconductor package for the simulation of structural variations rsvsim is a tool for the simulation of deletions, insertions, inversions, tandem duplications and translocations of various sizes in any genome available as fasta-file or data package in r. the structural variations can be generated randomly, based on user-supplied genomic coordinates or associated to various kinds of repeats. the package further comprises functions to estimate the distribution of structural variation sizes from real datasets. availability: rsvsim is implemented in r and available at http://www. bioconductor.org. a vignette with detailed descriptions of the functions and examples is included.next-generation sequencing (ngs) has accelerated the detection of (large) deletions, insertions, inversions, tandem duplications and translocations tremendously during the past years . various methods dealing with the comparison, annotation, visualization and especially the detection of structural variations (svs) were published . the simulation of svs is a powerful, quick and inexpensive approach to assess their performance and correctness. evaluating the performance of programs for sv detection, for instance, requires a large number of validated variations of various types with high-breakpoint precision. depending on the scope of the application, certain parts of a genome might be of special interest like coding regions, a subset of genes or regions of low complexity. variant detection from real data may not always comply with these requirements because of limitations of the experiment design, few validated svs or low-breakpoint resolution. a simulation, however, can generate a base exact ground truth consisting of (almost) any number of svs, which can then be used to test the sensitivity and precision of sv detections . the output of the algorithm can be compared with the set of simulated svs to see not only how many svs were correctly identified but also the svs missed and falsely predicted because of limitations of the algorithms rather than laboratory issues. a typical workflow for the assessment of an sv algorithm for sv detection consists of sv simulation ) read simulation ) sv algorithm ) evaluation a fasta-file with the simulated, rearranged genome can be used by most read simulators (e.g.) to generate ngs datasets from various sequencing platforms, which can then be used to assess an sv algorithm. a comprehensive simulation of different sv types of various sizes combined with a variety of read simulations with different numbers of reads, insert-sizes (for paired-end reads) or read lengths can give valuable information for the design of sequencing experiments. currently, most publications of sv detection methods restrict the sv simulation to deletions or insertions and implement a known set of svs, taken, for example, from studies of the 1000 genome project or venters genome or a random set into a reference genome . fusim is a more sophisticated approach, but specialized on the simulation of fusion transcripts for rna-seq analysis. to our knowledge, rsvsim is the first toolkit that covers a wide range of svs, which are detectable by dna-seq data, and that incorporates knowledge about size and formation mechanisms of svs for realistic modelling of their breakpoints.the r package rsvsim provides functionalities to simulate the five common types of structural variations within any kind of genome. it enables the user to adapt the simulation to the scope of his own application or experiments in terms of type, size and position of every single sv. artificially rearranged genomes  
