structural bioinformatics rs-webpredictor: a server for predicting cyp-mediated sites of metabolism on drug-like molecules regioselectivity-webpredictor (rs-webpredictor) is a server that predicts isozyme-specific cytochrome p450 (cyp)-mediated sites of metabolism (soms) on drug-like molecules. predictions may be made for the promiscuous 2c9, 2d6 and 3a4 cyp isozymes, as well as cyps 1a2, 2a6, 2b6, 2c8, 2c19 and 2e1. rs-webpredictor is the first freely accessible server that predicts the regioselectivity of the last six isozymes. server execution time is fast, taking on average 2s to encode a submitted molecule and 1s to apply a given model, allowing for high-throughput use in lead optimization projects. availability: rs-webpredictor is accessible for free use atthe cytochrome p450s (cyps) are a family of heme-thiolate proteins that metabolize 90 of fda-approved drugs . most cyps are regioselective, strongly favouring the oxidation of certain sites of metabolism (soms) over others. knowledge of the soms, the specific atom(s) of a molecule that are oxidized by specific cyp isozymes, is valuable information for early-stage lead design and optimization. armed with this knowledge, medicinal chemists can make rational modifications to a candidate lead in order to change its cyp-mediated metabolism. one way to use regioselectivity knowledge to perform rational lead optimization is to increase drug bioavailability based upon individual cypexpression profile while retaining patient uniform end-target efficacy. unfortunately, determining the isozyme-specific soms of early-stage lead candidates through experimental means is timeand resource-intensive, and not feasible for application to every candidate. consequently, several groups in recent years developed in silico som prediction models . regioselectivity-predictor (rs-predictor) is an algorithm for creating accurate isozyme-specfic som prediction models from any set of known substrates and metabolites . in prior work, we manually curated the public literature to identify 680 cyp substrates and metabolites distributed across nine isozymes, the largest collection of cytochrome p450 metabolite data released to date. rs-predictor was able to identify experimentally observed som(s) within the top two rank positions for substrate sets of each cyp isozyme with high levels of cross-validated accuracy: cyp isozyme (number of substrates, accuracy), 1a2 (271, 83.0), 2a6 (105, 85.7), 2b6 (151, 82.1), 2c8 (142, 83.8), 2c9 (226, 84.5), 2c19 (218, 86.2), 2d6 (270, 85.9), 2e1 (145, 82.8), 3a4 (475, 82.3). these accuracies were significantly higher than those of commercial methods stardrop (78.0, 75.3, 74.1) from optibrium and the p450 som prediction workflow (72.1, 68.1, 76.4) offered by schrodingerschrodinger for 2c9, 2d6 and 3a4 sets, respectively. although there have been a number of som prediction models for these three isozymes, rs-predictor offers the first ligand-based models for the remaining six isozymes. the full details of the rs-predictor algorithm have been described in prior work and are summarized here. rs-predictor calibrates an isozyme-specific regioselectivity qsar from a set of known isozyme substrates and metabolites by treating each substrate as an individual competition between candidate soms. each som is represented by 148 topological descriptorsis the som in an aromatic ring, what is the size of the ring, what is the distribution of different atom types 1, 2, 3 and 4 bond lengths away from the given som, etc.and a smartcyp-derived reactivity descriptor. smartcyp is an open-source ligand-based method that encoded density functional theory-derived transition state energies of molecule substructures with an isozyme non-specific cyp heme into a reactivity look-up table . next, som prediction models are created using mirank (multiple-instance ranking), a generalization of support vector machines that is specifically designed to optimize the ranking of observed soms over non-observed soms on a substrate by substrate basis . it is important to note that these models do not predict whether the given molecule is metabolized by a particular isozyme; they predict the exact location on that molecule that would be oxidized by that cyp if the molecule is a substrate for that particular isozyme. this limitation is shared by all other som prediction models, a comprehensive review of which was made by. still, the high prediction accuracies of rs-predictor to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2012. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com models, and the fact that they encapsulate the largest collection of cyp substrate and metabolite information publicly available, make free access to predictions made by them a valuable contribution to the scientific and pharmaceutical communities.  
