rtfbsdb: an integrated framework for transcription factor binding site analysis transcription factors (tfs) regulate complex programs of gene transcription by binding to short dna sequence motifs. here, we introduce rtfbsdb, a unified framework that integrates a database of more than 65 000 tf binding motifs with tools to easily and efficiently scan target gen-ome sequences. rtfbsdb clusters motifs with similar dna sequence specificities and integrates rna-seq or pro-seq data to restrict analyses to motifs recognized by tfs expressed in the cell type of interest. our package allows common analyses to be performed rapidly in an integrated environment. availability and implementation: rtfbsdb available at (https://github.com/danko-lab/rtfbs_db).transcription factors (tfs) regulate complex programs of gene expression by modulating the rates of several steps early in transcription. tfs bind degenerate dna sequence motifs, typically 320 bp, located in regulatory regions known as promoters, enhancers and insulators. identifying the coordinates of tf binding motifs within the genome is a crucial step in many genomic analyses. however, motif discovery is a challenging computational problem owing to the short lengths and high degeneracy of tf binding motifs. using experimentally derived sources of tf binding is one strategy to improve accuracy by constraining the motif discovery problem to known binding sequences. this strategy requires extensive knowledge about the dna sequence specificities of tfs, which have historically been time-consuming to measure experimentally. recently, high throughput experimental approaches have allowed the systematic discovery of motifs for thousands of tfs . moreover, strategies to impute binding motifs using tf amino-acid sequences extend these resources to most species with a sequenced genome . these developments make the use of known tf binding motifs a powerful strategy in many common applications. here, we introduce rtfbsdb, an open-source pipeline for transcription factor binding site (tfbs) identification and analysis, which integrates experimentally derived tf binding data for thousands of tfs. unlike other tfbs identification tools, rtfbsdb integrates high-throughput measurements of gene expression for tfs associated with each motif. for downstream tfbs scanning and identification, rtfbsdb uses the rtfbs package (peterson et al., unpublished), a highly flexible and efficient implementation of many tfbs scanning tasks. many common and complex analyses can be solved by rtfbsdb in as little as a single line of r. we demonstrate rtfbsdb using genomic data from the encode project.  
