rubioseq: a suite of parallelized pipelines to automate exome variation and bisulfite-seq analyses motivation: rubioseq has been developed to facilitate the primary and secondary analysis of re-sequencing projects by providing an integrated software suite of parallelized pipelines to detect exome variants (single-nucleotide variants and copy number variations) and to perform bisulfite-seq analyses automatically. rubioseqs variant analysis results have been already validated and published. availability: http://rubioseq.sourceforge.net/.primary and secondary data analyses of next-generation sequencing studies (ngs) consist of a set of successive stages that are repetitively and routinely executed using a wide collection of tools (e.g. quality control tools, read aligners, variant callers and so forth). these tools have different origins and usually lack of straight interoperability. this issue has driven computational biologists to demand intuitive, efficient and integrated pipelines to facilitate routine ngs analysis and improve the reproducibility of the results. several remarkable efforts have been carried out in this sense. prominent examples include narwhal, a recent proposal to automate illuminas primary analysis and hugeseq, a powerful pipeline designed to cover primary and secondary analysis of singlenucleotide variant (snvs) and copy number variation (cnv) experiments . hugeseq uses fastq files as input to detect and annotate genomic variants running gatk and samtools; however, the current version of hugeseq does not support either sample quality control tools or bisulfite-seq (bs-seq) analysis methods. galaxy, a large and flexible web-based platform also provides an ngs toolbox . despite its potential, galaxys ngs tools are still in and do not support either cnv or bs-seq analysis. we present rubioseq, an automated and parallelized software suite for primary and secondary analysis of illumina and solid experiments. using standard input and output file formats and an intuitive xml configuration file, the application offers an integrated framework to run parallelized pipelines for variant detection in exome enrichment and methylation studies. rubioseq results have been experimentally validated and accepted for publication .  
