antarna: ant colony-based rna sequence design motivation: rna sequence design is studied at least as long as the classical folding problem. although for the latter the functional fold of an rna molecule is to be found, inverse folding tries to identify rna sequences that fold into a function-specific target structure. in combination with rna-based biotechnology and synthetic biology, reliable rna sequence design becomes a crucial step to generate novel biochemical components. results: in this article, the computational tool antarna is presented. it is capable of compiling rna sequences for a given structure that comply in addition with an adjustable full range objective gc-content distribution, specific sequence constraints and additional fuzzy structure constraints. antarna applies ant colony optimization meta-heuristics and its superior performance is shown on a biological datasets. availability and implementation:engineered rna molecules are of growing importance with applications ranging from biotechnology to medicine and synthetic biology. in biotechnology, several applications use engineered rnas as scaffolds to optimize reactions or to deliver drugs. for example, rna aptamers can serve as protein-docking sites within scaffolds to organize intracellular reactions . or the bacteriophage phi29 dna packaging motor can be used to generate rna nanoparticles for delivering therapeutic compounds . however, biotechnology applications are not restricted to scaffold design, but often involve intriguing rna-based pathways. for instance, penchovsky and breaker (2005) computationally designed ribozymes to sense oligonucleotides. last but not least, the application of the crispr/cas9 system for genetic engineering is emerging and complementing the well established rnai technology. this requires the design of specific rna-molecules, see the review of terns and terns (2014). another important and growing area is rna synthetic biology, as reviewed in . design examples include rna-based regulators of translation , a general, rna-based framework for microbial engineering on the level of dna, protein or mrna , srna-based cellular circuits , the improvement of functional srnas by scaffold engineering or the de novo design of synthetic, transcriptional riboswitches . many of these approaches use rational design, based on a secondary structure model of the targeted rna molecule, and an increasing number of applications use computational methods for filtering the initial design. in principle, this is an instance of the inverse folding problem, which consists of finding a sequence that fits some secondary structure constraints. rnainverse pursues seed sequence generation with a subsequent optimization based on local search. the objective function is either to v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.within this work we present antarna, which solves the rna inverse folding problem for given secondary structures under additional side constraints using an aco approach. besides the explicit target structure features, specific target gc-content values, sequence constraints, and newly developed implicit structural constraints are incorporated and presented. target gc-content constraints allow to request sequences with a desired specific gc-content or from arbitrary controlled gc-content distributions, while the latter is unique to antarna. the results show that the tool produces on averageantarna: ant colony-based rna sequence designsequences that exactly show the targeted gc-content, even when additional sequence constraints are enforced. the mfe-structures of the designed sequences respect the provided structural constraints for almost all targets tested. this holds for a broad range of targeted gc values with and without sequence constraints. the program was optimized, compared and evaluated on various sets of constraints derived from the rfam database. the assessment revealed the superior quality of antarna produced sequences over incarnation and rnaifold. the prime feature of a sequence and its biological functionality is the structure. thus, it should be the central objective for sequence design tools. incarnation does not achieve this objective and produced on average high structural distances in our experiments. although it was tailored to enable specific gc-content optimization, it also shows poor performance in fulfilling the targeted gc values. only its high-sequence diversity partially outperforms other compared methods. incarnation applies a two stage-optimization approach that first produces gcoptimized seed sequences that are subsequently optimized towards the target structure by rnainverse. thus, often the gc-unaware rnainverse mfe-structure optimization counters the gcoptimization. in contrast, the sequences designed by rnaifold and antarna show both very good structural as well as gc compliance. although qualitative comparable on the level of constraint violation, the tools show significant differences concerning reliability and sequence diversity. rnaifold is not always producing sequence solutions within the allowed runtime. this might be due to the used constraint programming techniques and results in missing sequence designs for many constraint sets. in contrast, antarna is based on aco and applies a parallel optimization of all constraints. thus, it always reports a solution sequence with no qualitative loss. furthermore, antarna produces more diverse sequence sets compared with rnaifold, which shows a trend to non-diverse subsequences. summarizing, the capability of antarna to reliably produce highly diverse sequences for a given structure, coupled with the precise gc targeting, will help to explore the sequence space for rna design problems. the introduced implicit structure constraints enable the user to define parts of the structure in a very vague way. this can be of use when the structural context of a specific design target is less important as long as it does not interact with the important and maybe explicitly defined structure domains. the improvement and application of the fuzzy constraint concept (e.g. details about position or constraint type specific weighting) is a focus of our ongoing work. in total, the results are promising and encourage further work, which will include runtime optimization e.g. based on parallelization approaches. in addition, the implicit structure constraint is of great use in future work when modeling multi-structure constraints or pseudo-knot structures. furthermore, improving and developing new internal scoring mechanisms and evaluation patterns is subject of ongoing work, such that the tool can also handle more complex input structures and their constraints in an adequate way. this inevitably results in potentially new parameter setups for which we have to update our understanding of their synergistic effects on antarna.  
