sequence analysis saap-rrbs: streamlined analysis and annotation pipeline for reduced representation bisulfite sequencing reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (rrbs) is a cost-effective approach for genome-wide methylation pattern profiling. analyzing rrbs sequencing data is challenging and specialized alignment/mapping programs are needed. although such programs have been developed, a comprehensive solution that provides researchers with good quality and analyzable data is still lacking. to address this need, we have developed a streamlined analysis and annotation pipeline for rrbs data (saap-rrbs) that integrates read quality assessment/clean-up, alignment, methylation data extraction, annotation, reporting and visualization. this package facilitates a rapid transition from sequencing reads to a fully annotated cpg methylation report to biological interpretation. availability and implementation: saap-rrbs is freely available to non-commercial users at the web site http://ndc.mayo.edu/mayo/ research/biostat/stand-alone-packages.cfm. contact:dna methylation is one of the major epigenetic control mechanisms for gene regulation, cellular differentiation, embryogenesis, x chromosome inactivation, genomic imprinting and tumorigenesis . reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (rrbs) has been demonstrated to be a cost-effective approach to analyze dna methylation pattern in cpg dense regions of the genome . rrbs data analysis is challenging due to the bisulfitemediated c to t conversion. several specific rrbs sequence read alignment programs have been developed, which include bsmap/rrbsmap , bismark , bsseeker and illuminas bisulfite sequencing software (http://www.illumina.com/ applications/epigenetics.ilmn). each aligner uses a different strategy for bisulfite-converted read mapping. bismark and bsseeker to whom correspondence should be addressed. convert reference genome (c to t for + and g to a for strand) and reads (c to t) for alignment. illuminas pipeline does not align to the whole genome; rather, digitally digested mspi fragments are generated as multi-fasta files, which then undergo c/t and g/a conversion. bsmap/rrbsmap does not need the reference genome preparation step but everything is handled internally using bitwise masking. in addition to alignment, other steps are equally important to get high-quality and analyzable data for downstream analyses. the mspi digestion, bisulfite treatment and subsequent size selection tend to generate a higher portion of low-quality or adaptercontaminated reads; accurate extraction of cpg methylation status from alignment is not implemented in alignment programs or with limited function and more importantly, cpg methylation is highly context specific in the genome and it would be impossible to interpret the data without annotation. herein, we present a comprehensive workflow that combines all these steps into a single application that can be run on a high-performance computing cluster or on an individual workstation. the workflow accommodates aligned bam files from different aligners or conduct annotation alone. moreover, the workflow can be easily extended to analyze whole genome bisulfite sequencing.  
