structural bioinformatics salign: a web server for alignment of multiple protein sequences and structures accurate alignment of protein sequences and/or structures is crucial for many biological analyses, including functional annotation of proteins, classifying protein sequences into families, and comparative protein structure modeling. described here is a web interface to salign, the versatile protein multiple sequence/structure alignment module of modeller. the web server automatically determines the best alignment procedure based on the inputs, while allowing the user to override default parameter values. multiple alignments are guided by a dendrogram computed from a matrix of all pairwise alignment scores. when aligning sequences to structures, salign uses structural environment information to place gaps optimally. if two multiple sequence alignments of related proteins are input to the server, a profile profile alignment is performed. all features of the server have been previously optimized for accuracy, especially in the contexts of comparative modeling and identification of interacting protein partners. availability: the salign web server is freely accessible to the academic community at http://salilab.org/salign. salign is a module of the modeller software, also freely available to academic usersas part of our effort to better understand cellular processes, we annotate the functions of proteins, classify them into families, determine or model their 3d structures, categorize these structures, etc. to achieve these aims, robust and accurate methods for aligning protein sequences and structures with one another are essential. alignment methods can be divided into three categories based on the information used to align proteins: sequencesequence, sequence structure, and structurestructure alignments. the salign web server is designed to provide a user-friendly interface to producing robust and accurate solutions for the alignment problems in these different categories. although several programs and servers (e.g. di to whom correspondence should be addressed.) align protein sequences or protein structures with one another, salign can align sequences, structures, or a combination of sequences and structures.  
