sequence analysis samstat: monitoring biases in next generation sequencing data motivation: the sequence alignment/map format (sam) is a commonly used format to store the alignments between millions of short reads and a reference genome. often certain positions within the reads are inherently more likely to contain errors due to the protocols used to prepare the samples. such biases can have adverse effects on both mapping rate and accuracy. to understand the relationship between potential protocol biases and poor mapping we wrote samstat, a simple c program plotting nucleotide overrepresentation and other statistics in mapped and unmapped reads in a concise html page. collecting such statistics also makes it easy to highlight problems in the data processing and enables non-experts to track data quality over time. results: we demonstrate that studying sequence features in mapped data can be used to identify biases particular to one sequencing protocol. once identified, such biases can be considered in the downstream analysis or even be removed by read trimming or filtering techniques. availability: samstat is open source and freely available as a c program running on all unix-compatible platforms. the source code is available from http://samstat.sourceforge.net.next generation sequencing is being applied to understand individual variation, the rna output of a cell and epigenetic regulation. not surprisingly, the mapping of short reads to the genome has received a lot of attention with over 30 programs published to date [seefor a review of the most commonly used approaches]. nevertheless, commonly a noticeable fraction of reads remains unmatched to the reference genome in each experiment. one possibility is that these reads simply represent the fraction of reads containing more sequencing errors in the form of mismatches, insertions or deletions than the programs can handle. alternatively, it is conceivable that these reads contain contaminants and therefore do not map to the expected reference sequence. finally, the unmapped reads may represent novel splice junctions or genomic regions absent from the reference assembly. understanding the reason behind obtaining unmapped reads is clearly of interest. mapping programs like maq and bwa report mapping qualities allowing for further investigation. we wrote samstat to contrast properties to whom correspondence should be addressed.of unmapped, poorly mapped and accurately mapped reads to understand whether particular properties of the reads influence the mapping accuracy. as the name suggests, our program is designed to work mainly with sam/bam files but also not only can be used to visualize nucleotide composition and other basic statistics of fasta and fastq files.  
