data and text mining sapfinder: an r/bioconductor package for detection of variant peptides in shotgun proteomics experiments single nucleotide variations (snvs) located within a reading frame can result in single amino acid polymorphisms (saps), leading to alteration of the corresponding amino acid sequence as well as function of a protein. accurate detection of saps is an important issue in proteomic analysis at the experimental and bioinformatic level. herein, we present sapfinder, an r software package, for detection of the variant peptides based on tandem mass spectrometry (ms/ms)-based proteomics data. this package automates the construction of variation-associated databases from public snv repositories or sample-specific next-generation sequencing (ngs) data and the identification of saps through database searching, post-processing and generation of html-based report with visualized interface. availability and implementation: sapfinder is implemented as a bioconductor package in r. the package and the vignette can be downloaded at http://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/html/ sapfinder.html and are provided under a gpl-2 license.recent advances in next-generation sequencing(ngs) technologies, such as whole-genome sequencing and total rna sequencing (rna-seq), have yielded large volumes of genetic variation data (1000 genomes). among these variations, single nucleotide variations (snvs) are recognized as one of the most common type of genetic variants in human genome. the snvs that are located within protein-coding regions can cause the changes in the corresponding amino acids, which could result in change of protein functions and further influence particular physiological or pathological traits in individuals. detection of the proteins containing and its web-based nature prevents analysis of large files and scale-up. herein, we describe sapfinder, a program that can use data from public repositories of genetic variants or sample-specific ngs data to automate the generation of variant-containing databases and thereby enable detection of sap-containing peptides. the program also allows for efficient ms/ms data searching, post-processing and report generation from htmlbased format.to evaluate the utility of sapfinder, a published dataset was processed using our pipeline . ms/ms spectra files and snvs listed in the vcf file in the dataset, the mrna database and the gene annotation file downloaded from ucsc table browser were treated as the input for sapfinder. we used similar ms database search parameters as in the original paper. the canonical and variant peptides were filtered with a threshold of 1 fdr. as shown in, 403 variant peptides were identified and 80 of them were also identified in the original study, and a density distribution plot of their e-value distributions was compared in. as also found in the sheynkman et al. paper, the distributions reveal that there is a slight shift to higher score distributions for the variant peptides as compared with that for canonical peptides, suggesting that the variant peptide identifications as a group have a similar or lower fdr as compared with the canonical peptide identifications. the html-based report can be found in supplementary data. these results demonstrate the utility of sapfinder in detecting genetic variations at the protein level.  
