genome analysis savant: genome browser for high-throughput sequencing data motivation: the advent of high-throughput sequencing (hts) technologies has made it affordable to sequence many individuals genomes. simultaneously the computational analysis of the large volumes of data generated by the new sequencing machines remains a challenge. while a plethora of tools are available to map the resulting reads to a reference genome, and to conduct primary analysis of the mappings, it is often necessary to visually examine the results and underlying data to confirm predictions and understand the functional effects, especially in the context of other datasets. results: we introduce savant, the sequence annotation, visualization and analysis tool, a desktop visualization and analysis browser for genomic data. savant was developed for visualizing and analyzing hts data, with special care taken to enable dynamic visualization in the presence of gigabases of genomic reads and references the size of the human genome. savant supports the visualization of genome-based sequence, point, interval and continuous datasets, and multiple visualization modes that enable easy identification of genomic variants (including single nucleotide polymorphisms, structural and copy number variants), and functional genomic information (e.g. peaks in chip-seq data) in the context of genomic annotations. availability: savant is freely available atthe emergence of high-throughput (a.k.a. next-generation) sequencing technologies has made the acquisition of genomic data quicker and more affordable than ever before. continued technological strides are being made to further improve throughput, cost and accuracy of the sequencing platforms, enabling largescale studies of genomes, populations and diseases. within the field of personalized genomics, ambitious sequencing projects such as the 1000 genomes project, the international cancer genome consortium and the autism genome project, are seeking to identify genomic variants among human genomes and to use this knowledge to determine the genetic underpinnings of human diseases by associating variants with symptoms (; http://www.icgc.org/). many computational to whom correspondence should be addressed. tools have been developed for single nucleotide polymorphism (snp), insertion/deletion (indel) and other types of genetic variation discovery in individuals sequenced using high-throughput sequencing (hts) platforms (for reviews). the results of these analyses are being integrated into large-scale datasets, annotating each variant with the allele frequency in various populations, and enabling demographic and association studies. simultaneously, hts has also revolutionized functional genomics, where the ability to sequence rna and dna to extremely high coverage has made possible rna-seq and chip-seq , methodologies that help discover rare rna transcripts, identify the location of transcription factor binding sites on the genome, as well as discover the locations of nucleosomes. rna-seq and chip-seq data also consist of many reads aligned to a reference genome, which are then binned and analyzed for peaks that indicate putative transcription factor binding sites and exons, respectively. additionally, anomalously mapped reads or pairs from rna-seq experiments can suggest alternative splicing or fusion transcripts. the capacity of new sequencing technologies to generate huge volumes of raw sequence data has made its analysis a substantial informatics challenge. sequencing machines typically output files containing a nucleotide sequence and quality values for each read, which can be tens to hundreds of gigabytes in size due to the sheer number of reads sequenced in a single run. these files can be easily parsed line-by-line by downstream computer programs because of their structured textual format, but are not intended for direct manual or visual analysis. while downstream analysis programs, such as read mappers, snp callers and peak finders can identify regions of interest to the bench scientist, a visual analysis of the supporting data, as well as other, orthogonal, information is usually warranted before costly wetlab experiments are performed to confirm the biological validity of the prediction. visualization of genomic data gives researchers the benefit of looking at information in a more natural and interpretable way compared with a textual representation. there are many different tasks that are facilitated by visualization including: (i) integration of multiple related datasets into a single view, to gain insight into the interaction between genomic features, (ii) algorithm development, where visualization of many putative calls (e.g. genomic variants, promoter sites, intronexon boundaries, etc.) helps with debugging and identification of true and false positives; and (iii) exploration of various genomic regions for specific signatures of functional sites that may be difficult to describe within a computer program, e.g. two closely spaced peaks in chip-seq data indicating adjacentbinding sites. without the convenience of a visualization tool, in each of these settings all regions of interest would have to be painstakingly considered via manual analysis of the supporting data. a number of tools have been developed for visualizing genomebased annotations. the ucsc and ensembl genome browsers, for example, are popular online tools that have traditionally been used to display various biological datasets, such as genomic variants, expressed sequence tag (ests) and functional genomic data, in the context of high-quality, manually curated annotations . while both have been recently updated to support display of hts data, their use for this purpose is onerous because: (i) a large amount of locally stored data must be uploaded to servers across the internet, (ii) once uploaded, the data being visualized cannot easily be manipulated or computed with; and (iii) server-side browsers are typically slow and non-interactive. other visualization programs such as the integrative genomics viewer, artemis and tablet (http://www.broadinstitute.org/igv;) are designed to run on conventional desktop computers and thus make use of local storage capacity and computing resources to overcome the shortcomings of web-based browsers. while these popular browsers allow for interactive visualization of hts data, they have limited analytic capability, and are not extensible through user-contributed modules. a substantial barrier for researchers who use genomic visualization tools, for all types of data, is the disconnect between the processes of visualization and computerintensive analyses , a void which is caused by visualization tools being programmatically inaccessible. here, we introduce savant, the sequence annotation visualization and analysis tool, which combines visualization of hts and other genome-based data with powerful analytic tools. the savant feature set (summarized in) was guided by three key design principles. (i) ease of use: users can easily install the application, obtain and load data, and navigate to specific regions of interest. the general layout of data mirrors the standard genome browsers to shorten the learning curve. (ii) speed and efficiency: the program quickly and dynamically sifts through very large datasets while maintaining a reasonable memory footprint. (iii) access and extensibility: the underlying data is readily accessible from within the tool itself, and users can extend the application by adding any number of plug-ins for specific tasks.  
