systems biology sbml-pet-mpi: a parallel parameter estimation tool for systems biology markup language based models parameter estimation is crucial for the modeling and dynamic analysis of biological systems. however, implementing parameter estimation is time consuming and computationally demanding. here, we introduced a parallel parameter estimation tool for systems biology markup language (sbml)-based models (sbml-pet-mpi). sbml-pet-mpi allows the user to perform parameter estimation and parameter uncertainty analysis by collectively fitting multiple experimental datasets. the tool is developed and parallelized using the message passing interface (mpi) protocol, which provides good scalability with the number of processors. availability: sbml-pet-mpi is freely available for non-commercial use atmathematical models, paired with experimental analysis, have been widely used for the studies on cellular signaling pathways, gene regulatory networks and metabolic networks. in order to perform simulation and kinetic analysis of the models, one must know the parameter values for the modeled biological system. however, some parameter values cannot be experimentally measured in practice and their values are unknown. therefore, parameter estimation is a common issue and very important for the mathematical modeling of biological systems. to address the parameter estimation problem, we previously developed a parameter estimation tool called systems biology markup language (sbml)-pet to automatically estimate the unknown parameters of sbml-based models by fitting a variety of experimental datasets . the availability of many parameter estimation tools has facilitated the development of models in systems biology community . however, implementing parameter estimation is still time consuming and computationally demanding. a parallel implementation of a global optimization algorithm was developed by, but it did not address the issue of parameter estimation for sbml models. a fast and convenient parameter estimation tool is yet to be developed. here, we introduce a new parallel parameter estimation tool for sbml-based models, which is named as sbml-pet-mpi. this tool allows the user to perform parameter estimation and parameter uncertainty analysis by collectively fitting multiple experimental datasets. sbml-pet-mpi is parallelized using the message passing interface (mpi) protocol . it is fast and efficient as it provides a good speed up scalability for parameter estimation and analysis depending on the number of processors and the complexity of the model.  
