sbtab: a flexible table format for data exchange in systems biology sbtab is a table-based data format for systems biology, designed to support automated data integration and model building. it uses the structure of spreadsheets and defines conventions for table structure, controlled vocabularies and semantic annotations. the format comes with pre-defined table types for experimental data and sbml-compliant model structures and can easily be customized to cover new types of data. availability and implementation: sbtab documents can be created and edited with any text editor or spreadsheet tool. the website www.sbtab.net provides online tools for syntax validation and conversion to sbml and html, as well as software for using sbtab in ms excel, matlab and r. the stand-alone python code contains functions for file parsing, validation, conversion to sbml and html and an interface to sqlite databases, to be integrated into systems biology workflows. a detailed specification of sbtab, including examples and descriptions of table types and available tools, can be found at www.sbtab.net.data exchange between experimental and computational biologists plays a central role in systems biology. the scientific community has developed a range of standard formats for data and models that facilitate this exchange and increase software interoperability. prominent examples are the systems biology markup language (sbml;) for the exchange of mathematical models, the systems biology graphical notation (sbgn;) for standardized drawings of biological networks, and the investigation/study/assay format (isa-tab), a standard spreadsheet format for experimental data and metadata . standards facilitate automated file parsing and guarantee that files contain complete and unambiguous information, which makes research results better comprehensible and reproducible. standardized formats are often not designed to be human-readable, but rather written and read by software. this makes it harder for users without particular technical knowledge or software skills to employ them efficiently. an alternative approach to fostering data exchange is to provide guidelines for minimal information requirements, as demonstrated by the miriam rules for published models of systems biology : these rules specify minimal pieces of model information that must be provided to ensure that model simulations can be reliably reproduced by other researchers. such rules ensure complete and unambigous information while placing less restrictions on modellers than the aforementioned standardized file formats. despite these efforts, the usage of standard formats has not been fully established at the interface of experimental and computational systems biology. at this interface, complex models need to be constructed from heterogeneous data types (descriptions of network v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.  
