data and text mining scaffold network generator: a tool for mining molecular structures scaffold network generator (sng) is an open-source command line utility that computes the hierarchical network of scaffolds that define a large set of input molecules. scaffold networks are useful for visualizing, analysing and understanding the chemical data that is increasingly available through large public repositories like pubchem. for example, some groups have used scaffold networks to identify missed-actives in high-throughput screens of small molecules with bioassays. substantially improving on existing software, sng is robust enough to work on millions of molecules at a time with a simple command-line interface. availability and implementation: sng is accessible at http://swami.identifying the molecular scaffoldsthe core structure of a molecule with its side-chains are removedthat are biologically active is a central task in drug discovery. drugs are discovered by chemically modifying these molecular scaffolds to improve their medicinal properties . viewing molecules through the lens of scaffolds is informative. for example,found that a majority of fda approved drugs are derived from a small set of scaffolds. similarly,found that maximizing the diversity of scaffolds selected for confirmatory testing can dramatically improve the efficiency of screening experiments. detecting and defining scaffolds, however, is subjective because there is ambiguity in which part of a molecules structure should be considered the core scaffold and which parts should be considered side-chains. early work in the field ignores these ambiguities and uses an algorithm to assign each molecule to a single scaffold that may not be ideal. for example, the bemismurko scaffold of invacaftor is shown at the top level in. subsequent work more appropriately captured the complexity of extracting scaffolds by assigning molecules to a node in a network or tree of interrelated scaffolds. the first strategy for managing scaffold ambiguity is the scaffold tree . this algorithm assigns each molecule to a single bemis murcko scaffold, but then decomposes this scaffold by iteratively stripping the most peripheral ring. successive decompositions yield a linear graph of scaffolds, all of which are assigned to the molecule. for example, the linear graph generated from invacaftor depicted with double-dotted lines in. a scaffold tree is the aggregation of the linear graphs derived from multiple molecules. scaffold trees are somewhat helpful, but introduce a new ambiguity: defining which ring is the most peripheral. the second strategy, scaffold networks, decomposes each scaffold in all possible ways. this creates a network of scaffolds for each molecule. the scaffold network for invacaftor is shown in. networks from multiple molecules can be superimposed to form a large multipartite graph . molecules associated with nodes in this grapheach of which correspond to specific scaffoldsoften have similar properties. this network of scaffolds is useful for analysing and visualizing screening data to pick out the most promising scaffolds to develop into drugs. until now, no open-source software could generate both scaffold trees and networks for large sets (4225 000) of molecules. we fill this gap by releasing a command-line utility that extracts scaffold networks for large datasets and outputs them in an easy to parse format that facilitates computational analysis.sng is a new command-line tool for use in drug discovery. sng extracts scaffold networks from large sets of molecules. these networks can be incorporated into an automated pipeline for visualizing and analysing large databases of chemical information in order to identify scaffolds that can be developed into drugs.  
