scale-space measures for graph topology link protein network architecture to function motivation: the network architecture of physical protein interactions is an important determinant for the molecular functions that are carried out within each cell. to study this relation, the network architecture can be characterized by graph topological characteristics such as shortest paths and network hubs. these characteristics have an important shortcoming: they do not take into account that interactions occur across different scales. this is important because some cellular functions may involve a single direct protein interaction (small scale), whereas others require more and/or indirect interactions, such as protein complexes (medium scale) and interactions between large modules of proteins (large scale). results: in this work, we derive generalized scale-aware versions of known graph topological measures based on diffusion kernels. we apply these to characterize the topology of networks across all scales simultaneously, generating a so-called graph topological scale-space. the comprehensive physical interaction network in yeast is used to show that scale-space based measures consistently give superior performance when distinguishing protein functional categories and three major types of functional interactionsgenetic interaction , co-expression and perturbation interactions. moreover, we demonstrate that graph topological scale spaces capture biologically meaningful features that provide new insights into the link between function and protein network architecture. availability and implementation: matlab tm code to calculate the scale-aware topological measures (stms) is available at http:// bioinformatics.tudelft.nl/tssaunderstanding the living cell as a system of interconnected components is one of the key challenges of the post-genomic era . to address this, many high-throughput screening techniques are used that chart the physical protein interaction network (pin) of the living cell (e.g.). yeast, for instance, has one of the most comprehensive experimentally verified physical pins . the interactions captured in these pins entail the full range of chemical bonds between cellular components, ranging from protein complex formation and kinase signaling activity to transcription factor binding and dna modifications. physical interactions give rise to functional interactions. these can be broadly categorized into (i) serial function interactions, such as the (causal) effects of a gene perturbation on downstream transcription, i.e. regulatory network interactions , (ii) parallel function interactions, such as those arising from synthetic lethality (a genetic interaction;) and (iii) collaborative function interactions, such as co-expression in protein complexes. although some functional interactions are the result of a single physical interaction, most functional interactions arise as a result of a complex interplay between a collection of physical interactions. consequently, analysis of the network architecture is important for understanding the functionality that it orchestrates . for this purpose, several graph topological measures have been proposed. these topological characterizations have, for instance, been used to uncover homology relations between proteins or make predictions on protein function . moreover, it has been demonstrated that deletion of hub proteinsi.e. proteins with high network degreeis more often lethal than deletion of nonhub proteins . this observation was explained by the observation that essential genes cluster in hub-enriched essential modules . similarly, bottleneck proteinsi.e. proteins with high network betweennesswere found to be more essential and evolutionary conserved and exhibit different expression dynamics than proteins with low betweenness . common graph topological measures, such as shortest-path length, jaccard index, clustering coefficient and centrality measures, only capture topology in the direct vicinity of the node under investigation. they thus operate at a fixed zoom level, i.e. they do not take topological scale into account. this also holds for measures that characterize the centrality of a node with respect to the whole network. these include closeness centrality, betweenness centrality , subgraph centrality , katz centrality and eigenvector centrality . the concept of topological scale is, however, important for studying how functional interaction emerges from the structure of the physical pin . for instance, at the smallest scale, links in the pin may directly implicate a functional relation between two proteins. at a medium scale, one could find functional relations that are characterized by a number of physical interactions, such as a small signaling cascade. in terms of graph to whom correspondence should be addressed., which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com topology, this could be captured by a small, linearly connected, graph structure. finally, at larger scales, the network topology that describes complete protein complexes and pathways is important and should be captured to relate proteins functionally at a module level. the topology that describes this scale may consist of several densely connected subgraphs. because network topology occurs across a range of scales, traditional topological measures are inadequate to capture functional relations in the network. instead, measures that include some kind of zoom parameter on topological scale are required. measures that characterize meso-scale topology have been proposed before . of particular interest is the scale-aware version of the subgraph centrality, proposed by estrada, that resulted in superior ability to identify essential proteins . however, the method used to incorporate scale does not extend to other topological measures and, moreover, was discrete in nature. here, we address this issue by introducing a scale-invariant description of the topology around or between proteins. these scale-aware topological measures (stms) are built on the framework of diffusion kernels , which can be seen as a network smoothing operation by means of diffusion. the level of smoothing determines the scale and can be tuned using a scale parameter. application of kernel diffusion to a physical interaction network for a range of scales yields a graph topological scale-space. in spirit, such a scale-space is similar to image scale spaces used in computer vision applications. there, smoothing is used to obtain a family of derived images that describe the relevant image structure across all scales. we derive a range of stms that can be applied to this graph topological scale-space. stms can be defined to characterize a single protein, such as the degree centrality stm, as well as to characterize the network connecting two proteins, such as the shortest-path stm. as our main focus is on functional interactions, we additionally derive link descriptors from the nodebased stms. in the remainder of this article, we explore the use of stms when applied to the comprehensive physical pin of saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast). using supervised learning to predict three classes of functional interactions, i.e. geneticintuitive explanation of the shortest-path stm. for ! 0, the stm behaves similar to the standard shortest-path measure. for higher values of , it will start to take into account the number of shortest paths (bundle of paths) that connect x and y. moreover, when increases, paths that are longer than just the shortest path are considered. in this way, the overall network connectivity between two nodes is characterized. for !1, the measure will approach the logarithm of the number of nodes in the graph component containing x and y. (d) the jaccard measure, which normally determines the fraction of common neighbors of two nodes, will take into account more extended neighborhoods with increasing scale. (e) similar to the jaccard, the centrality and clustering coefficient do not just take into account their direct neighbors but with increasing scale also the neighbors of neighbors. (f) the betweenness centrality measure (measuring the number of shortest path going through a specific node) is expanded so that it, with increasing scale, also takes into account longer paths. that is, although node z has a betweenness value of zero using the standard measure, the stm version still captures its role in linking x and y throughout a non-shortest path i238 interactions, perturbation interactions and co-expression interactions, we find that non-linear classifiers trained on stm features can reach area under the receiver-operating characteristic (roc) curve (auc) performances as high as 85. moreover, we demonstrate that clustering based on stm features reveals a pronounced substructure within each of the functional interaction classes that exhibit clearly distinct characteristics with biologically meaningful interpretations.  
