sequence analysis scdfinder, a web-based tool for the identification of putative novel atm and atr targets motivation: the s/tq cluster domain (scd) constitutes a new type of protein domain that is not defined by sequence similarity but by the presence of multiple s/tq motifs within a variable stretch of amino acids. scds are recognized targets for dna damage response (ddr) kinases like atm and atr. characterizing ddr targets is of significant interest. the aim of this work was to develop a web-based tool to allow for easy identification and visualization of scds within specific proteins or in whole proteome sets, a feature not supported by current domain and motif search tools. results: we have developed an algorithm that (i) generates a list of all proteins in an organism containing at least one user-defined scd within their sequence, or (ii) identifies and renders a visual representation of all user-defined scds present in a single sequence or batch of sequences. availability and implementation: the application was developed using pearl and python, and is available at the followingatm and atr are the chief controlling kinases of a cells response to dna damage . the complete set of atm and atr (atm/atr) targets is currently unknown, but several high-throughput studies suggest that the final tally could be well over a thousand proteins . furthermore, there is growing evidence for atm functions even in the absence of dna damage, although direct atm/atr targets in those pathways are currently mostly uncharacterized . both atm and atr preferentially phosphorylate substrates on serine or threonine residues that are followed by a glutamine (s/tq). their specificity for this motif is such that mutations on the glutamine can be as deleterious for function as mutating the serine or the threonine . in addition, several well-known atm/atr targets contain clusters of more than one s/tq motif within a small region of the protein. this observation led to the description of the scd, a new type of domain that is not defined by a rigidly conserved sequence similarity but rather by the presence of at least three s/tq motifs within a stretch of 100 amino acids . this domain is present in 43 of 81 of the better-characterized atm targets in mammalian cells, and it can also be found in more than half of 686 human proteins identified in a highthroughput analysis as containing phosphorylated s/tq motifs . studies using a more stringent scd definition (three s/tq in 50 amino acids) found this domain present four times more abundantly in the yeast proteome than expected by random generation and concentrated in proteins belonging to pathways known to be under atm/atr control . searching for proteins that may contain an scd is not a simple task, given the domains arbitrary length and structural diversity that has been observed to date. current tools for motif or domain identification (like smart, which is designed to search for signaling domain sequences) typically rely on conserved sequence similarity and are thus not best suited for searching for scd domains. even elm, which identifies functional motifs in eukaryotic proteins and has a phosphoblast tool that identifies phosphorylated serines, threonines and tyrosines, does not identify scds. similarly, most motif-finding tools do not support the search for multiple motifs in regions of limited length. while it is possible to use the scanprosite tool with a user-defined pattern, the scd is not part of the default prosite collection of motifs. a user can submit a customized search pattern, but whole genome analysis is not possible without integrating to an external bioinformatics pipeline to perform the necessary filtering of the initial results, which requires programming abilities by the user. to facilitate this process, we have created scdfinder, a web-based tool that allows a user to easily search for scd-containing proteins in different proteomes using a user-determined scd definition. this program can also be used to identify and visualize user-defined scd domains within a given sequence or in a batch of submitted sequences.scdfinder is an online, open-access tool that can be accessed at http://ustbioinfo.webfactional.com/scd/. this scd search tool is easy to use and offers two distinct interfaces that allow userdefined queries: a static database search and a custom fasta sequence search. both allow the user to customize the scd definition, or use the default definition of three s/tqs in 100 residues.scdfinder is a new web-based tool for the detection and visualization of user-defined scds within single proteins, a set of proteins, or entire proteomes. it can be used to identify putative novel atm/atr substrates or to reveal new pathways under the possible control of these kinases. this tool may be particularly useful to investigate the function of atm/atr in the absence of dna damage by identifying potential direct targets that may have been missed in studies that fail to reproduce the conditions under which these kinases are activated. other valuable applications may include its use in comparative proteomics studies or to determine the optimal scd definition for different organisms.. flowchart depicting the step-wise process followed in scdfinder. also shown is an example of the output, showing a retrieved protein sequence highlighted (s/tq motif in red, scd in green) for easy identification of the scd  
