sequence analysis scorer 2.0: an algorithm for distinguishing parallel dimeric and trimeric coiled-coil sequences motivation: the coiled coil is a ubiquitous -helical protein structure domain that directs and facilitates proteinprotein interactions in a wide variety of biological processes. at the protein-sequence level, coiled coils are quite straightforward and readily recognized via the conspicuous heptad repeats of hydrophobic and polar residues. however, structurally they are more complicated, existing in a range of oligomer states and topologies. here, we address the issue of predicting coiled-coil oligomeric state from protein sequence.the coiled coil is a protein structure domain comprising two or more -helices wound around each other, usually in a lefthanded fashion . by using the superfam method to detect coiled-coil containing superfamilies of proteins, it has been estimated that on average 2.9 of open reading frames across all genomes contain regions that encode coiled coils (range, 0.36.5) .moreover, coiled-coil domains play roles in mediating protein protein interactions across a wide array of biological functions from transcription, through membrane remodeling, to cell and tissue structure and stability. despite this ubiquity and diversity, a relatively straightforward sequence motif of hydrophobic (h) and polar (p) residues hpphppp underlies most coiled-coil structures. the positions in these so-called heptad repeats are labeled a through g, with the hydrophobic sites falling at the a and d positions. traditionally, it is these repeats that are identified by coiled-coil region prediction algorithms (vide infra). however, this apparent simplicity of coiled-coil sequences hides considerable complexity in their 3d structures: coiled-coil assemblies can have different numbers of helices, which may be in parallel or antiparallel arrangements, and may be formed from the same (homo) or different (hetero) helical sequences . coiled-coil structure prediction, then, can be aimed at one or more of three problems:(1) given a protein sequence, can we accurately identify coiledcoil regions?(2) given a coiled-coil sequence, can we correctly assign its architecture and topology?(3) given two or more coiled-coil sequences, can we predict how these combine to form functional assemblies?here, we focus on the second problem, and specifically on oligomerstate prediction. however, the first problem of locating coiled-coilpage  
