data and text mining sdrs—an algorithm for analyzing large-scale dose–response data doseresponse information is critical to understanding drug effects, yet analytical methods for doseresponse assays cannot cope with the dimensionality of large-scale screening data such as the microarray profiling data. to overcome this limitation, we developed and implemented the sigmoidal dose response search (sdrs) algorithm, a grid search-based method designed to handle large-scale doseresponse data. this method not only calculates the pharmacological parameters for every assay, but also provides built-in statistic that enables downstream systematic analyses, such as characterizing dose response at the transcriptome level. availability: bio::sdrs is freely available from cpan (www.cpan.org). contacts:doseresponse assays are routinely used in todays pharmaceutical development. mechanistically, compound:target binding occurs at a single site and follows the law of mass action that is reflected by the sigmoidal doseresponse pattern seen in many assays . in statistics, sigmoidal dose-responses can be identified by non-linear regression, a form of regression analysis where the model function is a non-linear combination of the model parameters . non-linear regression methods such as the well-known levenbergmarquardt algorithm involve successive approximations that aim at minimizing an error function . despite the general applicability of the iterative non-linear regression methods, there are a couple of limitations in their application to large-scale doseresponse screening data. first, the iterative methods do not impose a boundary on the model parameter values, and thus the output model may contain unrealistic or uninterpretable values such as a negative ec50. second, these methods only calculate the parameter values and fitting statistic for the best model, but do not provide a means that can be integrated in downstream analyses such as the characterization of transcriptome response . to whom correspondence should be addressed.recently described a grid search-based algorithm, sigmoidal dose response search (sdrs), for identifying transcripts that exhibited sigmoidal dose-response to the treatments of kinase inhibitors. since the sdrs algorithm is generic and can be expanded to identify other doseresponse patterns in different sources of quantitative data, we have implemented the method as a perl module with c inline codes (bio::sdrs). we demonstrated the general utility of the method using a dataset from high content screening (hcs).  
