structural bioinformatics seabed: small molecule activity scanner web service based motivation: the seabed web server integrates a variety of docking and qsar techniques in a user-friendly environment. seabed goes beyond the basic docking and qsar web tools and implements extended functionalities like receptor preparation, library editing, flexible ensemble docking , hybrid docking/qsar experiments or virtual screening on protein mutants. seabed is not a monolithic workflow tool but software as a service platform.in silico methods such as molecular docking and quantitative-activity relationship (qsar) are gaining an increased role in drug discovery . qsar approaches are predictive models trained to distinguish compounds from molecular descriptors. molecular docking tries to recover active ligands by finding the best possible fitting of compounds to a 3d-binding site. qsar is faster and often more robust than docking approaches, but is limited to suggesting molecules close to those of proven activity. docking requires knowledge of the structure of biological target, is computationally very demanding, and is less robust than qsar, but can make suggestions for new drug scaffolds. we are then looking at two complementary techniques, and it is not a surprise that during daily practice drug designers are continuously using both approaches, which is largely facilitated by commercial programs, and a non-negligible list of open source software and web services . seabed is a web server that automates different tools for virtual screening. this includes classical qsar (with a large variety of machine learning tools) or molecular docking (with many features for target and ligandbinding characterization). the server allows a unique integration of molecular dynamics information in flexible (ensemble) docking enriched with essential dynamics md (edmd) sampling . it also enables us to combine in a single project docking and qsar (following the ideas in), and to incorporate genetic variability into the docking process. the modular nature of seabed (see supplementaryand supplementary data) allows an easy extension to incorporate additional modules. users can automate docking, qsar, structure-ensemble docking, hybrid docking/qsar and docking of protein mutants (supplementary table s1 provides an estimated processing time for each feature). the server is complemented with other functionalities to prepare the receptor and the compound libraries. receptor and compounds can be uploaded by the user or extracted from public databases.  
