sequence analysis seed: efficient clustering of next-generation sequences motivation: similarity clustering of next-generation sequences (ngs) is an important computational problem to study the population sizes of dna/rna molecules and to reduce the redundancies in ngs data. currently, most sequence clustering algorithms are limited by their speed and scalability, and thus cannot handle data with tens of millions of reads. results: here, we introduce seedan efficient algorithm for clustering very large ngs sets. it joins sequences into clusters that can differ by up to three mismatches and three overhanging residues from their virtual center. it is based on a modified spaced seed method, called block spaced seeds. its clustering component operates on the hash tables by first identifying virtual center sequences and then finding all their neighboring sequences that meet the similarity parameters. seed can cluster 100 million short read sequences in 4 h with a linear time and memory performance. when using seed as a preprocessing tool on genome/transcriptome assembly data, it was able to reduce the time and memory requirements of the velvet/oasis assembler for the datasets used in this study by 6085 and 2141, respectively. in addition, the assemblies contained longer contigs than non-preprocessed data as indicated by 1227 larger n50 values. compared with other clustering tools, seed showed the best performance in generating clusters of ngs data similar to true cluster results with a 2-to 10-fold better time performance. while most of seeds utilities fall into the preprocessing area of ngs data, our tests also demonstrate its efficiency as stand-alone tool for discovering clusters of small rna sequences in ngs data from unsequenced organisms.in recent years, the data volumes generated by next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies have been growing at a pace that has now begun to greatly challenge the data processing and storage capacities of modern compute systems . only 4 years ago, ngs technologies like illuminas reversible terminator to whom correspondence should be addressed. method or abis ligation approach created 1 billion bases of dna sequence information per instrument run which has now increased to over 300 billion bases per run with even shorter turnaround times . this corresponds approximately to a 4-fold increase of sequence data output per year. as a result of this rapid improvement of the technology, many exciting sequencebased research applications have evolved recently. these include genome resequencing of entire organism populations, personalized medicine, rna-seq, chip-seq and many others (1000 genomes). processing and storing the large amounts of data produced by these technologies is a major challenge for modern genome research. thus, it is important to develop methods that can improve the efficiency of the analysis workflows for ngs data. to mention just a few, these include algorithms for processing the data more time and space efficiently as well as data reduction approaches that aim to retain only the scientifically relevant and non-redundant information from ngs projects rather than everything . for example, in genome resequencing projects one can greatly reduce the dataset sizes by storing only genetic variations, while removing the bulk of the sequence information that only confirms what is already known . similarly, in quantitative ngs experiments for profiling pools of mrnas, small rnas or proteindna interactions one can convert the data to much less storage intensive tag counts at an early stage of the analysis workflow. solutions that prevent or greatly minimize information loss are always preferred. however, with the current growth rates of ngs data many of them may soon become impractical, especially when the data sizes become the main time and financial bottleneck for conducting scientific experiments in the ngs field. this study introduces a new algorithm capable of clustering ngs sets in size ranges of several hundred million entries using a modified spaced seed method . this method, hereafter referred to as seed, efficiently joins sequences into clusters with user-definable similarity parameters ranging from 0 to 3 mismatches and overhanging ends with up to 3 nt in length. these mismatch features are important to make the method less sensitive to base call errors, imprecise molecular cleavage events or inaccurate adaptor trimming. the main utilities of seed are the identification, enumeration and removal of redundant sequences in ngs data. in its current implementation, seed is designed to function as a short read clustering tool with controllable mismatch parameters, but not as an error corrector like freclu . there are several practical applications of this clustering approach. first, the method can be used to reduce the complexity in ngs data by collapsing redundant reads to a singlepage: 2503 25022509  
