data and text mining apcluster: an r package for affinity propagation clustering affinity propagation (ap) clustering has recently gained increasing popularity in bioinformatics. ap clustering has the advantage that it allows for determining typical cluster members, the so-called exemplars. we provide an r implementation of this promising new clustering technique to account for the ubiquity of r in bioinformatics. this article introduces the package and presents an application from structural biology. availability: the r package apcluster is available via cranthe comprehensive r archive network: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/apcluster contactaffinity propagation (ap) is a relatively new clustering algorithm that has been introduced by. ap clustering determines a so-called exemplar for each cluster, that is, a sample that is most representative for this cluster. like agglomerative clustering, ap has the advantage that it works for any meaningful measure of similarity between data samples. unlike most prototypebased clustering algorithms (like, e.g. k-means), ap does not require a vector space structure and the exemplars are chosen among the observed data samples and not computed as hypothetical averages of cluster samples. these characteristics make ap clustering particularly suitable for applications in bioinformatics: (i) many similarity measures used in bioinformatics cannot be linked to explicit vectorial descriptions (e.g. sequence or structure alignment scores); (ii) the opportunity to identify a small set of exemplars provides new potentials for exploratory analysis of biological data. ap clustering has been used successfully for clustering microarray/gene expression data , in structural biology , biological network analysis and sequence analysis . to date, no r implementation has been available. in order to leverage affinity propagation for bioinformatics applications, we have implemented affinity propagation as an r package along with visualization tools for analyzing the results. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
