systems biology selection of human tissue-specific elementary flux modes using gene expression data motivation: the analysis of high-throughput molecular data in the context of metabolic pathways is essential to uncover their underlying functional structure. among different metabolic pathway concepts in systems biology, elementary flux modes (efms) hold a predominant place, as they naturally capture the complexity and plasticity of cellular metabolism and go beyond predefined metabolic maps. however, their use to interpret high-throughput data has been limited so far, mainly because their computation in genome-scale metabolic networks has been unfeasible. to face this issue, different optimization-based techniques have been recently introduced and their application to human metabolism is promising. results: in this article, we exploit and generalize the k-shortest efm algorithm to determine a subset of efms in a human genome-scale metabolic network. this subset of efms involves a wide number of reported human metabolic pathways, as well as potential novel routes, and constitutes a valuable database where high-throughput data can be mapped and contextualized from a metabolic perspective. to illustrate this, we took expression data of 10 healthy human tissues from a previous study and predicted their characteristic efms based on enrichment analysis. we used a multivariate hypergeometric test and showed that it leads to more biologically meaningful results than standard hypergeometric. finally, a biological discussion on the characteristic efms obtained in liver is conducted, finding a high level of agreement when compared with the literature.with the expansion of high-throughput molecular experimental technologies in the past decade, particularly genomics and transcriptomics, a vast amount of data is available to the scientific community . their analysis in the context of metabolic pathways is essential to uncover their underlying functional structure, and it is a widely used practice in the field of bioinformatics and systems biology . to this end, different approaches have been proposed to date. some of the existing tools explain high-throughput omics data in the light of predefined metabolic maps . despite their wide application , these methods are limited, as predefined maps do not capture the wide variety of complex metabolic states. instead, the use of unbiased mathematical pathway concepts based on genome-scale metabolic networks is suitable for this purpose. among these pathway concepts, path-finding techniques from the field of graph theory have been a recurrent approach . in contrast to their low computational expense, they face important theoretical issues because they do not consider stoichiometric mass balancing constraints, as recently emphasized in. for this reason, other more general pathway concepts have been used to interpret omics data, particularly elementary flux modes (efms) and recently elementary flux patterns . in this article, we focus on the efm approach. despite its early definition, the interpretation of omics data in light of efms has been limited so far . the reason is that the number of efms explodes in a combinatorial fashion as the network size increases and classical approaches fail to compute them in large networks . that is the case for the human genome-scale metabolic network , which involves several thousand reactions and metabolites. to face this issue,computed a set of efms for each human kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg) map, which is a reductionist approach. a promising strategy is to compute a subset of efms using recently developed optimization techniques . in the present work, a generalized version of the algorithm presented inis introduced and used to determine a subset of efms in the human genome-scale metabolic network that captures a wide variety of pathways in human metabolism. in particular, aside from recovering an extensive number of metabolic pathways previously reported in the literature, more to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com solutions do arise in our subset of efms, which should allow us to describe more accurately the repertoire of metabolic states. in light of our subset of efms, we analyzed data from. in that work, based on gene expression data, reactions fromare classified into highly, moderately and lowly expressed in different healthy human tissues. we used this reaction classification to determine characteristic efms for each tissue based on statistical enrichment analysis. three-level discrete classification of reactions prevented us from using more established enrichment techniques, such as gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) . instead, we introduced a multivariate hypergeometric test, which considers highly expressed and lowly expressed reactions in the same statistical score. with this test, we aim to obtain as characteristic those efms enclosing an elevated number of highly expressed reactions and as few as possible of lowly expressed reactions. this fact differs from the approach presented in, which uses the standard hypergeometric test with only one feature (either highly or lowly expressed reactions). we show in different tissues that this improvement provides a more accurate picture of their characteristic efms and, therefore, their key metabolic pathways.the (k,d)-shortest efm algorithm is applied here to determine a subset of efms in human metabolism aiming at capturing a diverse and representative set of pathways. we integrated this subset of efms with expression data of 10 human tissues (liver, brain, heart, kidney, lung, pancreas, prostate, spleen, thymus and skeletal muscle) and determined their characteristic efms. finally, the technical performance of our approach is analyzed and a biological discussion focused on liver is accomplished.  
