semantic body browser: graphical exploration of an organism and spatially resolved expression data visualization advancing technologies generate large amounts of molecular and phenotypic data on cells, tissues and organisms, leading to an ever-growing detail and complexity while information retrieval and analysis becomes increasingly time-consuming. the semantic body browser is a web application for intuitively exploring the body of an organism from the organ to the subcellular level and visualising expression profiles by means of semantically annotated anatomical illustrations. it is used to comprehend biological and medical data related to the different body structures while relying on the strong pattern recognition capabilities of human users. availability and implementation: the semantic body browser is a javascript web application that is freely available attechnological innovations of the last decades have revolutionized current bio-medical research. high-throughput sequence data is widely adopted and repositories like gene expression omnibus or arrayexpress provide access to large amounts of expression data. imaging and functional analysis tools improve phenotypic cell and tissue characterization, while text mining facilitates big-data applications with increasing importance in current research. thus, scientists and clinicians are faced with an ever-growing detail and complexity, resulting in an increasing amount of time and resources that are needed to retrieve and process the right information, which constitutes one of the major obstacles for their efficient use.most data resources provide text-based information retrieval only, meaning that the user searches for keywords of a desired target. while this is sufficient when the target is known by name, it often fails or is time-consuming when the exact target name is unknown. similarly, large tables of numbers are suitable for computational analysis, but require expert knowledge and time to be analysed manually. while graphs or diagrams can greatly summarize numbers, concepts or other data, their representation remains abstract and does not close the gap between complexity of data and intuitiveness of access. in biomedical research reality, it is highly desirable to have quick and intuitive access to a broad range of information and data types, which cannot easily comprehend by conventional means.the semantic body browser (sbb) exploits the visual pattern recognition capability of human users to provide this access. the sbb uses the anatomy of an organisms body itself as starting point to browse for information associated with organs, tissues, cells or cellular structures. besides very fundamental computer skills no preknowledge is required, to use the sbb. the representation of data is facilitated by means of interactive, annotated anatomical illustrations through a user-friendly web application for fast access to upto-date computationally derived data. an organism is explored along the four dimensions: resolution/location (gross body to subcellular level), developmental stage (e.g. carnegie stages), species (e.g. human and mouse) and gender (male and female).to our knowledge, the sbb is the first web-based tool for browsing and searching large sets of diverse biological information guided by interactive anatomical illustrations that integrate different levels of resolution, developmental stages, gender and species. the two-dimensional (2d) representation of an organisms anatomy using vector graphics facilitates high accuracy, dynamic interactions and element-wise ontological annotations while maintaining simplicity and usability across a wide range of devices. existing 3d representations like bodyparts3d , zygote body (http://zygotebody.com) or the worm browser (http://browser.openworm.org/), conversely, emphasize on graphical representation of the organisms gross anatomy rather than on exploration across many different dimensions.to summarize, the sbb is an intuitive, user-friendly web application for graphically browsing an organisms body for cell and tissue associated data. it is meant to enhance the information retrieval and visualization of biological data without requiring computational background knowledge.  
