gene expression semi-supervised recursively partitioned mixture models for identifying cancer subtypes motivation: patients with identical cancer diagnoses often progress differently. the disparity we see in disease progression and treatment response can be attributed to the idea that two histologically similar cancers may be completely different diseases on the molecular level. methods for identifying cancer subtypes associated with patient survival have the capacity to be powerful instruments for understanding the biochemical processes that underlie disease progression as well as providing an initial step toward more personalized therapy for cancer patients. we propose a method called semi-supervised recursively partitioned mixture models (ss-rpmm) that utilizes array-based genetic and patient-level clinical data for finding cancer subtypes that are associated with patient survival. results: in the proposed ss-rpmm, cancer subtypes are identified using a selected subset of genes that are associated with survival time. since survival information is used in the gene selection step, this method is semi-supervised. unlike other semi-supervised clustering classification methods, ss-rpmm does not require specification of the number of cancer subtypes, which is often unknown. in a simulation study, our proposed method compared favorably with other competing semi-supervised methods, including: semi-supervised clustering and supervised principal components analysis. furthermore, an analysis of mesothelioma cancer data using ss-rpmm, revealed at least two distinct methylation profiles that are informative for survival. availability: the analyses implemented in this article were carried out using r (http://www.r.project.org/).there are approximately 200 known types of cancer, although they may be overly general as the same type of cancer can have very different trajectories in different people. for example, it is not unusual for a tumor to proliferate in one patient and stabilize or regress in another, even though their tumors are indistinguishable at a microscopic level. traditionally, researchers diagnosed and treated cancer based on an analysis of cell shape and size, a method that is substantially challenging for closely related cancers. in recent years, information regarding molecular alterations in cancer has contributed to defining cancer subtypes based on the underlying molecular signature of a tumor . such molecular pathology has contributed to the discovery of subtypes of several different tumor types and has successfully identified patients with different survival times . more recently, there has been substantial interest in the use of methylation profiling for understanding the effect of epigenetic alterations on disease susceptibility as well as to characterize cancer subtypes based on methylation patterns . however, such associations work best when cancer subtypes based on genetic profiles are already known. if subtype membership is known, then a number of different supervised classification procedures such as support vector machines (svms), discriminant analysis, multinomial logistic regression or ensemble-based procedures, can be used to build a statistical model to diagnose such cancers in future patients. in most instances, however, neither the different subtypes nor patient-specific subtypes are known. consequently, attempts have been made to identify cancer subtypes, many of which use either fully unsupervised learning or fully supervised learning techniques. unsupervised analyses for identifying cancer subtypes is often addressed using hierarchical clustering , where cancer subtypes are identified using only array-based genetic data. asreport, hierarchical clustering can be an effective method for identifying clinically relevant cancer subtypes, although one major limitation of unsupervised learning procedures is that they may identify cancer subtypes that are unrelated to patient survival or other clinical outcomes of interest, especially when they are applied to high-dimensional data. sincepage: 2579 25782585motivated by the ss-clust approach of bair and tibshirani (2004), ss-rpmm utilizes array-based genetic data and patientlevel clinical information to identify biologically and clinically meaningful cancer subtypes. we begin our procedure by prescreening array-based genetic data to identify loci that are associated with the primary outcome of interest, with the idea of guiding the subsequent clustering algorithm toward a solution that is prognostically relevant. we then develop a classifier that can be used to predict cancer outcome for future patients. while the originally proposed version of ss-clust requires specification of the number of assumed classes k, our proposed method estimates this number directly. since the number of classes is often not known, ss-rpmm can be viewed as an improvement upon the ss-clust approach. it should be pointed out that when the assumption that the expression of each gene or loci is independent conditional on class membership is satisfied, rpmm and the model-based clustering algorithm of fraley and raftery (2002) tend to produce identical results. however, the latter method sequentially fits mixture models for different numbers of assumed classes and consequently is computationally less efficient than the corresponding rpmm solution . the analysis of the mesothelioma data using ss-rpmm revealed promising results. using 3 (41 out of 1413 available) of the loci available in the mesothelioma dataset, we were able to find two distinct survival profiles among the three classes predicted in our testing set. a number of the loci identified (supplementary) as demonstrating altered dna methylation related to survival in mesothelioma are involved in processes known to be critical in carcinogenesis and to effect patient outcome. these include a number of genes considered oncogenic growth factors or growth factor receptors such as fgr, met, ifngr2, fgf8, grb10, plg and fgfr3, as well as tumor suppressor genes involved in cellcycle control (p16ink4a, s100a2), apoptosis (casp10) and dna repair (tdg). also identified as a critical predictor of survival was sfrp1, which has been previously shown to be downregulated in mesothelioma and to be associated with more aggressive disease . thus, there is strong biologic plausibility to the genes identified in the ss-rpmm methodology. using an additional 10 random splits of the full mesothelioma data into training and testing sets we were able to gain insight into the performance on average as well as the variability in performance of ss-rpmm, ss-clust and spca. despite using a fewer number of loci on average, ss-rpmm outperformed ssclust and showed a modest improvement compared with spca in discovering methylation profiles that are informative for survival, as evidenced through a larger average pseudo-r 2 and smaller average aic. this finding is significant in that ss-rpmm identifies discrete cancer subtypes, which are often of interest from both a biological and clinical perspective, with no loss in predictive accuracy compared with spca.in summary, ss-rpmm appears to be a promising method for identifying cancer subtypes relevant to patient survival. our approach combines the strengths of the semi-supervised approaches of bair andwith the ability of rpmm to determine the number of clusters in a robust and computationally efficient manner.  
