data and text mining semmeddb: a pubmed-scale repository of biomedical semantic predications effective access to the vast biomedical knowledge present in the scientific literature is challenging. semantic relations are increasingly used in knowledge management applications supporting bio-medical research to help address this challenge. we describe semmeddb, a repository of semantic predications (subjectpredi-cateobject triples) extracted from the entire set of pubmed citations. we propose the repository as a knowledge resource that can assist in hypothesis generation and literature-based discovery in biomedicine as well as in clinical decision-making support. availability and implementation: the semmeddb repository is available as a mysql database for non-commercial use at http://skr3. nlm.nih.gov/semmeddb. an umls metathesaurus license is required. contact:scientific discoveries depend on synthesis of knowledge from the literature and generation of novel hypotheses for testing. in biomedicine, the overwhelming size of literature makes it difficult for researchers to identify promising new avenues, which may involve insights from seemingly unrelated subfields of the domain. large-scale information extraction in the form of semantic relations is increasingly proposed for advanced knowledge management and discovery systems . in this note, we describe semmeddb, a repository of semantic predications extracted from the titles and abstracts of all pubmed citations by semrep , a rule-based semantic interpreter. elements of semantic predications are drawn from the unified medical language system (umls) knowledge sources ; the subject and object pair corresponds to metathesaurus concepts, and the predicate to a relation type in an extended version of the semantic network. for example, semrep extracts the predication infection-causes-guillain-barre syndrome from the sentence infections can trigger gbs. by normalizing the free text describing a relation to umls domain knowledge, semrep provides the ability to combine and link knowledge from various sources as well as aggregate knowledge at pubmed scale. semrep extracts 30 predicate types, largely relating to clinical medicine (e.g. treats, diagnoses, administered_to, process_of), substance interactions (e.g. interacts_with, inhibits, stimulates), genetic etiology of disease (e.g. associated_with, causes, predisposes) and pharmacogenomics (e.g. affects, augments, disrupts). for a full list and descriptions of these predicate types, we refer the reader to. several evaluations have focused on different domains and linguistic structures. results are summarized in. numbers in the first column indicate the number of predications evaluated. the semmeddb repository consists of information regarding semantic predications extracted from pubmed citations by preprocessing and stored for efficient access. the repository underpins semantic medline (http://skr3.nlm.nih.gov/semmed), a web application that incorporates pubmed-based information retrieval with semantic predications, automatic summarization and visualization . in this note, we propose the repository as a stand-alone, large-scale knowledge resource that can be exploited independently of semantic medline. with the ability to access the full extent of the repository, the users can circumvent the search summarizevisualize model of semantic medline and apply advanced data mining algorithms directly to support biomedical research as well as clinical practice, for hypothesis generation and literature-based discovery.we described the semmeddb repository, which makes the semantic content of all pubmed citations as extracted by semrep available to the research community. the utility of the repository for hypothesis generation, literature-based discovery and clinical decision making has so far been demonstrated from within the semantic medline paradigm and independently. given its scale and size, this repository can further serve as the basis of advanced data-mining techniques and assist in uncovering novel relationships in biomedicine.  
