sensa: web-based sensitivity analysis of sbml models sensa is a web-based application for sensitivity analysis of mathematical models. the sensitivity analysis is based on metabolic control analysis, computing the local, global and time-dependent properties of model components. interactive visualization facilitates interpretation of usually complex results. sensa can contribute to the analysis, adjustment and understanding of mathematical models for dynamic systems. availability and implementation: sensa is available atthe understanding of complex systems and their dynamics has greatly improved with mathematical modelling. with models, the dynamics of system components can be analysed, hypotheses can be tested and the behaviour of the system can be predicted in different conditions or in response to perturbations. these predictions guide future experiments, which can save money and time. to mimic the behaviour of the real biological system, model parameters have to be tuned based on biological observations. in this process, it is vital to test the effects of changes in parameter values on the behaviour of the system. this test is often referred to as sensitivity analysis. sensitivity analysis measures the change of a specific system property (e.g. a steady state concentration, reaction flux or the amplitude of oscillations) in response to changes in parameter values. thus, it shows how sensitive the system is towards a particular parameter. it can also be interpreted as fragility or robustness analysis of the system. here, we implement sensitivity analysis as defined by metabolic control analysis (mca). mca defines coefficients that describe the effect of infinitesimal changes of parameters on system properties, like reaction fluxes or variable concentrations . classical mca is limited to models in steady state, but ingalls and sauro extended the theory to look at the time-dependent changes of sensitivities as well . mca and its extension provide a sound theoretical framework for sensitivity analysis.to demonstrate the main analysis and the corresponding type of results a user can expect, we analysed a model for the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (erk) cascade from, accessible on the biomodels database (biomodels id: biomd0000000270). the model comprises 33 variables and 39 parameters, resulting in 2376 different tdcrcs. a schematic of the model topology and a selection of concentration time courses and computed tdcrcs are shown in. looking at the structure of the model and the concentrations, it becomes clear that a phosphorylation of praf leads to a number of phosphorylations further downstream. using sensa, we are now able to observe the inherent relationship between changes in the concentration of praf and perk1 and pperk2 over time. moderately complex models already produce a large number of tdcrcs that can be problematic to visualize. to address this, we implemented interactive graphics with a selection matrix and a plotting area. the matrix shows all possible tdcrcs. when the user hovers over a specific coefficient, the line is transiently displayed in the plot. this serves as a quick and easy way to scan a large number of coefficients. also, the user may select to plot all, none or the 10 most extreme coefficients.sensitivity analysis in general is an important tool in many areas of modern systems biology and is often used to understand the growing complexity of models. especially tdcrcs can give an interesting perspective on signalling models, and are an often cited method in the field (original paper has 140 citations). nevertheless, studies that actually use it are rare . we provide sensa to close the gap between this sophisticated analysis and a comprehensive way to use it. this can enable modellers to use the method and make the results more accessible.  
