seq2pathway: an r/bioconductor package for pathway analysis of next-generation sequencing data seq2pathway is an r/python wrapper for pathway (or functional gene-set) analysis of genomic loci, adapted for advances in genome research. seq2pathway associates the biological significance of genomic loci with their target transcripts and then summarizes the quantified values on the gene-level into pathway scores. it is designed to isolate systematic disturbances and common biological underpinnings from next-generation sequencing (ngs) data. seq2pathway offers bioconductor users enhanced capability in discovering collective pathway effects caused by both coding genes and cis-regulation of non-coding elements. availability and implementation: the package is freely available atfunctional gene-set analysis (fgsa) improves biological interpretability of genomic features with respect to prior knowledge and has led to important biological discoveries . its power lies in the fact that it detects statistical significance over an entire dataset of gene-sets and yields biologically meaningful interpretations . recently, researchers revealed driver pathways that predispose individuals to disease and shed light on the development of targeted therapy by performing fgsa on genes proximal to significantly disease-associated loci. however, with the increasing growth of genomic sequencing measurements, noncoding regulatory loci pose a critical challenge to fgsa, as nearly 99 of the nucleotides in the human genome do not code for proteins but instead richly harbor functional regulators of genes . gene-based fgsa methods neglect non-coding regulatory information because they have no readily annotated gene function and cannot be assigned to a specific biological pathway. for example, homer (hypergeometric optimization of motif enrichment), a popular tool for discovering cis-regulatory regions before any subsequent fgsa, links genomic loci to only the nearest genes . other fgsa algorithms take into account singlenucleotide polymorphisms (snps) only located in or near coding genes or exonic mutations . sequence-derived fgsa regarding the functional impact of not only coding genes, but also non-coding regulators, is necessary. a growing body of evidence supports the strategy of connecting genomic loci and coding genes using a many-to-many mapping and considering long-distance cis-regulation. first, non-coding regions richly harbor functional regulatory elements in humans . second, nearly half of the diseaseassociated snps are located in gene deserts . third, our recent study suggests that a disease-associated snp located in an intron could be the enhancer of a neighboring gene rather than of its host gene (van den). the first sequence-derived fgsa method is great (the genomic regions enrichment of annotations tool) . great quantifies an fgsa score by determining if the total  
