genome analysis seqanswers: an open access community for collaboratively decoding genomes the affordability of high-throughput sequencing has created an unprecedented surge in the use of genomic data in basic, translational and clinical research. the rapid evolution of sequencing technology, coupled with its broad adoption across biology and medicine, necessitates fast, collaborative interdisciplinary discussion. seqanswers provides a real-time knowledge-sharing resource to address this need, covering experimental and computational aspects of sequencing and sequence analysis. developers of popular analysis tools are among the 4000 active members, and 40 peer-reviewed publications have referenced seqanswers. availability: the seqanswers community is freely accessible atthe human genome project represents one of the greatest concerted achievements of the life sciences. this massive global effort jump-started the genomics era and enabled more ambitious and collaborative projects such as the cancer genome atlas (cancer genome atlas research), 1000 genome project (1000 genomes) and human microbiome project (the nih hmp working). these large population-scale studies, powered by high-throughput sequencing (hts) technologies, have generated massive amounts of genomic data with the potential to revolutionize genetics and medicine. the translation of these data to actionable medicine, however, is complicated by the challenges of extracting meaningful information from hts data . the challenge is not purely computational, as bioinformatics is bound by the experimental methods employed to produce genomic data . a successful experiment minimizes false positives and depends on to whom correspondence should be addressed. the optimization of an entire pipeline, from sample preparation to computational analysis. as hts begins to transform nearly all aspects of biological and medical science, more labs will incorporate the production and analysis of genomic data into their studies. however, these experimental and computational methods are evolving at an incredible pace and it is increasingly challenging for smaller research groups outside of major genome centers to stay current. real-time, interdisciplinary collaboration helps large genome centers optimize analysis pipelines and methods, and allows smaller groups to exploit them, even if they did not have resources to facilitate the initial development.the massive amounts of data and rapid pace of genome technology development necessitates innovations in scientific communication. the current standard for scientific communication between disparate research groups focuses on peer-reviewed research published in traditional scientific journals. these journals have evolved for the internet age, especially with the new emphasis on open access and fast publishing from both new, exclusively open access journals to traditional journals that have created new outlets for open access publication. while scientific journals will continue to have important roles as curators of research and referees for the peerreview process, there is an opportunity for open, internet-based platforms to supplement traditional journals by enabling the rapid exchange of results, techniques and data, the latter two being crucial for advancing research, 1 but notoriously difficult to access. seqanswers was designed to address this need for genomics. the community has since developed into a thriving community that offers a wealth of information, including discussions that have facilitated the construction of analysis pipelines and consensus on standards in the genomics community.  
