gene expression seqgsea: a bioconductor package for gene set enrichment analysis of rna-seq data integrating differential expression and splicing seqgsea is an open-source bioconductor package for the functional integration of differential expression and splicing analysis in rna-seq data. seqgsea implements an analysis pipeline, which first computes differential splicing and differential expression scores, followed by integrating them into a per-gene score that quantifies each genes association with a phenotype of interest, and finally executes gene set enrichment analysis in a cutoff-free manner to achieve biological insights. seqgsea accounts for biological variability and determines the statistical significance of gene pathways and networks using subject permutation, and thus requires at least five samples per group. real applications show that seqgsea detects more biologically meaningful gene sets without biases toward long or highly expressed genes. seqgsea can be set up to run in parallel to reduce the analysis time. availability and implementation: the seqgsea package with a vi-gnette is available atby enabling simultaneous quantification of abnormal expression and aberrant splicing, high-throughput transcriptome sequencing or rna-seq is providing unprecedented insight into disease and condition-associated transcriptome alterations. although these complex patterns of transcriptional activity have a profound influence in the pathophysiology of disease, we need tools that are capable of integrating their biological influences to determine their functional significance. functional annotation of independently differentially expressed genes and their pathway analysis is ideal for investigating highly controlled interventions in clonal or syngeneic systems with no underlying heterogeneity. however, when comparing conditions in outbred populations, particularly for complex phenotypes or diseases, biologically significant effects are often distributed in pathways or networks such that the influence of individual genes is redundant and untraceable.arguably the best alternative in thisituation is to consider related gene sets using gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) to identify disturbances at the pathway and network levels that have biologically associated function . although there are existing tools for performing gsea on conventional gene expression data, there are currently no tools for implementing gsea with rna-seq data that can efficiently incorporate gene expression and alternative splicing (as). for example, goseq cannot account for as in its enrichment analysis. in higher primates, the majority of genes undergo as; especially, in humans more than 90 genes are alternatively spliced . recent evidence suggests that splicing and transcription largely take place almost simultaneously , and both result in the alteration of mrna composition, stability, localization and translation. in this applications note, we introduce a new software system for implementing a recently proposed enrichment analysis approach for rna-seq data, combining both overall differential expression (de) and differential splicing (ds) . we also demonstrate the utility of this approachdesignated seqgsea, to maximize the yield of biological insight from rna-seq data without any biases toward long or highly expressed genes, in a number of data sets.  
