genome analysis seqlm: an mdl based method for identifying differentially methylated regions in high density methylation array data motivation: one of the main goals of large scale methylation studies is to detect differentially methylated loci. one way is to approach this problem sitewise, i.e. to find differentially methylated positions (dmps). however, it has been shown that methylation is regulated in longer genomic regions. so it is more desirable to identify differentially methylated regions (dmrs) instead of dmps. the new high coverage arrays, like illuminas 450k platform, make it possible at a reasonable cost. few tools exist for dmr identification from this type of data, but there is no standard approach. results: we propose a novel method for dmr identification that detects the region boundaries according to the minimum description length (mdl) principle, essentially solving the problem of model selection. the significance of the regions is established using linear mixed models. using both simulated and large publicly available methylation datasets, we compare seqlm performance to alternative approaches. we demonstrate that it is both more sensitive and specific than competing methods. this is achieved with minimal parameter tuning and, surprisingly, quickest running time of all the tried methods. finally, we show that the regional differential methylation patterns identified on sparse array data are confirmed by higher resolution sequencing approaches. availability and implementation: the methods have been implemented in r package seqlm that is available through github: https://dna methylation is an important cellular mechanism that is associated to processes like x-chromosome inactivation and genomic imprinting. it has also been related to several diseases such as diabetes, schizophrenia and cancer . in recent years the role of methylation in various diseases has received considerable interest from the research community. this can be attributed largely to the development of high-density methylation microarrays, like illumina infinium 450k, which have made affordable the characterization of genome-wide methylation patterns on large disease related cohorts. the illumina 450k microarray covers around 20 cpg sites per gene. such resolution reveals a spatially correlated structure of dna methylation. closely situated cpg sites often display almost identical methylation patterns. this feature has been seen already in the early sequencing studies and it has been also shown that methylation is regulated in longer regions . while strong spatial correlation is a dominant feature in the data, common analysis methods do not take this into account. for example, differential methylation analysis is commonly performed in a sitewise manner , thus ignoring correlations between probes. to take spatial correlations into account when performing the analysis, it is natural to search for differentially methylated regions (dmrs) instead of sites. statistically, it could improve the sensitivity of the analysis and make the results less redundant. biologically, differential methylation supported by multiple independent probes is less likely to represent an experimental artefact. dmr centric analysis has been performed in multiple studies and there are several tools available for it . however, despite the numerous tools available, there is no standard approach for dmr identification. one possibility is to use predefined regions that are based on genomic features such as gene parts or cpg islands. this has been implemented in an r package ima , but it has several shortcomings. such an analysis often reveals large amount of regions that cover the same set of differentially methylated sites, while their rankings are more based on the concordance between the borders of true dmrs and predefined regions than the true extent of differential methylation. another, a more general approach is to define the regions dynamically based on the data. one such method is comb-p that combines single site p-values by using sliding windows and taking into account the correlation between sites. this method operates on p-values, which makes it flexible and computationally efficient. however, the dmrs are then based on summary statistics and this may lose some information compared to modeling directly on the measurements. also, the user must pick the minimum p-value required to start a region, and the resulting regions strongly depend on this parameter value. maybe the most well-known method is bump hunting , integrated into r package minfi . essentially, it performs site-level analysis on spatially smoothed data and then applies some rules to aggregate the sites into regions. significance of these regions is assessed using permutations. the number and nature of bumphunter results depends strongly on the effect size cutoff and smoothing window size parameters that are hard to interpret in biological terms and thus tricky to optimize. second, due to smoothing the method is unable to detect single-site differential methylation , making it less effective in sparsely covered regions. another tool aclust defines the regions by gradually clustering the consecutive sites together. the significance of identified clusters is tested using the generalized estimating equations (gee) model. this approach relies on an even larger number of user-defined parameters, such as correlation metric, agglomeration method, correlation threshold, etc. in this article we present a novel method for identifying dmrs. probes are grouped into regions based similarity of differential methylation profiles by using the minimum description length (mdl) principle. the significance of these regions is estimated using linear mixed models. such an information theoretic background makes the model flexible in a variety of situations without the need of extensive parameter tuning. for validation, we show that our approach is effective in finding true dmrs while appropriately controlling the number of false positives both on simulated and real methylation datasets.we demonstrate the utility of seqlm method in three parts. first, we study the statistical properties and performance of seqlm and other methods on simulated data. second, we apply the methods to a large public methylation dataset covering 17 different tissues. in all cases we compare seqlm with bumphunter, aclust, comb-p and ima. finally, we validate several dmrs that were identified using seqlm on illumina 450k chip data with sanger sequencing.the method as defined in this article opens up a number of future directions for development. the current model can also handle continuous variables in addition to the two groups of data. thus, it is possible to use seqlm to search for methylation quantitative trait loci (meqtls). in such analysis, even small improvements in statistical power can have huge consequences. the method can be generalized to handle raw sequencing data with methylation counts instead of aggregated methylation values. for that we must replace linear regression with logistic regression. the change only alters the model fitting inside fixed region and not the core of the dynamic programming routine. the mdl framework underlying seqlm is a powerful way to identify genomic regions. by employing different statistical models it is possible to specify the properties of the desired regions. for example one can include more sophisticated linear models to test more complex hypotheses or use clustering methods instead, to perform unsupervised region finding.we presented a novel approach for dmr identification, described as a three-stage process. first, the data is divided into smaller segments based on genomic distance between consecutive probes. then, each of these segments is divided into regions with consistent differential methylation patterns. for this, all possible segmentations are considered and the optimal one is chosen according to the mdl principle. finally, the significance of differential methylation in each region is assessed using linear mixed models. in our algorithm, the latter two steps are naturally related as both the segmentation and assessing the statistical significance are based on the b parameter. we showed that seqlm performs well on simulated data, being both more sensitive and more specific than the alternative methods. on a real dataset we can see that dmrs found by seqlm cover more sites than other methods while controlling the type i error rate. at the same time, the redundancy within the results is smaller as the close sites are reported together. finally, we validated 14 dmrs using sanger sequencing and managed to show good correlation between the array and sequencing based estimates of differential methylation.  
