sequence analysis seqpig: simple and scalable scripting for large sequencing data sets in hadoop hadoop mapreduce-based approaches have become increasingly popular due to their scalability in processing large sequencing datasets. however, as these methods typically require in-depth expertise in hadoop and java, they are still out of reach of many bioinformaticians. to solve this problem, we have created seqpig, a library and a collection of tools to manipulate, analyze and query sequencing datasets in a scalable and simple manner. seqpigscripts use the hadoop-based distributed scripting engine apache pig, which automatically parallelizes and distributes data processing tasks. we demonstrate seqpigs scalability over many computing nodes and illustrate its use with example scripts. availability and implementation: available under the open source mit license at http://sourceforge.net/projects/seqpig/novel computational approaches are required to cope with the increasing data volumes of large-scale sequencing projects, as the growth in processing power and storage access speed is unable to keep pace with them . several innovative tools and technologies have been proposed to tackle these challenges. some are based on mapreduce, which is a distributed computing paradigm that is based on the idea of splitting input data into chunks, which can be processed largely independently (via a map function). subresults can later be merged after grouping-related subresults (by a reduce function). mapreduce permits automatic parallelization and scalable data distribution across many computers. the most popular implementation available as open-source software is apache hadoop, which also comes with its own distributed file system. the validity of hadoop as a data processing platform is demonstrated by the level of adoption in major data-intensive companies, e.g. twitter, facebook and amazon. motivated by the potential scalability and throughput offered by hadoop, there are an increasing number of hadoop-based tools for processing sequencing data , ranging from quality control and alignment to snp calling , variant annotation (o) and structural variant detection , including general purpose workflow management (schonherr). note the recent publication of independent and complimentary work in . although hadoop does simplify writing scalable distributed software, it does not make it trivial. such a task still requires specialized skills and a significant amount of work, particularly if the solution involves sequences of mapreduce jobs. this effort can be reduced significantly by using high-level tools such as apache pig, which implements an sql-like scripting language that is automatically translated into a sequence of mapreduce jobs. given its flexibility and simplicity for developing data processing pipelines, it is not surprising that a large fraction of computing jobs in contemporary hadoop deployments originate from apache pig or similar high-level tools . seqpig brings the benefits of apache pig to sequencing data analysis. it allows users to integrate their own analysis components with existing mapreduce programs to create full ngs pipelines based on hadoop.  
