genetics and population analysis seraphim: studying environmental rasters and phylogenetically informed movements seraphim ( studying environmental rasters and phylogenetically informed movements ) is a suite of computational methods developed to study phylogenetic reconstructions of spatial movement in an environmental context. seraphim extracts the spatio-temporal information contained in estimated phylogenetic trees and uses this information to calculate summary statistics of spatial spread and to visualize dispersal history. most importantly, seraphim enables users to study the impact of customized environmental variables on the spread of the study organism. specifically, given an environmental raster, seraphim computes environmental weights for each phylogeny branch, which represent the degree to which the environmental variable impedes (or facilitates) lineage movement. correlations between movement duration and these environmental weights are then assessed, and the statistical significances of these correlations are evaluated using null distributions generated by a randomization procedure. seraphim can be applied to any phylogeny whose nodes are annotated with spatial and temporal information. at present, such phylogenies are most often found in the field of emerging infectious diseases , but will become increasingly common in other biological disciplines as population genomic data grows. availability and implementation: seraphim 1.0 is freely available from http://evolve.zoo.ox.ac.uk/. r package, source code, example files, tutorials and a manual are also available from this website.phylogenetic techniques are now a standard tool in the study of the spatial and demographic history of organisms (e.g.). in the context of infectious diseases, for example, phylogenetic inference can be used to reconstruct epidemic history (e.g.). of most relevance here, phylogeographic methods, such as that implemented in the software program beast , enable the reconstruction of the dispersal history of a phylogeny of a given set of genomes sampled through time in continuous space . the current version of this approach uses a relaxed random walk model to reconstruct historical dispersal. phylogeographic methods model the geographic locations of nodes in a phylogeny, and can therefore be considered a type of phylogenetic character mapping approach. trees inferred using this method, or related methods such as the structured coalescent model can be visualized in a geographical context, such that each branch is interpreted as a vector that characterizes a distinct path through time and space. thus, the tree represents a collection of phylogenetically informed v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com movement events and contains useful information about the past dynamics of spatial spread. here we present seraphim ( studying environmental rasters and phylogenetically informed movements ), a new suite of computational and statistical methods developed to study the environmental context of spatio-temporal phylogenies. seraphim is available as a r package (r core team, 2016, http://www.r-pro ject.org) that (i) extracts spatio-temporal information from a set of phylogenetic trees, (ii) estimates and plots dispersion statistics, and (iii) statistically test hypotheses regarding the relationship between dispersal velocity and environmental variables, such as altitude, population density and land cover.  
