gene expression a personalized committee classification approach to improving prediction of breast cancer metastasis motivation: metastasis prediction is a well-known problem in breast cancer research. as breast cancer is a complex and heterogeneous disease with many molecular subtypes, predictive models trained for one cohort often perform poorly on other cohorts, and a combined model may be suboptimal for individual patients. furthermore, attempting to develop subtype-specific models is hindered by the ambiguity and stereotypical definitions of subtypes. results: here, we propose a personalized approach by relaxing the definition of breast cancer subtypes. we assume that each patient belongs to a distinct subtype, defined implicitly by a set of patients with similar molecular characteristics, and construct a different predictive model for each patient, using as training data, only the patients defining the subtype. to increase robustness, we also develop a committee-based prediction method by pooling together multiple personalized models. using both intra-and inter-dataset validations, we show that our approach can significantly improve the prediction accuracy of breast cancer metastasis compared with several popular approaches, especially on those hard-to-learn cases. furthermore, we find that breast cancer patients belonging to different canonical subtypes tend to have different predictive models and gene signatures, suggesting that metastasis in different canonical subtypes are likely governed by different molecular mechanisms. availability and implementation: source code implemented in matlab and java available atrecently, large-scale profiling techniques such as microarray and next-generation sequencing have enabled systematic screening of genomic, epigenomic and transcriptomic changes associated with cancer. these data have been used for disease prognosis and outcome prediction with an accuracy comparable or superior to conventional histological grading-based methods . however, it is well known that cancer is a heterogeneity disease and that cancers occurring at the same tissue or organ can have multiple subtypes with distinct molecular signatures and likely have different prognosis and treatment responses . therefore, the overall performance of such prognostic models is still poor. an intuitive solution to address the aforementioned problem is to design prognostic models separately for each cancer subtype. this simple solution poses two problems. firstly, the number of available training samples becomes smaller, especially for relatively rare subtypes, which unavoidably reduces the reliability and stability of the classification models. secondly and more importantly, this solution depends on well establishment of predefined cancer subtypes and unambiguous assignment of each patient to some subtype. however, the definition of subtypes may be ambiguous and evolve with time. for example, in a series of studies, perou and colleagues analyzed gene expression profiles of primary breast tumors and defined the subtypes of breast cancer, termed luminal a, luminal b, normal breast-like, basal, erbb2 and more recently, claudia-low, which have different survival rates and responses to hormone treatment . studies on other datasets have confirmed some of the subtypes such as the basal-like and erbb2, but the definitions of the other subtypes are not always consistent and are sensitive to the set of genes used and the set of samples analyzed . it was suggested that the molecular subtypes of cancer may be a continuum . hence, attempting to identify distinct subtypes may not be always appropriate. in this article, we propose a generalization of the subtypebased classification idea. instead of relying on explicit definition of subtypes, we simply treat each patient as if he/she belongs to a different subtype and then construct multiple, personalized, predictive models for each patient. these models are evaluated for their performance in predicting the outcomes of the specific patient, and only the good models are retained. when a new patient comes, a set of patients of similar molecular characteristics are chosen, so are their predictive models. the final decision is made by considering the predictions from all the selected models. applying our method to three publicly available microarray datasets of breast cancer for prediction of metastasis, we found that our proposed personalized classification method has much better prediction accuracy than standard methods that either do to whom correspondence should be addressed. not use cancer subtype information or use only the predefined cancer subtypes. importantly, we found that our proposed method significantly improves cross-dataset prediction accuracy, which is critical in clinical practice to predict disease outcomes. furthermore, our results show that different breast cancer subtypes require different metastatic classification models, suggesting that the metastasis process in these different subtypes are governed by different molecular mechanisms.in this article, we proposed a personalized committee classification approach for disease outcome prediction that was based onbasal, lumb/erbb2 and luma/lumb represent the models displayed in cluster 1, 3 and 4, respectively, in. bold values indicate ranks less than 50.  
