structural bioinformatics sesaw: balancing sequence and structural information in protein functional mapping motivation: functional similarity between proteins is evident at both the sequence and structure levels. sesaw is a web-based program for identifying functionally or evolutionarily conserved motifs in protein structures by locating sequence and structural similarities, and quantifying these at the level of individual residues. results can be visualized in 2d, as annotated alignments, or in 3d, as structural superpositions. an example is given for both an experimentally determined query structure and a homology model. availability and implementation: the web server is located atsequence alignment and structural alignment are widely used techniques for inferring functional or evolutionary relationships between proteins. however, most alignment methods do not integrate sequence and structural information into one measure of similarity or describe the similarity at the level of individual residues. we recently introduced a sequence and structure-based scoring method that employs sequence profileprofile comparisons, but is anchored by structural alignments and showed that the functional information associated with the top-scoring hits found by the method agreed well with expert annotations published in the literature . subsequently, we have shown that this approach can be used to identify functional sites in remote (e.g.1020 sequence identity) homology models, even when the structural template used to build the model is itself un-annotated . that is, a structure without a known function (e.g. a structural genomics target) can be used as an intermediate template to subsequently locate a functionally characterized structure, and thus map putative functional sites onto a distantly related query sequence. here, we describe a web-based implementation of the method called sesaw (sequencederived structural alignment weights) that can automatically perform putative functional residue mapping. we emphasize that such mapping is intended to guide subsequent experiments rather than to serve as a substitute for experimental annotations. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
