systems biology sgns2: a compartmentalized stochastic chemical kinetics simulator for dynamic cell populations motivation: cell growth and division affect the kinetics of internal cellular processes and the phenotype diversity of cell populations. since the effects are complex, e.g. different cellular components are partitioned differently in cell division, to account for them in silico, one needs to simulate these processes in great detail. results: we present sgns2, a simulator of chemical reaction systems according to the stochastic simulation algorithm with multi-delayed reactions within hierarchical, interlinked compartments which can be created, destroyed and divided at runtime. in division, molecules are randomly segregated into the daughter cells following a specified distribution corresponding to one of several partitioning schemes, applicable on a per-molecule-type basis. we exemplify its use with six models including a stochastic model of the disposal mechanism of unwanted protein aggregates in escherichia coli, a model of phenotypic diversity in populations with different levels of synchrony, a model of a bacterio-phages infection of a cell population and a model of prokaryotic gene expression at the nucleotide and codon levels.recent evidence suggests that even in cellular organisms whose division is morphologically symmetric, there are a number of asymmetries between daughter cells. these arise, among other things, from the stochasticity in the partitioning of components in division and from biased partitioning schemes for some components. for example, in escherichia coli, unwanted protein aggregates follow biased partitioning schemes dependent on the age of the daughter cells poles . these and other recent findings suggest that the phenotypic diversity of cell populations, among other factors, depends on errors and biases in the partitioning of rna, proteins and other molecules. this is of relevance since most rnas exist in small numbers and small fluctuations in these numbers can alter the behavior of genetic circuits and trigger visible phenotype changes . these sources of phenotypic heterogeneity are difficult to distinguish from, e.g. noise in gene expression . although some effects can be assessed analytically , others are too complex and must be assessed numerically. a simulator is thus needed that accounts for noise and delays in gene expression and for compartmentalization of processes and components. presently, simulators of the dynamics of noisy biochemical systems rely on the stochastic simulation algorithm (ssa) , e.g. . some support compartmentalization, simulating reaction-diffusion systems in either static or dynamically sized compartments . others support rule-based creation of reactions at runtime , and thus can simulate a dynamic cell population. very few support delays on the release into the system of one or more products of a reaction . these delays are essential to accurately model the kinetics of some processes, e.g. transcription, as rna production is mostly regulated by the duration of events in transcription initiation . here, we present sgns2, an extension of sgn sim that incorporates dynamic compartments and multiple partitioning distributions at cell division, applicable on a per-molecule-type basis. the number of reactions, compartments and delayed events, allowing complex models to be simulated in reasonable time. to simulate cell division, we introduced a special reaction event, whose timing follows the ssa rules. when executed, instead of subtracting substrates from the system, a random number is generated based on one of the several partitioning distributions available, including some of those listed in huh and paulsson (2011). each of these mimics a specific molecule partitioning process during cell division. sgns2 allows both biased and unbiased partitioning of molecules and sub-compartments. the results of these events can be instantaneous or be placed on the wait list. compartment division and molecule partitioning are represented in the following form: splitp : protein@cell ! c @cell : protein@cell when this reaction occurs, a new cell compartment is created (@cell in the product list). proteins in the original cell are partitioned according to a biased binomial partitioning scheme. in this, each protein is independently partitioned into the new cell with probability p. other common partitioning distributions include the independent partitioning of molecules into daughter cells with random (beta-distributed) sizes and the binding of molecules to spindle binding sites which are segregated evenly between daughter cells such as during mitosis. available distributions are listed in the manual. sgns2 is a command line utility, designed to fit into a toolchain, supporting various input and output formats. input can be specified in two formats: sbml and sgnsims native format . a subset of sbml core level 3 version 1 is supported, allowing simulation of most sbml models. output can be in csv, tsv or in binary format. a text editor may be used to write models in sgnsim format. sbml-based graphical interfaces such as celldesigner or cytoscape may be used to manage sbml models. the results of simulations are interpretable by programs like matlab, r or excel. an example of running a model in sgnsim format of a growing cell population is shown in supplementary.  
