structural bioinformatics shape directed rna folding chemical mapping experiments allow for nucleotide resolution assessment of rna structure. we demonstrate that different strategies of integrating probing data with thermo-dynamics-based rna secondary structure prediction algorithms can be implemented by means of soft constraints. this amounts to incorporating suitable pseudo-energies into the standard energy model for rna secondary structures. as a showcase application for this new feature of the viennarna package we compare three distinct, previously published strategies to utilize shape reactivities for structure prediction. the new tool is benchmarked on a set of rnas with known reference structure. availability and implementation: the capability for shape directed rna folding is part of the upcoming release of the viennarna package 2.2, for which a preliminary release is already freely available at http://www.tbi.beyond its role as information carrier from genome to proteome, rna is a key player in genome regulation and contributes to a wide variety of cellular tasks. the spatial structure of rna plays an important role in this context because it critically influences the interaction of rnas with proteins and with nucleic acids. knowledge of rna structure is therefore crucial for understanding various biological processes. chemical and enzymatic probing methods provide information concerning the flexibility and accessibility at nucleotide resolution. they are based on the observation that rna can be selectively modified by small organic molecules, metal ions or rnase enzymes, resulting in formation of an adduct between the rna and the small compound or rna cleavage. subsequent primer extension mediated by rt enzymes typically terminates at the modified sites. the resulting cdna fragments thus inform directly on the rna structure by identifying, depending on the particular reagent, paired or unpaired sequence positions. for a recent overview of such (highthroughput) probing methods we refer to. as chemical probing is becoming a frequently used technology to determining rna structure experimentally, there is increasing demand for efficient and accurate computational methods to incorporate probing data into secondary structure prediction tools. efficient dynamic programming algorithms, as implemented in the viennarna package , typically yield excellent prediction results for short sequences, but accuracy decreases to between 40 and 70 for long rna sequences. this discrepancy is mainly caused by imperfect thermodynamic parameters and the inherent limitations of the secondary structure model, such as tertiary interactions, pseudoknots, ligand binding or kinetics traps. to alleviate the gap in available computational tools we have extended the viennarna package by a flexible framework to incorporate all those soft constraints that are compatible with the rna folding grammar; here we use this to handle position-wise data as they arise from chemical probing experiments.  
