data and text mining shiny-phyloseq: web application for interactive microbiome analysis with provenance tracking we have created a shiny-based web application, called shiny-phyloseq, for dynamic interaction with microbiome data that runs on any modern web browser and requires no programming, increasing the accessibility and decreasing the entrance requirement to using phyloseq and related r tools. along with a data-and context-aware dynamic interface for exploring the effects of parameter and method choices, shiny-phyloseq also records the complete user input and subsequent graphical results of a users session, allowing the user to archive, share and reproduce the sequence of steps that created their resultwithout writing any new code themselves. availability and implementation: shiny-phyloseq is implemented entirely in the r language. it can be hosted/launched by any system with r installed, including windows, mac os and most linux distributions. information technology administrators can also host shiny-phyloseq from a remote server, in which case users need only have a web browser installed. shiny-phyloseq is provided free of charge under a gpl-3 open-source license through github atanalysis of microbial communities requires the interpretation of one or more high-dimensional abundance matrices and its relationship with other datasets, using a complex and emerging suite of methods from ecology, genetics, phylogenetics, multivariate statistics, visualization and testing. filtering, custom curation and transformation of the abundance data are also required usually, but the precisely reproducible workflow from raw data to final analyses is often difficult or impossible to reproduce exactly. ideally, published scientific analyses are completely reproducible in as easy a fashion as possible; and anything less represents an impediment to both progress and peer review . fortunately, r is well suited for the analytical aspects of microbiome research, with an interaction-oriented functional programming design (r development core) that includes support for reproducible research . we recently described a software package for the r language, phyloseq, dedicated to the object-oriented representation and analysis of microbiome census data . one of the originally stated goals of phyloseq was to leverage r-based resources for reproducible research, and thereby, improve the reproducibility and portability of published microbiome analyses. unfortunately, for many microbiome researchers with classical training in biology, learning a programming languageeven a functional interactive language like rhas proven to be a prohibitive investment of time and effort. however, most of the necessary computations are not only tractable by r, but also fast enough for dynamic interaction via a graphical user interface (gui). here we describe our release of shiny-phyloseq, a web browser gui that leverages phyloseq and other r resources for the analysis of microbiome census datawhile also allowing the user to archive the complete code and data necessary to exactly reproduce their session results. although it is difficult for any single gui application to support the full range of analyses required in microbiome research, shiny-phyloseq provides a compelling framework and introduction to microbiome analysis in r. its modular opensource design encourages modification, customization and code reuse. there are other resources with gui elements available for the analysis of microbiome census data, including mg-rast , qiime and clovr . to our knowledge, there are no guis available for the analysis of microbiome census data that also leverage the r programming language, ggplot2 , and phyloseq while also providing a provenance record of a users session.  
