gene expression shortran: a pipeline for small rna-seq data analysis high-throughput sequencing currently generates a wealth of small rna (srna) data, making data mining a topical issue. processing of these large data sets is inherently multidimensional as length, abundance, sequence composition, and genomic location all hold clues to srna function. analysis can be challenging because the formulation and testing of complex hypotheses requires combined use of visualization, annotation and abundance profiling. to allow flexible generation and querying of these disparate types of information, we have developed the shortran pipeline for analysis of plant or animal short rna sequencing data. it comprises nine modules and produces both graphical and mysql format output. availability: shortran is freely available and can be downloaded fromone of the challenges in bioinformatics is to create tools with sufficient flexibility to enable formulation and testing of complex biological hypotheses while remaining technically simple and user friendly. useful programs for processing small ribonucleic acid (srna)-seq data exist, such as the uea (university of east anglia) srna toolkit , waprna and dario . however, during our analysis of large-scale srna-seq datasets, two issues hampered our progress when using the existing tools. one was restrictions on data upload sizes and parameter adjustment options for web-based tools and the other was a lack of options for easy integration and combined querying of srna expression and annotation data. to help address these issues, we developed the shortran pipeline for srna-seq analysis. it is a command-line python-based software package consisting of nine modules that can be used independently. the pipeline output includes graphical summaries, text files that can be easily parsed and automatic construction of a mysql database, which allows simultaneous querying of expression and annotation data. its features are compared with those of the existing pipelines in supplementary table s1. shortran is aimed at a broad group of users with only basic bioinformatics training, requiring only little experience with command line and database environments for successful use.we analyzed 18 srna-seq libraries representing the major arabidopsis root cell types and developmental zones using shortran (supplementary) . in the original study, the authors focused on mirnas and briefly mentioned cell-type-specific enrichment of 19-mer srnas. here, we exploit the ease of combining annotation and profiling information using shortran to describe the features of this class of srnas in detail. the total 200 million reads were processed with and without a variation score cutoff (stdev/average420) (supplementary). there was a large variation in library size, with larger libraries showing higher correlation between replicates (supplementaryand). since the endodermis2 library was small and showed very poor correlation with all other samples, we ignored it in the subsequent analyses. application of the variation score cutoff elevated the correlation coefficients (supplementary, supplementary) but did not affect the sequence composition of nucleotides 13 (supplementary). in accordance with the original study, mirna prediction by module 4 identified a number of conserved and putative novel mirnas that displayed high variation scores (supplementaryand supplementaryq1). the graphical data summaries produced by module 1 showed that the stele and endodermis libraries were strongly enriched for 19-mers compared with the cortex, epidermis and columella samples (supplementary figs s4 and s5). to determine the precise nature of the enrichment, we queried the shortran mysql output database (supplementary), filtering out 19-mer srnas at least three times enriched in stele and endodermis (supplementary table s7, q2). both construction and querying of the database were computationally light (supplementary). all the resulting 69 srnas were assigned to the same genomic clusters by module 3, and module 6 mapped them all to glycine transfer ribonucleic acids (trnas) with tcc anticodons (supplementary table s9 and). using further queries (supplementaryq10), we found that the gly trna derived srnas fully explained the 19-mer enrichment in the stele and endodermis libraries, and we showed that the enrichment was not limited to the most abundant gly ttc-associated srna (supplementary, lines 110). this dominant role of gly trnas in srna generation agrees with previous observations . interestingly, the remaining 19-mer trna-derived srnas were most abundant in columella cells (supplementary table s10, lines 1112). this enrichment was caused exclusively by srnas derived from arg cct trnas (supplementaryq1112,lines 1316 and), emphasizing the differential cellular expression and potential biological significance trna-associated srnas.  
