gene expression shrinkage estimation of dispersion in negative binomial models for rna-seq experiments with small sample size motivation: rna-seq experiments produce digital counts of reads that are affected by both biological and technical variation. to distinguish the systematic changes in expression between conditions from noise, the counts are frequently modeled by the negative binomial distribution. however, in experiments with small sample size, the per-gene estimates of the dispersion parameter are unreliable. method: we propose a simple and effective approach for estimating the dispersions. first, we obtain the initial estimates for each gene using the method of moments. second, the estimates are regularized, i.e. shrunk towards a common value that minimizes the average squared difference between the initial estimates and the shrinkage estimates. the approach does not require extra modeling assumptions , is easy to compute and is compatible with the exact test of differential expression. results: we evaluated the proposed approach using 10 simulated and experimental datasets and compared its performance with that of currently popular packages edger, deseq, bayseq, bbseq and samseq. for these datasets, sseq performed favorably for experiments with small sample size in sensitivity, specificity and computational time.whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing (rna-seq) technology quantifies gene expression in biological samples in counts of transcript reads mapped to the genes. accurate and comprehensive, it has made a major impact on genomic research . one common goal of rna-seq experiments is to detect differentially expressed genes, i.e. genes for which the counts of reads change between conditions more systematically than as expected by random chance . statistical methods for detecting differentially expressed genes must reflect the experimental design and appropriately account for the stochastic variation.moreover, many rna-seq experiments serve as high-throughput screens of a small number of samples with the goal of subsequent experimental validation. therefore, the analysis must handle a relatively small number of biological replicates. a variety of statistical methods and software has recently been proposed for detecting differentially expressed genes. these include deseq , edger , bayseq , samseq , bbseq. we briefly overview these methods. we further propose a direct and effective approach for characterizing the variation in the counts of reads, which improves the sensitivity and specificity of detecting differentially expressed genes for experiments with small sample size. we support this approach with an open-source r-based software package sseq.in addition to sseq, the following versions of the existing packages were used: edger v3.0.8 , deseq v1.10.1 , bayseq v1.12.0 , bbseq v1.0 , samseq as part of the r package samr v2.0 . for sseq, all the datasets were analyzed with the exact test, and analyses of the hammer and the tuch datasets accounted for their experimental designs. for edger and deseq, the datasets with two-group comparisons were analyzed with the exact test, and hammer and tuch datasets were analyzed with the glm-based approaches. for edger, the estimatecommondisp function in an older version of edger package (v2.4.6) was used to analyze unreplicated datasets. for deseq, the option fittypelocal was used to estimate the per-group variance. the default parameters were used otherwise. see supplementary materials for details and representative r scripts.in this manuscript, we advocated a model that specifies free pergene dispersion parameters in the negative binomial model for counts of rna-seq reads. we also advocated a biased estimation of these parameters, which can reduce the variance of the estimates and minimize the overall mse. biased estimation is different from specifying a probability model (such as in deseq) that assumes a true systematic relationship of the true variance and the true mean. it is particularly useful for experiments with a small sample size, where the systematic relationship may be difficult to evaluate. the shrinkage estimates are easy to compute, avoid iterative estimation, minimize the potential for overfitting and do not require extra computation time. they are compatible with the exact test of differential expression. for the datasets in this manuscript, sseq consistently had a similar or a higher sensitivity and specificity of detecting differential expression than the existing methods. the approach can be generalized to express the dependence of the dispersions on the expected value or on other covariates such as guanine-cytosine (gc) content or gene ontology annotations.(1) sseq (2) edger (3) deseq (4) bayseq (5) bbseqp-value p-value p-value 1-post. prob. p-value. the ecdf curves of detecting differential expression for the datasets with no external gold standard. y-axis: ecdf, function of the gene rank. x-axis: p-value or 1 minus posterior probability. solid line: two randomly selected replicates from a same condition (avsa). dotted line: one randomly selected replicate from each condition (unreplicated avsb). dashed line: avsb on the full dataset for two-group designs. dashed-dotted line: avsb on the full dataset for more complex designs. gray line: 45 degree. samseq is not applicable to unreplicated experiments and is excluded. the desired patterns are high areas under the avsb curves, and avsa curves that are at or below the 45 degree line estimation of dispersion in negative binomial models sseq can produce meaningful results in under-replicated rnaseq screens. however, we stress that rna-seq screens do not eliminate the biological variation in gene expression equation (12). as evidenced byand, the under-replicated screens have lower reproducibility as compared with the replicated studies. multiple biological replicates are necessary to adequately assess the full extent of the variation in the biological system. therefore, the under-replicated screens can only be conducted when followed by a rigorous experimental validation with complementary technologies and adequate sample size.  
