a pipeline for rna-seq data processing and quality assessment we present an r based pipeline, arrayexpresshts, for pre-processing, expression estimation and data quality assessment of high-throughput sequencing transcriptional profiling (rna-seq) datasets. the pipeline starts from raw sequence files and produces standard bioconductor r objects containing gene or transcript measurements for downstream analysis along with web reports for data quality assessment. it may be run locally on a users own computer or remotely on a distributed r-cloud farm at the european bioinformatics institute. it can be used to analyse users own datasets or public rna-seq datasets from the arrayexpress archive.deep sequencing of cdna molecules (rna-seq) is becoming the tool of choice for gene expression studies, often replacing microarrays to estimate gene expression levels, and rapidly superseding exon arrays in alternative splicing analysis or tilling arrays in the identification of previously unknown transcribed regions . in fact rna-seq allows researchers to study phenomena that were previously beyond the reach of microarrays, such as allele specific expression . the popularity of the new sequencing methods for gene expression is attested by the numerous recent publications and by the increasing number of submissions to public data repositories such as arrayexpress (ae) . many methods have been developed recently to tackle different aspects of rna-seq data analysis, but combining them into a robust analysis pipeline is an inherently study-specific task and poses ongoing challenges. the configuration options used for each tool affect the others used downstream, making it necessary for bioinformaticians to have a thorough knowledge of each one of them and its internal workings. furthermore, rna-seq methods routinely generate tens of millions of raw sequence reads corresponding to hundreds of gigabytes of data, the analysis of which requires intensive computational processing steps that render the analysis to whom correspondence should be addressed. impossible without the use of powerful servers. the gap between experimental throughput and processing speed is widening , with the analysis component falling behind. in light of these considerations we have developed arrayexpresshts, an automated r/bioconductor-based pipeline for pre-processing, expression estimation and data quality assessment of rna-seq datasets. starting from the raw read files it produces standard r objects containing expression levels for downstream analysis, and graphical html reports for data quality assessment. the pipeline has a choice of analysis methods and guides their configuration. flexibility is provided for power users to adjust all aspects of the pipeline within the well-known and powerful r language.the arrayexpresshts package allows the users to obtain a standard bioconductor expressionset object containing expression levels from raw sequence files with a single r function call. the main benefit of arrayexpresshts is the ease of its use, running in the same way either on a local computer or on the r cloud and with private or public data. written in r and available as open source, it also gives users the opportunity to extend and customize the pipeline for their needs. it can be used for individual data analyses or in routine data production pipelines, and it will be extended in the future to support other sequencing platforms, multiplexed data and the reporting of expression of non-annotated regions.  
