structural bioinformatics simicon: a web tool for protein–ligand model comparison through calculation of equivalent atomic contacts simicon is a web server designed for an automated identification of equivalent proteinligand atomic contacts in different conformational models of a complex. the contacts are computed with internal coordinate mechanics (icm) software with respect to molecular symmetry and the results are shown in the browser as text, tables and interactive 3d graphics. the web server can be executed remotely without a browser to allow users to automate multiple calculations.docking and virtual ligand screening with crystal structures or homology models play important roles in the understanding of receptorligand interactions, with numerous applications in drug discovery. a critical requirement for any useful application of docking algorithms is their ability to find accurate poses of the ligand and its contacts with the receptor atoms. the validation of the geometry of a complex or pose-prediction is based on the ability to reproduce the binding mode of a ligand observed in the cognate reference x-ray or nmr structure. the precision of the models is usually checked with the root mean squared deviation (rmsd), a popular measure that accounts for the distances of the ligand atoms of the model from the ligand atoms in the reference structure. to provide an example, in small molecule docking context, a heavy-atom rmsd 2 with respect to the reference pose is widely accepted as good . rmsd, however, has shortcomings that can lead to misclassification of both correct and incorrect poses . for instance, although a low rmsd value is indicative of a strong similarity, it does not show how well the critical interactions are conserved. in this regard, literature contains numerous examples where hydrogen bond interaction patterns differ between reference and model, despite having low rmsd values . conversely, a high rmsd might come from differences in a flexible region of the ligand (not important for the overall binding mode), or from a nearly correct pose of a  
