simple neurite tracer: open source software for reconstruction, visualization and analysis of neuronal processes motivation: advances in techniques to sparsely label neurons unlock the potential to reconstruct connectivity from 3d image stacks acquired by light microscopy. we present an application for semi-automated tracing of neurons to quickly annotate noisy datasets and construct complex neuronal topologies, which we call the simple neurite tracer. availability: simple neurite tracer is open source software, licensed under the gnu general public licence (gpl) and based on the public domain image processing software imagej. the software and further documentation are available via http://fiji.sc/simple_neurite_tracer as part of the package fiji, and can be used on windows, mac os and linux. documentation and introductory screencasts are available at the same url. contact:as genetic techniques for imaging neurons have improved and become more widespread, there has been an increasing demand for software to extract accurate and quantitative data on morphology, topology and connectivity patterns from these images. this process, which typically involves generating a graph of points through the midlines of neurons, is often known as tracing. extracting path data from 3d image stacks enables researchers to publish detailed information about putative connectivity, to reduce image complexity and to produce summary statistics for different neuron types. when combined with image registration, neuronal paths can be analysed for variation or used to construct connectivity maps. in this note, we introduce the simple neurite tracer, an application for precise annotation of paths from tube-like structures (such as neurons or blood vessels) in large image stacks. unlike many packages that analyse whole images with a single set of parameters, the simple neurite tracer is an exploratory tracing system. the semi-automatic approach can efficiently find the best path between points in neurons and build up complex topology. the package also provides methods for measuring neuron length and volume, an interface for sholl analysis and interactive 3d visualization. in addition, as part of the fiji framework, the simple neurite tracer interacts with other imagej plugins for further  
