simtoolbox: a matlab toolbox for structured illumination fluorescence microscopy simtoolbox is an open-source, modular set of functions for matlab equipped with a user-friendly graphical interface and designed for processing two-dimensional and three-dimensional data acquired by structured illumination microscopy (sim). both optical sectioning and super-resolution applications are supported. the software is also capable of maximum a posteriori probability image estimation (map-sim), an alternative method for reconstruction of structured illumination images. map-sim can potentially reduce reconstruction artifacts, which commonly occur due to refractive index mismatch within the sample and to imperfections in the illumination. availability and implementation: simtoolbox, example data and the online documentation are freely accessible atin structured illumination microscopy (sim), a sequence of images is acquired, each taken with a different position of an illumination pattern in a fluorescence microscope but without a mask in the detection path . subsequent processing of the raw data is required to reconstruct the final image. current sim methods include optical sectioning microscopy (os-sim) and super-resolution sim (sr-sim) . several different algorithms can be used to process sim data . simtoolbox offers a set of matlab functions for processing both os-sim and sr-sim data according to a variety of methods. simtoolbox can also apply an alternative method for processing the data, maximum a posteriori probability estimation (map-sim) . the tools can be accessed from a user-friendly graphical user interface. our goal is to offer a collection of processing methods, which were developed based on extensive testing with real data. the software can be used to process data acquired by commercial sim systems; however, some of the tools and documentation provided are meant for researchers developing their own systems. in addition to the software, we provide example data, a users guide and a detailed description of the implemented methods and algorithms. please refer to the supplementary note for further details.  
