sequence analysis simultaneous alignment and clustering of peptide data using a gibbs sampling approach motivation: proteins recognizing short peptide fragments play a central role in cellular signaling. as a result of high-throughput technologies , peptide-binding protein specificities can be studied using large peptide libraries at dramatically lower cost and time. interpretation of such large peptide datasets, however, is a complex task, especially when the data contain multiple receptor binding motifs, and/or the motifs are found at different locations within distinct peptides. results: the algorithm presented in this article, based on gibbs sampling , identifies multiple specificities in peptide data by performing two essential tasks simultaneously: alignment and clustering of peptide data. we apply the method to de-convolute binding motifs in a panel of peptide datasets with different degrees of complexity spanning from the simplest case of pre-aligned fixed-length peptides to cases of unaligned peptide datasets of variable length. example applications described in this article include mixtures of binders to different mhc class i and class ii alleles, distinct classes of ligands for sh3 domains and sub-specificities of the hla-a02:01 molecule. availability: the gibbs clustering method is available online as a web server at http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/gibbscluster.peptides are short amino acid sequences occurring ubiquitously in biological processes, such as metabolism, signal transduction and immune response. they are also extensively used in research to mimic functional or (linear) structural aspects of proteins and protein interactions. the advantage of using peptides lies in the relative ease in generating large libraries of sequences, such as in phage display technologies . more recently, developments in high-throughput peptide microarrays have allowed producing large-scale datasets of peptide-ligand interactions and have been applied to various problems including antibodyantigen interactions, peptidemhc binding, kinase binding motifs and other receptor-ligand interactions . identifying receptor-ligand binding motifs within peptide datasets is a highly challenging task for at least two major reasons, which we term alignment and poly-specificity. the alignment problem arises because most receptor motifs are weak and short, making identification of the binding register within the ligands not trivial . the poly-specificity problem arises because receptor-ligand datasets often contain multiple motifs either owing to the experimental setup or to the actual poly-specificity of the receptor . several bioinformatics methods have been developed attempting to deal with these challenges and detect subtle sequence signals in peptide datasets, including motif alignment , gibbs sampling , hidden markov models and artificial neural networks . in particular, artificial neural networks have shown a high performance on this kind of data . significant correlations between residues have been found in peptide interaction domains . although positional correlations can be accurately captured by artificial neural networks, the specificities of such domains can, in many cases, more intuitively be represented by multiple position-specific scoring matrices (pssm) . multiple pssms allow visualizing poly-specificities as sequence logos of the different binding modes. although the above methods attempt to deal with the challenges involved in motif identification in peptide datasets, they all suffer from the limitations of only dealing with single specificities or requiring the input data to be pre-aligned to a common motif. in this article, we describe a novel approach for effective alignment and clustering of peptide data going beyond these limitations. in the gibbs clustering method, alignment and specificity clustering are performed simultaneously by sampling the space of possible solutions using a gibbs sampling strategy. each cluster is represented by a pssm, and the method aims at maximizing the information content of individual matrices while minimizing the overlap between distinct clusters.the gibbs clustering algorithm performs two essential tasks simultaneously: alignment and clustering of peptide data. here, we use the method to de-convolute binding motifs in a panel of different peptide datasets with different degrees of complexity spanning from the simplest case of pre-aligned fixed-length peptides to cases of unaligned peptide datasets of variable length. more details about the datasets are given as supplementary material.we proposed an efficient algorithm to identify multiple specificities in peptide datasets. the applications of the method are numerous, ranging from the deconvolution of poly-specificities contained in a dataset, to the analysis of sub-specificities within a known binding motif. the algorithm aims at identifying the solution (the set of clusters and corresponding alignments) that optimally fits the peptide dataset. the optimal solution is automatically selected and the identified binding motifs are visualized as individual sequence logos. using a panel of benchmark datasets, we have demonstrated the power of the gibbs clustering method in deconvoluting poly-specificities contained both in pre-aligned and unaligned peptide datasets covering the mhc class i, mhc class ii and human sh3 domain systems. gibbs sampling is a powerful approach to explore large spaces of possible solutions. in the case of amino acid sequences, there are immense possible ways of aligning and clustering them as soon as the number of sequences becomes bigger than a handful. the probabilistic nature of gibbs sampling allows efficient sampling of the search space and convergence towards a state of high fitness of the system. compared with other motif identification methods, gibbs clustering is unique in that it incorporates alignment and clustering in a set of alternative sampling moves, allowing for simultaneous identification of clusters and optimal sequence alignment. this property makes the method capable of identifying subtle and relatively weak binding motifs (as demonstrated for the case of mhc class ii binding motifs), but it comes at the price of computational speed. analysing the 400 peptides in the mhc class ii binding dataset takes a little45 min using gibbs clustering. this running time is reduced to 15 s using the musi algorithm yet at the cost of a dramatic and significant drop in accuracy. in a general situation, it is not known a priori how many motifs are contained in a dataset. when presented with a set of experimental data, the investigator ideally wants a definitive answer to the question: how many motifs are contained in my data? unfortunately, the answer is not unambiguous, not so much for a fault of mathematical and computational methods, rather for the ambiguity of the question. the answer depends on the level of resolution that is expected for the particular problem at hand. if the goal is a rough classification of sequences based on global differences, then the resulting number of clusters will be small. conversely, more partitions would be produced if we were searching for subtler distinguishing sequence characteristics. the true number of clusters is therefore not an objective answer but depends on the kind of biological question that is being asked. in the gibbs clustering algorithm, we introduce a parameter that aims to modulate the degree of resolution required by the user. high penalizes overlap between clusters and tends to create coarser clusters, whereas low results in smaller and specialized clusters. for example, we showed that for a certain value of , we could accurately identify the number of mhc class i molecules contained in a dataset of mixed specificities. in another example, we split one of these very same specificities into sub-motifs and looked for subtle differences in a rather homogenous population of peptides. these are not the extremes: one could conceive partitioning the data further into more specialized sub-populations, as well as obtaining a coarser picture of similarities between alleles. the same data may have different levels of resolution depending on the aim of the analysis, and the investigator should keep this in mind when using a classification method like the one presented here. the gibbs clustering method in its current form is limited to handle situations where motifs are of uniform length. likewise, the method can only handle amino acid input data. the reason for this limitation is that most of its unique features like pseudo-count estimates from blosum substitution matrices and sequence weighting of are specific for amino acid data. in conclusion, we believe the gibbs clustering method to be both a highly accurate and very user-friendly tool that will allow researchers to interpret peptide datasets in terms of receptor specificities in a highly intuitive manner. therefore, we expect it to become an important tool as large-scale peptide chip. sub-motifs of hla-a02:01 binding specificity. the peptides in the two clusters have similar affinity but differ significantly in stability. the sequence logo in the left panel is composed mainly of stable peptides (th 5.7 h), whereas peptides in the second group have lower stability (th 2.1 h) technologies grow to be a cost-effective and accessible platform for investigation of protein-ligand interactions. the method is highly customizable and publicly available as an online web-server at http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/gibbscluster.  
