simultaneous prediction of enzyme orthologs from chemical transformation patterns for de novo metabolic pathway reconstruction motivation: metabolic pathways are an important class of molecular networks consisting of compounds , enzymes and their interactions. the understanding of global metabolic pathways is extremely important for various applications in ecology and pharmacology. however, large parts of metabolic pathways remain unknown, and most organism-specific pathways contain many missing enzymes. results: in this study we propose a novel method to predict the enzyme orthologs that catalyze the putative reactions to facilitate the de novo reconstruction of metabolic pathways from metabolome-scale compound sets. the algorithm detects the chemical transformation patterns of substrateproduct pairs using chemical graph alignments, and constructs a set of enzyme-specific classifiers to simultaneously predict all the enzyme orthologs that could catalyze the putative reactions of the substrateproduct pairs in the joint learning framework. the originality of the method lies in its ability to make predictions for thousands of enzyme orthologs simultaneously, as well as its extraction of enzyme-specific chemical transformation patterns of substrateproduct pairs. we demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed method by applying it to some ten thousands of metabolic compounds, and analyze the extracted chemical transformation patterns that provide insights into the characteristics and specificities of enzymes. the proposed method will open the door to both primary (central) and secondary metabolism in genomics research, increasing research productivity to tackle a wide variety of environmental and public health matters.metabolic pathways are an important class of molecular networks that consist of chemical compounds (or metabolites), enzyme proteins and their interactions. the understanding of global metabolic pathways is extremely important for various applications in ecology (heidel) and pharmacology . however, large parts of metabolic pathways remain unknown, and most organism-specific pathways contain many missing enzymes. for example, it is estimated that more than one million compounds exist in the plant kingdom , although the number of enzymes that are experimentally verified and approved by the international union of biochemistry and molecular biology (iubmb) is only approximately 5600 . this indicates our lack of knowledge on enzymatic reactions . it is still difficult to experimentally verify enzyme functions in biological processes; thus, there is a strong need for in silico metabolic pathway reconstruction . a variety of methods have been developed for the in silico reconstruction of metabolic pathways. they can be categorized into three approaches . the most traditional approach assigns putative enzyme genes to appropriate positions in pre-defined reference pathways based on sequence homology with genes across different v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.in this study, we proposed a novel method for the de novo reconstruction of metabolic pathways from metabolome-scale compound sets. this was made possible by elucidating the putative reaction networks among compounds and by predicting the associated enzyme orthologs catalyzing the putative reactions in a seamless mannar. particularly, we developed a novel algorithm to predict enzyme orthologs catalyzing the putative reactions in the jl framework. the originality of the method lies in its ability to make predictions for thousands of enzyme orthologs simultaneously, as well as its extraction of enzyme-specific chemical transformation patterns of substrateproduct pairs. we demonstrated the usefulness of the proposed method in terms of prediction accuracy, large-scale applicability and interpretability of the predictive models. the proposed method will enable us to analyze both primary (central) and secondary metabolism as well as underground metabolism, the series of alternative reactions by known enzymes which is expected to be useful for various applications. here we elaborate on the importance of predicting enzyme orthologs rather than predicting ec numbers. there have been several previous studies to predict ec numbers from chemical structures . an ec number consists of four numerals connected by dots. the first three numerals (ec sub-subclasses) represent an enzyme classification based on the reactions they catalyze, whereas full ec numbers (including the fourth numeral) are enzyme identifiers, rather than an enzyme classification. when an enzyme is found to catalyze a previously unknown reaction, a new ec number is assigned . this makes it reasonable to find existing ec numbers for a known reaction, but it makes no sense to predict existing ec numbers (including the fourth digit) for a previously unknown reaction. in contrast, it still makes sense to predict existing ec sub-subclasses for a previously unknown reaction. however, the number of ec sub-subclasses is much smaller than the number of enzyme orthologs, meaning that an ec subsubclass generally corresponds to many enzyme orthologs, which makes it ineffective to use ec sub-subclasses for enzyme prediction. for this reason, we attempted to directly link enzyme orthologs to reactions. an ortholog is a group of highly homologous genes or proteins that are considered to have the same biological function across different organisms. examples include clusters of orthologous groups and ko . theoretically, any set of ortholog groups can be used in the analysis, but in this study we used the ko database because of its higher coverage. to date, 17 228 orthologs have been defined in the ko database, of which there are 3584 enzyme orthologs. the number of enzyme orthologs is larger than the number of ec sub-subclasses (281 ec sub-subclasses). more importantly, enzyme orthologs represent groups of enzymes based on the sequence homology, not on the reactions they catalyze. therefore the enzyme function may change due to amino acid substitutions. a limited number of enzyme proteins within an enzyme ortholog catalyze a verified reaction. some enzyme proteins may catalyze the same reaction or different reactions, and others may catalyze no reaction at all. it is therefore reasonable to assume that an enzyme ortholog may catalyze a novel reaction that is yet to be identified. in order to elaborate on our results, we examined the distribution of sequence similarity calculated using the smith-waterman score (smith and) within the same enzyme orthologs and between different enzyme orthologs. if the hierarchical classification of enzymes by ec numbers reflected the similarity of enzyme proteins, then enzymes in the same ec sub-subclass whould be more similar than those in different ec sub-subclasses. however, this is not always true. the first, second and third box-plots inshow the distributions of sequence similarity scores among enzymes associated with ec 4.1.1.25 and ec 1.1.1.85 (seesimultaneous prediction of enzyme orthologs from chemical transformation patterns i285 5a and b). the median scores between ec 4.1.1.25 and ec 1.1.1.85 were not significantly different from those within the same ec subsubclasses. in fact, these two enzymes had common characteristics in their reactions, as shown inand ec 1.3.1.21 are very similar in terms of both enzymatic reactions and enzyme proteins, making it reasonable to predict the same chemical transformations . these results demonstrate an advantage of the enzyme ortholog over the ec subsubclass for the de novo reconstruction of metabolic pathways. the proposed method is expected to reconstruct metabolic pathways consisting of a wide range of new reactions that are not defined within the existing ec numbers.  
