single-cell transcriptional analysis to uncover regulatory circuits driving cell fate decisions in early mouse development motivation: transcriptional regulatory networks controlling cell fate decisions in mammalian em-bryonic development remain elusive despite a long time of research. the recent emergence of single cell rna profiling technology raises hope for new discovery. although experimental works have obtained intriguing insights into the mouse early development, a holistic and systematic view is still missing. mathematical models of cell fates tend to be concept-based, not designed to learn from real data. to elucidate the regulatory mechanisms behind cell fate decisions, it is highly desirable to synthesize the data-driven and knowledge-driven modeling approaches. results: we propose a novel method that integrates the structure of a cell lineage tree with tran-scriptional patterns from single-cell data. this method adopts probabilistic boolean network (pbn) for network modeling, and genetic algorithm as search strategy. guided by the directionality of cell development along branches of the cell lineage tree, our method is able to accurately infer the regulatory circuits from single-cell gene expression data, in a holistic way. applied on the single cell transcriptional data of mouse preimplantation development, our algorithm outperforms conventional methods of network inference. given the network topology, our method can also identify the operational interactions in the gene regulatory network (grn), corresponding to specific cell fate determination. this is one of the first attempts to infer grns from single-cell transcriptional data, incorporating dynamics of cell development along a cell lineage tree.understanding gene regulatory networks (grns) that control cell fate decisions is of paramount importance in biology. it can provide critical insights into many questions in developmental biology , stem cell , cancer , synthetic biology , etc. mouse preimplantation development is a prominent example for the study of cell fate decisions . starting from the 1-cell fertilized zygote it proceeds to the 64-cell blastocyst, consisting of three). for this classic developmental process, many results and insights have been obtained through decades of research. however, the regulatory mechanism for differential gene expression that leads to the formation of the three cell types remains to be elucidated. one hurdle lies in that many analyses were conducted on the average expression of a population of cells in mouse as well as other species , ignoring the heterogeneity among individual cells, which however is critical for the cell lineage formation. recently, the technology of single-cell rna profiling promises to overcome this hurdle and provides new insights . in 2010, robson lab generated a single-cell rna profiling dataset for the early development of mouse embryo . using statistical analysis techniques on the dataset, they identified intriguing patterns that shed light on the dynamics of cell fate decisions. the results obtained from this dataset (which we will refer to as robsons data hereafter) demonstrated the power of single-cell expression analysis. however, the data-driven approach in was limited to descriptive statistical relations of gene expression, interpretation of which requires highly specialized knowledge and experiences of researchers. to gain a systematic and holistic understanding of the causal mechanisms, an integrative network model that is executable through computer simulations would be highly desirable. in conjunction with experimental works, mathematical models have been proposed for the study of cell fate determination. many models are based on the theory of dynamical systems , which represents a cell state by a vector of gene expression levels, s x 1 ; x 2 ; ::: ; x n , where x i is the expression value of the ith gene. hence, each cell state is a point in the n-dimensional state space, in which a change of the cell state is represented as a movement along a trajectory. constrained by the architecture of a grn, cell states tend to move toward stable states called attractors. kauffman proposed that cell types can be modeled as attractors over 40 years ago, and he pioneered the use of boolean networks . among numerous applications, boolean networks have been applied to studies of cancer cell death and stem cells . in addition to the discrete model of boolean network, ordinary differential equations based approaches that include kinetic models of molecular interactions are popular for cell fate modeling . the continuous models can represent the physical processes of gene regulation precisely and quantitatively, and they are amenable to theoretical analysis of the underlying systems (e.g. steady-state analysis). for the inference and analysis of grns, various differential equation models have been developed . however, differential equation models need accurate estimation of parameter values, which remains a challenge in many cases . machine learning models have also been developed to elucidate gene regulation in cell development. for example, in and , cell lineage trees were incorporated into machine learning algorithms to infer gene networks and expression programs, respectively. reverse engineering of grn from gene expression data is a challenging problem in computational biology. although many methods have been proposed (see, and references therein), they were mostly designed for the average expression in a population of cells, and rely on local dependence among variables (e.g. genes). however, single-cell expression data pose new challenges for grn inference. the heterogeneity among cells could make the average of expression levels misleading. moreover, many existing methods of grn inference require long and dense times series data of rna profiling, which are often unavailable, especially when the experimental cost is high. therefore, alternative strategies of grn inference are needed for single-cell transcriptional data with short and sparse time series. in this article, we propose a novel approach to the inference of grn from single-cell expression data. it takes into account the relative positions of cells on the cell lineage tree. our assumption is that grn provides the driving force that pushes cells from ancestral states towards descendant states . such directionality of cell development is imposed by the logical constraints of the underlying grn. from robsons dataset of mouse early development, we can observe which cell states belong to a certain node in the cell lineage tree. given a candidate grn, we can simulate the dynamic trajectories of cells following the regulatory rules encoded in the grn. if the simulated trajectories are compatible with the directed paths from the root towards leaves of the cell lineage tree, the grn is likely to be true. conversely, if a candidate grn drives cells from descendant states backward to ancestral states, it is likely to be false. to implement this strategy, we choose the framework of boolean network for its strength in state transition analysis, and genetic algorithms (gas) for optimization (see section 2.2 for details). a similar idea for grn inference based on boolean network was proposed in . however, pal et al. assumed that the expression data should be sampled from attractor states, which may be too restrictive for single-cell data. relying on the concordance of attractor states of the model with states of the data, they did not consider fully the directionality of cell development along branches of a cell lineage tree. therefore, although the method of pal et al. is very insightful, it is not directly applicable to the single-cell expression data of mouse embryonic development. running on the robsons dataset, our method for grn structure inference achieved better performance than most of the other methods, validated using a published benchmark grn constructed manually from experiments . moreover, given the structure of grn, our method is able to predict operational regulatory interactions responsible for a specific cell lineage formation. most of the predictions are consistent with literature of experimental observations. to the best of our knowledge, the method proposed here is one of the first attempts to infer grn from single-cell expression data. unlike existing methods, it does not rely on local dependence of variables, which is difficult to detect from short and sparse time series data. instead, it is a holistic approach that utilizes global information about a system (e.g. network stability). as more singlecell data become available in near future, our method is promising to help decipher the mechanisms of cell fate decisions.in this article, we have proposed a novel method to uncover regulatory circuits of cell fate decisions from single-cell transcriptional data. we mapped the transcriptional dynamics of cell development to the stg generated by an asynchronous pbn, and defined a score to evaluate how well a candidate network fits the data. to learn the optimal network structure, a ga was employed to search for the network with the most natural cell state transitions according to the cell lineage tree. applied to real single-cell expression data and validated against benchmark networks from biological experiments, our method outperformed most of the other methods for grn inference. through simple adaption, our method could also be used to identify operational interactions in grn responsible for cell fate decisions. as one of the first methods for network analysis of single-cell data, our method still needs to address several issues. first, it has been verified only on robsons dataset, partly due to the dearth of publicly available single-cell data and benchmark networks. nevertheless, we believe that the strategy of our method can be naturally applied to other single-cell datasets in many biological contexts (e.g. cancer, stem cell). second, although our method achieved good prediction performance (measured by precision, sensitivity and f-measure), it is currently slower than the other methods, partly because our method was implemented in matlab, while others were in java or c. also, we used ga, which is known to be computationally intensive. in future, we will speed up our method by parallel computing, and other strategies (e.g.). third, the procedure of cell lineage commitment is often triggered by external stimulus, e.g. signaling events from neighboring cells, which has not been explicitly included in our current model. in future, this could be modeled as a perturbation that pushes a cell state to a different point in a state space without following any internal regulatory rules.  
