sipros/prorata: a versatile informatics system for quantitative community proteomics sipros/prorata is an open-source software package for end-to-end data analysis in a wide variety of community proteomics measurements. a database-searching program, sipros 3.0, was developed for accurate general-purpose protein identification and broad-range post-translational modification searches. hybrid message passing interface/openmp parallelism of the new sipros architecture allowed its computation to be scalable from desktops to supercom-puters. the upgraded prorata 3.0 performs label-free quantification and isobaric chemical labeling quantification in addition to metabolic labeling quantification. sipros/prorata is a versatile informatics system that enables identification and quantification of proteins and their variants in many types of community proteomics studies. availability: both programs are freely available under the gnu gplcommunity proteomics (metaproteomics) aims to characterize the whole protein complement of a microbial community. in a shotgun approach, proteins extracted from environmental samples of microbial communities are digested with trypsin into a more complex peptide mixture. peptides are then separated by liquid chromatography and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (ms/ms). ms/ms data are searched against translated metagenomic sequences to identify proteins from different members of a microbial community. post-translational modifications (ptms) of proteins can be identified computationally by searching an expanded peptide space. abundance changes of identified proteins can be measured between different environmental samples of a microbial community by quantitative proteomics. common quantification methods include label-free approaches, 15n metabolic labeling and isobaric chemical labeling with tmt and itraq. here we present a versatile software package for a wide range of community proteomics analysis. the package integrates a redesigned and reimplemented sipros 3.0 program for highly scalable database searching and an upgraded prorata 3.0 program for handling all common quantification methods.  
