gene expression skyline: an open source document editor for creating and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments skyline is a windows client application for targeted proteomics method creation and quantitative data analysis. it is open source and freely available for academic and commercial use. the skyline user interface simplifies the development of mass spectrometer methods and the analysis of data from targeted proteomics experiments performed using selected reaction monitoring (srm). skyline supports using and creating ms/ms spectral libraries from a wide variety of sources to choose srm filters and verify results based on previously observed ion trap data. skyline exports transition lists to and imports the native output files from agilent, applied biosystems, thermo fisher scientific and waters triple quadrupole instruments, seamlessly connecting mass spectrometer output back to the experimental design document. the fast and compact skyline file format is easily shared, even for experiments requiring many sample injections. a rich array of graphs displays results and provides powerful tools for inspecting data integrity as data are acquired, helping instrument operators to identify problems early. the skyline dynamic report designer exports tabular data from the skyline document model for in-depth analysis with common statistical tools. availability: single-click, self-updating web installation is available at http://proteome.gs.washington.edu/software/skyline. this web site also provides access to instructional videos, a support board, an issues list and a link to the source code project.in recent years, the promise of targeted proteomics has gained significant attention. however, the tools for its practice have been either limited and cumbersome or proprietary and specific to a particular instrument vendor (supplementary text 1). skyline was explicitly designed to accelerate targeted proteomics experimentation and foster broad sharing of both methods and results to whom correspondence should be addressed. across instrument platforms (supplementary). the software is developed under the open source apache 2.0 license as part of the proteowizard project. an official public release is freely available and currently in use in many proteomics labs, both commercial and academic.  
