structural bioinformatics slim on diet: finding short linear motifs on domain interaction interfaces in protein data bank motivation: an important class of protein interactions involves the binding of a proteins domain to a short linear motif (slim) on its interacting partner. extracting such motifs, either experimentally or computationally, is challenging because of their weak binding and high degree of degeneracy. recent rapid increase of available protein structures provides an excellent opportunity to study slims directly from their 3d structures. results: using domain interface extraction (diet), we characterized 452 distinct slims from the protein data bank (pdb), of which 155 are validated in varying degrees40 have literature validation, 54 are supported by at least one domainpeptide structural instance, and another 61 have overrepresentation in high-throughput ppi data. we further observed that the lacklustre coverage of existing computational slim detection methods could be due to the common assumption that most slims occur outside globular domain regions. 198 of 452 slim that we reported are actually found on domain domain interface; some of them are implicated in autoimmune and neurodegenerative diseases. we suggest that these slims would be useful for designing inhibitors against the pathogenic protein complexes underlying these diseases. our findings show that 3d structure-based slim detection algorithms can provide a more complete coverage of slim-mediated protein interactions than current sequence-based approaches.proteinprotein interactions are vital to virtually every biological process. some important biological processes, such as the signaling pathways, require proteinprotein interactions that are designed for fast response to stimuli. these interactions are usually transient, easily formed and disrupted, and specific. while other protein protein interactions are mediated by the binding of two large globular domain interfaces (domaindomain interactions), these transient interactions typically involve the binding of a protein domain to to whom correspondence should be addressed. a short stretch (310) of amino acid residues, which is usually characterized by a simple sequence pattern, i.e. a short linear motif (slim). we call these domainslim interactions. numerous well-known and biologically important domains such as sh2, sh3, ww, 14-3-3, fha and pdz have been found to interact with their partners via domainslim interactions. the small binding areas on the slims result in weak binding affinity that makes them suitable for mediating the transient interactions . compared with the larger domaindomain interaction interfaces, domainslim interfaces are also better candidates for intervention by small molecules . however, current wet lab experiments for detecting slims are laborious and time consuming. it is also a challenge to detect these motifs in silico, due to their short length and highly degenerative nature . one popular approach is to mine slims that are overrepresented in a set of non-homologous proteins known to be interacting with a particular protein/domain or known to share a similar biological function [e.g. dilimot and slimfinder (. another line of computational approach finds slims from sets of densely interacting protein pairs, for example, the work ofand d-star . there are several drawbacks with these approaches. first, as the slims are highly degenerative, most of these algorithms mask conserved structured regions (which are assumed not to have many slims) such as globular domains to reduce false positives. recently, it was found that such filtering has caused some true motifs to be missed . second, the motifs identified via the sequence-based approaches are not guaranteed to occur on the binding interface. such atomic level of details can only come from high-resolution 3d structures . third, the algorithms are highly dependent on the accuracy of the interaction identification experiments. however, these interaction data are well known to be noisy (von). the rapid increase of protein structure data in the protein data bank (pdb) database offers an excellent opportunity to detect slims directly from 3d structures instead of the proteins sequences. some researchers have begun to exploit the structural data by using the structures as templates to find seed binding motifs, which are subsequently enriched using the available protein-protein interaction (ppi) data . they therefore suffer from the accuracy and coverage limitations of the ppi data like the previous methods. in this work, we directly find de  
