databases and ontologies slims—a user-friendly sample operations and inventory management system for genotyping labs we present the sample-based laboratory information management system (slims), a powerful and user-friendly open source web application that provides all members of a laboratory with an interface to view, edit and create sample information. slims aims to simplify common laboratory tasks with tools such as a user-friendly shopping cart for subjects, samples and containers that easily generates reports, shareable lists and plate designs for genotyping. further key features include customizable data views, database change-logging and dynamically filled pre-formatted reports. along with being feature-rich, slims power comes from being able to handle longitudinal data from multiple time-points and biological sources. this type of data is increasingly common from studies searching for susceptibility genes for common complex diseases that collect thousands of samples generating millions of genotypes and overwhelming amounts of data. limss provide an efficient way to deal with this data while increasing accessibility and reducing laboratory errors; however, professional lims are often too costly to be practical. slims gives labs a feasible alternative that is easily accessible, user-centrically designed and feature-rich. to facilitate system customization, and utilization for other groups, manuals have been written for users and developers. availability: documentation, source code and manuals are available atgenetic studies of complex diseases that interrogate the human genome are known as genome-wide association (gwa) studies. they require both high-throughput genotyping platforms and large samples sizeswith thousands of subjects from multiple sources and time pointsto clearly define the contributions of common alleles associated with common complex diseases. to obtain the large sample sizes needed, gwa studies have led to international consortia formed from smaller studies, with differences in study designs and quality control procedures. if not dealt to whom correspondence should be addressed.with appropriately, these situations can lead to decreased data accessibility, increased laboratory errors and an overall reduction in operational efficiency. laboratory information management systems (limss) provide solutions for these situations; however, the perception that learning to use new software will be timeconsuming and difficult can be a significant barrier to the adoption of a lims . this situation is worsened by the high turnover rate of research staffresulting in recurrent training costsand the lack of user-centric designs in open source limsresulting in steep learning curves. in searching for a solution to the challenges we faced managing our biological samples, we failed to find any open-source systems that would provide adequate functionality for our needs. we developed sample-based lims (slims) to make available a feature-rich system capable of handling longitudinal data and to increase the presence of user-centric design in limss. slims is based on a previously published lims: passim .the consequences of incomplete user acceptance of a lims are very serious. even the best professional systems lose value and can even become detrimentalif they fall out of date because of inconsistent use. in a busy laboratory, instructing staff to use a new system can only have so much effect; successfully achieving consistent usage requires incentives in addition to instruction. to this end, slims aims to combine record-keeping with features that save time and simplify dailylaboratory tasks. we have taken a three-pronged approach to achieve this goal. first, facilitation of bench-top procedures is integrated with record keeping in slims by the automatic production of documents required for procedure completion. second, we have ensured that the users experience is as easy and efficient as possible by formally involving a broad spectrum of users in the development process from requirements analysis to interface design and testing. this approach allowed us to map different user-groups mental models of a lims system and incorporate them in our design, making the system more intuitive for users. though focusing development on users instead of programmers reduces a systems learning curve, it cannot be erased. our third prong focused on easing and accelerating the learning process with user manuals and instructional text throughout the system. though slims applicable scope may be limited by a setup targeting sample-based laboratories and tools targeting genotyping workflows, the approaches to lims development described above incorporate widely applicable, well-established techniques that are lacking in existing open-source lims. documentation, source code, and manuals are available at http://genapha.icapture.ubc.ca/slims/index.jsp.  
