databases and ontologies sm2mir: a database of the experimentally validated small molecules' effects on microrna expression the inappropriate expression of micrornas (mirnas)micrornas (mirnas) are endogenous, single-stranded and non-coding rnas, which regulate their target genes at the post-transcriptional level through inhibiting protein translation or degrading mrna . a mirna can regulate hundreds of genes and plays key roles in many physiological and pathological processes, such as proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis . the inappropriate expression of mirnas is related to many kinds of critical illness, including cancer, cardiovascular disease, metabolic disease, inflammatory disease and so on . various evidences are overwhelming that the abnormal expression of mirnas is the hallmark of diseases. for example,confirmed that mir-155, mir-210, mir-222 and mir-203 were highly expressed by qrt-pcr in pancreatic tumor. the expression of let-7 was significantly reduced in colon cancer patients compared with that in adjacent non-cancerous tissue from the same patient . in addition, mirnas have several attractive features to be druggable, such as the specific secondary structures and the conserved sequences. recently, many studies demonstrated that small molecules can regulate mirna expression, which indicates that targeting mirnas with small molecules is a new type of therapy for human diseases . for example, the expression levels of 22 mirnas were changed after 5-fluorouracil treatment in human colon cell line through qrt-pcr .detected 22 up-regulated mirnas and 10 down-regulated mirnas after the treatment of trichostatin a in human breast cancer cell lines by microarray. to sum up, specific mirna will be treatment target for majority of diseases. therefore, the study of how small molecule drugs influence the expression levels of mirnas is very significant. hitherto, diverse mirna-related databases have been constructed. for example, mirbase is the central online repository of mirna sequences and annotations. microcosm targets , targetscan and tarbase provide the computationally predicted or the experimentally validated target genes for mirnas. with the progression of research on the important roles of mirnas in human diseases, several manually curated databases about the associations of mirnas and diseases were developed, such as phenomir , hmdd and mir2disease . however, the databases about how bioactive small molecules influence the expression levels of mirnas are quite rare. the relevant information is scattered among the massive literatures, which is inconvenient for researchers to explore the relationships between small molecules and mirnas.presented the mirenvironment database to describe the complex interactions between genetic factors and environmental factors, where a few small molecules appeared as environment factors. thus, this manuscript described a curated database sm2mir, which offered more comprehensive information about the small molecules effects on mirna expression and filled the vacancy in this field. to whom correspondence should be addressed.more and more evidences have proved that mirna as a treatment target is meaningful and promising, and many small-molecule drugs can achieve this purpose. the restoration of the mirna expression may cure many kinds of critical illness. the mirna-based therapy may work through different ways. the small molecules can not only structurally bind to the grooves and pockets of mirnas but also target the key enzymes and other cofactors of the process of mirna synthesis or the transcription factors of mirnas. thus, drug-targeted protein may influence mirna expression. however, mirnas are important post-transcriptional regulatory factors and can regulate downstream protein expression. even if the changed mirna expression is the result of protein-targeted treatment, the mirna may be a welcome addition to the current drug targets. to provide a valuable and comprehensive resource about the influences of small molecules on mirna expression, we manually retrieved the relationships of small molecules and mirnas from literatures and developed the sm2mir database. sm2mir provides detailed information about small molecules, mirnas and evidences of their relationships. the development and expansion of the sm2mir will continues to progress. in the future, the next version will incorporate more comprehensive information and become more powerful.  
