structural bioinformatics small-molecule inhibitor starting points learned from protein–protein interaction inhibitor structure motivation: proteinprotein interactions (ppis) are a promising, but challenging target for pharmaceutical intervention. one approach for addressing these difficult targets is the rational design of small-molecule inhibitors that mimic the chemical and physical properties of small clusters of key residues at the proteinprotein interface. the identification of appropriate clusters of interface residues provides starting points for inhibitor design and supports an overall assessment of the susceptibility of ppis to small-molecule inhibition. results: we extract small-molecule inhibitor starting points (smisps) from protein-ligand and proteinprotein complexes in the protein data bank (pdb). these smisps are used to train two distinct classifiers, a support vector machine and an easy to interpret exhaustive rule classifier. both classifiers achieve better than 70 leave-one-complex-out cross-validation accuracy and correctly predict smisps of known ppi inhibitors not in the training set. a pdb-wide analysis suggests that nearly half of all ppis may be susceptible to small-molecule inhibition.proteinprotein interactions (ppis) play a key role in nearly every biological function and are a promising new class of biological targets for therapeutic intervention . ppis present a number of unique challenges compared to targets that have historically dominated pharmaceutical efforts, such as enzymes, g-protein-coupled receptors, and ionchannels . unlike these targets, which have evolved to bind small molecules, ppis have no convenient natural substrate to serve as a starting point for small-molecule design. however, alanine scanning mutagenesis reveals that most of the energy of a ppi is contributed by just a few hot spot residues . a small cluster of co-located interface residues that includes at least one hot spot provides a starting point for the rational design of small molecule inhibitors . indeed, the chemical mimicry of small clusters of key residues, typically deeply buried anchor residues , has produced to whom correspondence should be addressed. inhibitors for several ppi targets . the importance of hot spot residues and the difficulty in performing alanine scanning mutagenesis has led to the development of several computational methods for predicting hot spots. energybased methods attempt to directly compute the energetic contributions of residues. solvent accessible surface area (sasa) and sequence conservation have also been used to predict hot spots. however, the most successful computational methods use some combination of these and other features and achieve accuracies of 6080. often a consensus scoring mechanism is derived using machine learning techniques such as decision trees or support vector machines , although ad hoc consensus schemes are effective as well . in order to enhance specificity and affinity, additional interactions beyond those present in a single individual hot spot residue are needed. nearby residues that do not meet the criteria of a hot spot may also play an important, if not essential, role in the interaction. additionally, these residues may describe extra pockets or energetics essential for small molecule binding or specificity. although identifying a minimum set of stereochemical properties consistent with a small-molecule binding site is challenging , the increasing number of ligandprotein and proteinprotein structures in the protein data bank (pdb) provides a foundation to explore this important problem with respect to ppis. in fact, a systematic analysis of such structures reveals that residues that participate in both ligand and protein binding have distinctly different characteristics from other interface residues . this important insight suggests that it may be possible to automatically identify those interface residues that are most susceptible to small-molecule intervention. in this work we describe a novel structural bioinformatics approach that identifies and ranks those clusters of interface residues in a ppi that are most suitable as starting points for rational smallmolecule design. we refer to these clusters as small-molecule inhibitor starting points (smisps). a smisp is larger than a hot spot, but substantially smaller than the entire collection of interface residues. a smisp cluster may include both those residues critical to the proteinprotein interaction and those with features important for binding specificity, all within a volume accessible to a small molecule.page: 785 784791we analyze the information theoretic properties of our cluster features to highlight the most useful features for classification. we show that we can recover known ppi inhibitor sites and assess the general accessibility of ppis to small-molecule inhibitors.ppis are an emerging class of biological targets that have been poorly addressed by high throughput screening . the steadily increasing amount of ppi structural information makes structure-based rational design one attractive alternative. the interactions of the complex itself provide a natural starting point as long as the most favorable interactions can be effectively identified. previous work has largely focused on identifying individual hotspots, i.e. single residues that contribute a significant portion of the free energy of the complex. we have built upon this previous work to address the problem of finding an entire set of residues that, as a unit, identify a binding site that is susceptible to small-molecule inhibition. our automated structural bioinformatics method learns both scoring (svm-based) and filtering (rule-based) classifiers for identifying these sites. a novel aspect of our method is that we use the structure of ppi complexes and known binders at the ppi interface to create our training set. smisps are identified purely from the steric overlap of small-molecule binders and the ppi structure. this results in a less quantitative assessment of training examples compared to using alanine scanning results. however, our structure-based approach has several advantages. the existence of a high-affinity ligand at the protein interface is more relevant to our goal of identifying small-molecule starting points. alanine scanning may identify hot spots for reasons that are not relevant to inhibition, such as the residues contribution to protein stability. additionally, the g does not include any backbone contributions, which may be important for small molecule design. our structure-based method naturally identifies groups of co-located residues, smisps, as opposed to single, potentially isolated hot spot residues. finally, our method benefits from the rapidly increasing number of available protein structures, exemplified by the pdb. we use a standard svm classifier for ranking smisps, but also find that simple thresholding rules provide an easily interpretable alternative classifier with accuracy similar to more sophisticated techniques. unlike previous work that relied on a subjective evaluation of histograms to set rule thresholds , our exhaustive rule classifier uses information theoretic techniques to automatically identify the optimal classification rules from the training set. our approach correctly predicts the binding sites and, to a lesser extent, the interactions of several known ppi inhibitors. perhaps more interestingly, the application of our classifiers to a non-redundant subset of the pdb containing more than 12,000 complexes reveals that nearly half the complexes contain at least one chain that has a similar distribution of predicted smisps as complexes with known inhibitors. this suggests that ppis may be substantially more susceptible to small-molecule inhibition than indicated by the current distribution of pharmaceutical targets . the historical bias against ppi targets present in existing compound libraries makes structurebased rational design a logical paradigm for developing ppi inhibitors. the smisps identified using our approach and available from http://pocketquery.csb.pitt.edu provide an immediate computational hypothesis to initiate such efforts which have the potential to ultimately culminate in the design of novel therapeutics.  
