small rnas in angiosperms: sequence characteristics, distribution and generation high-throughput sequencing (hts) has opened up a new era for small rna (srna) exploration. using hts data for a global survey of srnas in 26 angiosperms, elevated gc contents were detected in the monocots, whereas the 5-terminal compositions were quite uniform among the angiosperms. chromosome-wide distribution patterns of srnas were investigated by using scrolling-window analysis. we performed de novo natural antisense transcript (nat) prediction, and found that the overlapping regions of trans-nats, but not cis-nats, were hotspots for srna generation. one cis-nat generates phased natural antisense short interfering rnas (nat-sirnas) specifically from flowers in arabidopsis, while one in rice produces phased nat-sirnas from grains, suggesting their organ-specific regulatory roles.in eukaryotes, small rnas (srnas) are essential regulators in gene expression, heterochromatin formation and virus resistance . the plant srnas are divided into two classes: micrornas (mirnas) and sirnas. the 21-nt mirnas exert post-transcriptional regulation on targets mostly through cleavage. however, the 2024-nt sirnas are more diverse. two subspecies, natural antisense short interfering rnas (natsirnas) and trans-acting sirnas , have been characterized. besides cleavage effect on targets, numerous sirnas were reported to mediate dna or histone methylation . the development of sensitive high-throughput sequencing (hts) technology has enabled our efficient srnas exploration , and there are a number of huge hts datasets available . a few analytical frameworks have been proposed for analyzing such data , but it is clear that these datasets contain a wealth of information that has not been fully explored.here we report a large-scale analysis of hts data for plant srnas. we have surveyed the gc contents, 5-terminal compositions and chromosome-wide distribution patterns of srnas. de novo natural antisense transcript (nat) prediction unveiled that the overlapping regions of trans-nats were hotspots for srna generation. we have identified novel cis-nats that produce phase-distributed nat-sirnas which are likely involved in organ-specific regulation.  
