gene expression a powerful and flexible approach to the analysis of rna sequence count data motivation: a number of penalization and shrinkage approaches have been proposed for the analysis of microarray gene expression data. similar techniques are now routinely applied to rna sequence transcriptional count data, although the value of such shrinkage has not been conclusively established. if penalization is desired, the explicit modeling of meanvariance relationships provides a flexible testing regimen that borrows information across genes, while easily incorporating design effects and additional covariates. results: we describe bbseq, which incorporates two approaches: (i) a simple beta-binomial generalized linear model, which has not been extensively tested for rna-seq data and (ii) an extension of an expression meanvariance modeling approach to rna-seq data, involving modeling of the overdispersion as a function of the mean. our approaches are flexible, allowing for general handling of discrete experimental factors and continuous covariates. we report comparisons with other alternate methods to handle rna-seq data. although penalized methods have advantages for very small sample sizes, the beta-binomial generalized linear model, combined with simple outlier detection and testing approaches, appears to have favorable characteristics in power and flexibility.sequencing of rna-based libraries (rna-seq) can provide digital gene expression measurement, and is an attractive approach, potentially replacing microarrays for analyzing the transcriptome in an unbiased and comprehensive manner. for genes with very low or very high levels, microarrays often lack sensitivity, or can result in saturated signal. in contrast, rna-seq has been shown to have high accuracy across many orders of expression magnitude , with clear advantages over microarray hybridization. at a basic level, simple counts of rna sequences can be used for digital gene expression measurement, and are the subject of this article. additional information derived from the sequences, such as to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
