gene expression accounting for non-genetic factors by low-rank representation and sparse regression for eqtl mapping motivation: expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) studies investigate how gene expression levels are affected by dna variants. a major challenge in inferring eqtl is that a number of factors, such as unobserved covariates, experimental artifacts and unknown environmental perturbations , may confound the observed expression levels. this may both mask real associations and lead to spurious association findings. results: in this article, we introduce a low-rank representation to account for confounding factors and make use of sparse regression for eqtl mapping (lors). we integrate the low-rank representation and sparse regression into a unified framework, in which single-nucleotide polymorphisms and gene probes can be jointly analyzed. given the two model parameters, our formulation is a convex optimization problem. we have developed an efficient algorithm to solve this problem and its convergence is guaranteed. we demonstrate its ability to account for non-genetic effects using simulation, and then apply it to two independent real datasets. our results indicate that lors is an effective tool to account for non-genetic effects. first, our detected associations show higher consistency between studies than recently proposed methods. second, we have identified some new hotspots that can not be identified without accounting for non-genetic effects.nowadays both gene expression levels and hundreds of thousands of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) can be measured by high-throughput technologies. this allows us to systematically explore the relationship between gene expression levels and genotypes: whether a gene is differentially expressed with different genotypes (or alleles) at a specific locus. the loci that are associated with gene expression levels are known as expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) . recently, a large number of eqtls have been found in eqtl studies . these findings provide insights on how gene expression levels are affected by specific genetic variants . they may further help to prioritize disease-associated loci and contribute to disease understanding . an important issue in eqtl mapping is that a fairly large proportion of the measured gene expression variations may not be caused by genetic variants, but by some other factors, including cellular state , environmental factors and experimental conditions . a typical example is the batch effect, which may arise when sub-groups of samples were processed by different laboratories, different technicians or on different days. because these factors are unrelated to genetic variants, we call them non-genetic factors in the rest of the article. some of the non-genetic effects can be directly measured. for example, when the batch information is available, the batch effects may be adjusted, e.g an empirical bayes method named combat . however, in practice, non-genetic factors may not be directly and completely observable and thus remain hidden. for example,showed that cell culture conditions have an unnegligible influence on a large number of genes. gagnonreported that a substantial within-batch effect exists in the microarray quality control study . expression heterogeneity (eh) arises when these hidden factors are not taken into account in statistical analysis.showed that eh not only leads to the reduction of statistical power but also spurious association signals in eqtl mapping. recently, capturing eh in gene expression studies has drawn the attention of researchers. many methods have been proposed to infer the hidden factors by some forms of factor analysis, and adjust the inferred factors as if they were observed . one well-known method that attempts to address these issues is the surrogate variable analysis (sva;). it performs principal component analysis while taking genotypes into consideration and uses permutation to choose the number of principal components.proposed the intersample correlation emended (ice) eqtl mapping method, in which a linear mixed model was introduced to model the hidden factors. when modeling eh,used the covariance matrix of the gene expression data as the eh covariance matrix in their ice model. however, this estimate is inconsistent and thus reduces the power of eqtl mapping.introduced another linear mixed model, named to whom correspondence should be addressed. lmm-eh, which corrected the inconsistency of the estimated eh covariance matrix. once the latent covariance matrix has been estimated, lmm-eh can scan every gene-snp pair. alternatively,jointly modeled snps, gene probes and hidden confounders into a bayesian framework. despite its greatly increased power in eqtl mapping, its heavy computational burden might limit its usage.proposed another model named panama and borrowed some computational techniques from gaussian process and further improved the performance of eqtl mapping. however, during the model optimization, panama may be trapped in a local optimum because the optimization problem is not convex. in this article, we introduce an alternative formulation to address this issue. we propose a low-rank representation to account for non-genetic factors and make use of sparse regression for eqtl mapping (lors). we integrate the low-rank representation and sparse regression into a unified framework, in which snps and gene probes can be jointly analyzed. given the two regularization parameters, the optimization of the model structure is a convex problem. we have developed an efficient algorithm to solve this convex problem and its convergence is guaranteed. we demonstrate its usefulness through its applications to both synthetic data and real data.  
