genome analysis smethillium: spatial normalization method for illumina infinium humanmethylation beadchip dna methylation is a major epigenetic modification in human cells. illumina humanmethylation27 beadchip makes it possible to quantify the methylation state of 27 578 loci spanning 14 495 genes. we developed a non-parametric normalization method to correct the spatial background noise in order to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. the prediction performance of the proposed method was assessed on three fully methylated samples and three fully unmethylated dna samples. we demonstrate that the spatial normalization outperforms beadstudio to predict the methylation state of a given locus.dna methylation is a major epigenetic modification that regulates transcription by gene silencing and have a role in the protection of chromosomal integrity. methylation occurs in cytosines which precede guanines in dinucleotide called cpgs. illumina humanmethylation27 beadchip is a valuable technology for genome-wide screen of dna methylation. as any microarray technology, beadchip suffers from spatial artifact that requires a correction in order to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. to our knowledge, the methylumi r package is the only one to deal with illumina methylation beadchip but does not address the spatial correction. the proposed method smethillium consists of a spatial correction of the background noise, a probe summarization and a confidence assessment. the performance of the method is evaluated on six real samples with known methylation states. to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors.figures 1, 2 and 3 shows that the spatial normalization allows a better separation between the methylation state than the illuminas proprietary software beadstudio . this is confirmed by the global criterion in. our method allows a better concentration of the beta values around their expected value allowing the possibility to better identify intermediate state such as hemi-methylation. for a l threshold of 0.35, the global performance criterion is 80 after smethillium normalization, 53 with beadstudio and 60 without normalization (raw).we developed a non-parametric spatial normalization method that improves the signal-to-noise ratio allowing a more reliable prediction of the methylation state as compared with beadstudio. the method is implemented in r and publicly available. we recommend the user to use in-house experiments in order to define the most optimal l threshold for their data.  
