structural bioinformatics smurflite: combining simplified markov random fields with simulated evolution improves remote homology detection for beta-structural proteins into the twilight zone motivation: one of the most successful methods to date for recognizing protein sequences that are evolutionarily related has been profile hidden markov models (hmms). however, these models do not capture pairwise statistical preferences of residues that are hydrogen bonded in beta sheets. these dependencies have been partially captured in the hmm setting by simulated evolution in the training phase and can be fully captured by markov random fields (mrfs). however, the mrfs can be computationally prohibitive when beta strands are interleaved in complex topologies. we introduce smurflite, a method that combines both simplified mrfs and simulated evolution to substantially improve remote homology detection for beta structures. unlike previous mrf-based methods, smurflite is computationally feasible on any beta-structural motif. results: we test smurflite on all propeller and barrel folds in the mainly-beta class of the scop hierarchy in stringent cross-validation experiments. we show a mean 26 (median 16) improvement in area under curve (auc) for beta-structural motif recognition as compared with hmmer (a well-known hmm method) and a mean 33 (median 19) improvement as compared with raptor (a well-known threading method) and even a mean 18 (median 10) improvement in auc over hhpred (a profileprofile hmm method), despite hhpreds use of extensive additional training data. we demonstrate smurflites ability to scale to whole genomes by running a smurflite library of 207 beta-structural scop superfamilies against the entire genome of thermotoga maritima, and make over a 100 new fold predictions. availability and implementaion: a webserver that runs smurflitemany researchers use hidden markov models (hmms) to annotate proteins according to homology, with popular systems such as pfam and superfamily based on hmm methods integrated into uniprot. however, hmms are limited in their power to recognize remote homologs because of to whom correspondence should be addressed. their inability to model statistical dependencies between amino-acid residues that are close in space but far apart in sequence . for this reason, many have suggested that more powerful markov random fields (mrfs) be used. mrfs employ an auxiliary dependency graph which allows them to model more complex statistical dependencies, including statistical dependencies that occur between amino-acid residues that are hydrogen bonded in beta sheets. however, as the dependency graph becomes more complex, major design difficulties emerge. first, the mrf becomes more difficult to train. second, it quickly becomes computationally intractable to find the optimal-scoring parse of the target to the model. we have built a fully automated system, smurflite, that combines the power of mrfs with kumar and cowens simulated evolution (which offloads information about pairwise dependencies in beta sheets into new, artificial training data), in order to build the first mrf models that are computationally tractable for all beta-structural proteins, even those with limited training data. the smurflite system builds in part on the smurf mrf , which uses multidimensional dynamic programming to simultaneously capture both standard hmm models and the pairwise interactions between amino acid residues bonded together in beta sheets. unlike the full smurf mrf, where the computational requirements of the random field become prohibitive on folds with deeply interleaved beta-strand pairs, such as barrels, smurflite is tractable on all beta-structural proteins. smurflite enables researchers to trade modeling power for computational cost by tuning an interleave threshold. the interleave threshold represents the maximum number of unrelated beta strands that can occur in linear sequence between the beta strands hydrogen bonded in a beta sheet while still being retained as pairwise dependencies in the mrf. as the interleave threshold increases, computation time increases, but so does the power of the mrf (see). we first test smurflite on all propeller and barrel folds in the mainly-beta class of the scop hierarchy in stringent crossvalidation experiments. we show a mean 26 (median 16) improvement in area under curve (auc) for beta-structural motif recognition as compared with hmmer (a popular hmm method;) and a mean 33 (median 19) improvement as smurflite. a closed beta barrel (pdb id 1bw3, a barwin domain) from the superfamily barwin-like endoglucanases to illustrate interleaving of strand pairs. beta strands a and b, which close the barrel, have interleave 4, whereas strands c and d, which are adjacent in sequence, have interleave 1. strands b and c have interleave 2. compared with raptor (a well-known threading method;), and even a mean 18 (median 10) improvement in auc over hhpred (a profileprofile hmm method;), despite hhpreds use of extensive additional training data. we demonstrate smurflites ability to scale to whole genomes by running a smurflite library of 207 beta-structural scop superfamilies against the entire genome of t.maritima, and make over a 100 new fold predictions (available at http://smurf.cs.tufts.edu/smurflite). the majority of these predictions are for genes that display very little sequence similarity with any proteins of known structure, demonstrating the power of smurflite to recognize remote homologs. we offer an online server (http://smurf.cs.tufts.edu/ smurflite) for predicting remote homologs from our library of 207 mainly-beta superfamilies using smurflite. the online server sets the interleave threshold (the parameter that determines the complexity of the mrf) to 2; we have also shown that increasing the interleave number for smurflite can dramatically improve performance, but at a great computational cost. while the primary intent of using simulated evolution in conjunction with simplified mrfs is to compensate for the removal of highly-interleaved betastrand pairs required for computational feasibility, we surprisingly find that simulated evolution can still improve full-fledged smurf in cases of sparse training data. for instance, the 5-bladed beta propellers have only three superfamilies in scop, two of which contain only one family. we find that for the 5-bladed beta-propeller fold, combining smurf and simulated evolution improves auc from 0.73 for full smurf alone to 0.89.  
