snipa: an interactive, genetic variant-centered annotation browser motivation: linking genes and functional information to genetic variants identified by association studies remains difficult. resources containing extensive genomic annotations are available but often not fully utilized due to heterogeneous data formats. to enhance their accessibility, we integrated many annotation datasets into a user-friendly webserver. availability and implementation: http://www.snipa.org/genome-wide association studies (gwas) and next-generation sequencing (ngs) are performed routinely to identify genetic variants and novel genes implicated in both common and rare human diseases. a key step in translating results from such studies into a better understanding of molecular disease mechanisms and, ultimately, into clinical applications, is the prioritization of potentially functional variants that may be active in vivo. to this end, comprehensive collection and evaluation of existing functional annotation from genetic, informatics and experimental resources is essential . this comprises the integration of data and knowledge across multiple levels including the variant, the gene and the chromatin level. several large resources (ensembl, ucsc, ncbi, etc.) aim at providing genome-wide genome-level annotation tracks from an extensive set of resources. however, retrieving statistical and functional annotation relevant at the single nucleotide level remains difficult. for instance, common genome browsers often display single nucleotide variants (snvs) as thin bars that trail away in the wealth of other annotation tracks and are even less prepared to display statistics such as linkage disequilibrium (ld) relationships between variants. this limits visual distinction of relevant variants from those without relevant annotations and leaves the complex task of aggregating position-based data to the researcher. variantcentered resources, on the other hand, typically concentrate on specific types of data such as amino acid changes , expression quantitative trait loci (eqtls) , trait associations or regulatory effect predictions . moreover, these annotations are often presented in resource-specific data structures. for individual inspection of single variants, both resource types are extremely valuable. however, for simultaneous processing of larger variant sets, collection and examination of annotations from different data sources quickly becomes cumbersome. this presents a major bottleneck in genome-wide scans of genetic influences on human traits since the collection of such evidences is the key to understanding the effects of phenotype-linked genetic variants. here we propose snipa, a web service offering variant-centered genome browsing and interactive visualization tools tailored for easy inspection of many variants in their locus context .mechanistic characterization of variants identified by genetic studies is the key to understanding molecular disease mechanisms. snipa combines a comprehensive set of genomic annotations with a genetic variant-based genome browser to simplify the task of variant annotation. snipa as well as all underlying data is freely available to the scientific community (commercial use may be limited by third-party constraints) and will be automatically updated following the ensembl releases.a method and server for predicting damaging missense mutations. nat. methods, 7, 248249.. the snipa variant browser shows variants (top), genes (center) and regulatory regions (bottom). top-level information is available in mouse-over tooltips for all plot elements as shown here for the query snp rs174583. the example highlights the value of variant-centered accumulation of annotations: rs174583 is associated with the concentration of a lipid metabolite as well as with the expression levels of two genes encoding enzymes involved in lipid metabolism (fads1/2) and the gene coding for ldl receptor, a major regulator of cholesterol homeostasis. furthermore, the variant was linked to the response to lipid lowering drugs (statins), which target hmg-coa reductase regulated by the ldl receptorsnipa: an interactive, genetic variant-centered annotation browser  
