snoopy—a unifying petri net framework to investigate biomolecular networks to investigate biomolecular networks, snoopy provides a unifying petri net framework comprising a family of related petri net classes. models can be hierarchically structured, allowing for the mastering of larger networks. to move easily between the qualitative, stochastic and continuous modelling paradigms, models can be converted into each other. we get models sharing structure, but specialized by their kinetic information. the analysis and iterative reverse engineering of biomolecular networks is supported by the simultaneous use of several petri net classes, while the graphical user interface adapts dynamically to the active one. built-in animation and simulation are complemented by exports to various analysis tools. snoopy facilitates the addition of new petri net classes thanks to its generic design. availability: our tool with petri net samples is available free of charge for non-commercial use at http://www-dssz.informatik.tu-cottbus.de/snoopy.html; supported operating systems: mac os x, windows and linux (selected distributions).petri nets combine an intuitive, bipartite graphical representation with formal semantics, allowing for model execution to experience the net behaviour as well as exhaustive analyses to prove certain net properties. the rich body of petri net theory comprises structural and dynamic analysis techniques, coming up with conclusions on behavioural properties under any timing constraints. petri nets enjoy an explicit notion of concurrency. they provide a flexible modelling language and allow the unambiguous representation of mass flow and biochemical or genetic regulation mechanisms at arbitrary abstraction level within one model, ranging from molecular via cellular to multi-cellular level, describing, for example, developmental processes in multi-cellular pattern formation. most importantly, petri nets may serve as umbrella formalism integrating qualitative and quantitative (i.e. stochastic, continuous or hybrid) modelling and analysis techniques, supported by quite a number of reliable tools, developed by the international community of computational methods. accordingly, snoopy is set up as unifying to whom correspondence should be addressed.petri net framework, comprising a family of related petri net models, sharing structure, but specialized by their kinetic information: qualitative (time-free) place/transition petri nets (qpn) as well as quantitative (time-dependent) petri nets such as stochastic petri nets (spn) and continuous petri nets (cpn). this provides the grounds to investigate one and the same model in various complementary ways . to move easily between the qualitative, stochastic and continuous paradigms, models can be converted into each other; obviously with loss of information in some directions (cf. arrows labelled with abstraction in). different net classes can be used simultaneously.  
