genome analysis snostrip: a snorna annotation pipeline motivation: although small nucleolar rnas form an important class of non-coding rnas, no comprehensive annotation efforts have been undertaken, presumably because the task is complicated by both the large number of distinct small nucleolar rna families and their relatively rapid pace of sequence evolution. results: with snostrip we present an automatic annotation pipeline developed specifically for comparative genomics of small nucleolar rnas. it makes use of sequence conservation, canonical box motifs as well as secondary structure and predicts putative targets. availability and implementation: the snostrip web service and the download version is available atsmall nucleolar rnas (snornas) are one of the most abundant and evolutionarily ancient groups of functional non-coding rnas (ncrna) dating back at least 23 billion years to the last common ancestor of archaea and eukarya. they fulfill an impressive variety of cellular functions ranging from specifying the locations of chemical modifications in several ncrna classes and nucleolytic processing of rrnas to the synthesis of telomeric dna and an involvement in genomic imprinting and alternative splicing, reviewed e.g. by. they broadly fall into two classes distinguished by secondary structure and characteristic sequence boxes, after which they are named box c/d and box h/aca snornas. a variety of computational tools has been devised to identify snornas de novo in searches of genomic dna, see e.g.. homologous snornas are often hard to find because of their small size, poor sequence conservation andin the case of box c/d snornaslack of a conserved secondary structure. so far no specific tool for homology-based snorna search has been devised. at the same time, the rfam database covers only a subset of the known snornas and many of the seed alignments contain only few independent sequences (70 of the snorna alignments contain516 sequences). available snorna databases, on the other hand, mainly focus on single organisms, e.g. snornalbme-db on human and the umass-database on yeast. lacking overall sequence conservation and structural elements combined with characteristic sequence motifs makes it hard to detect snornas by means of sequence homology, i.e. ncbi-blast, only.  
