snp calling using genotype model selection on high-throughput sequencing data motivation: a review of the available single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) calling procedures for illumina high-throughput sequencing (hts) platform data reveals that most rely mainly on base-calling and mapping qualities as sources of error when calling snps. thus, errors not involved in base-calling or alignment, such as those in genomic sample preparation, are not accounted for. results: a novel method of consensus and snp calling, genotype model selection (gems), is given which accounts for the errors that occur during the preparation of the genomic sample. simulations and real data analyses indicate that gems has the best performance balance of sensitivity and positive predictive value among the tested snp callers.within the last few years, advances in high-throughput sequencing (hts) technologies have garnered much attention . these advances have necessitated more efficient and more accurate data analysis tools. one area of recent interest and development is that of single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) detection. scientists have acknowledged and continue to research the significant impact of snps in the development of diseases as well as in pharmacogenomics or personalized medicine . among snp detection tools, or snp callers, that can be used for single-sample illumina hts platform data, popular procedures include those from gatk , freebayes (http://bioinformatics.bc.edu/marthlab/freebayes), samtools , atlas-snp2 , snvmix2 , varscan , soapsnp and maq . upon closer examination, it becomes clear that the aforementioned procedures rely mainly on base-calling and mapping quality values as sources of error. base-calling and mapping errors can occur when converting raw intensity data into short read sequences and when aligning these short read sequences to a reference genome, respectively. however, they failed to account for genomic sample preparation errors. these errors can occur during the acquisition of the genomic sample, the random fragmentation of the sample and the amplification of the fragments. in particular, unaccounted amplification errors may have a significant negative impact on hts analyses . in contrast to the above snp callers, here we present genotype model selection (gems), our novel snp detection procedure which accounts for errors in the genomic sample preparation, base-calling and alignment. at a given site, gems maximizes the likelihood for each possible genotype with respect to the parameter associated with the genomic sample preparation errors. the gems consensus genotype is the one whose likelihood is the largest among all genotype likelihoods. the dixon outlier test is then used to determine if a snp should be called at the sites where the consensus genotype differs from the reference genotype. this article is organized as follows. section 2 reviews a selection of current snp callers that can be used for single-sample illumina hts platform data. section 3 describes the gems procedure in detail. section 4 compares gems with its competitors through a simulation study and real data analyses. section 5 gives some concluding remarks.  
