snpdryad: predicting deleterious non-synonymous human snps using only orthologous protein sequences motivation: the recent advances in genome sequencing have revealed an abundance of non-synonymous polymorphisms among human individuals; subsequently, it is of immense interest and importance to predict whether such substitutions are functional neutral or have deleterious effects. the accuracy of such prediction algorithms depends on the quality of the multiple-sequence alignment, which is used to infer how an amino acid substitution is tolerated at a given position. because of the scarcity of orthologous protein sequences in the past, the existing prediction algorithms all include sequences of protein paralogs in the alignment, which can dilute the conservation signal and affect prediction accuracy. however, we believe that, with the sequencing of a large number of mammalian genomes, it is now feasible to include only protein orthologs in the alignment and improve the prediction performance. results: we have developed a novel prediction algorithm, named snpdryad, which only includes protein orthologs in building a multiple sequence alignment. among many other innovations, snpdryad uses different conservation scoring schemes and uses random forest as a classifier. we have tested snpdryad on several datasets. we found that snpdryad consistently outperformed other methods in several performance metrics, which is attributed to the exclusion of paralo-gous sequence. we have run snpdryad on the complete human proteome, generating prediction scores for all the possible amino acid substitutions. availability and implementation: the algorithm and the prediction results can be accessed from the web sitesingle-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) are single nucleotide variations between different individuals of the same species. they account for the majority of the genetic variations among human individuals, as it is estimated that a single snp is present in every 2000 nt between any two individuals . depending on how the amino acid is affected by the polymorphism, the snps in the protein coding regions can be classified into synonymous snp (those that do not change amino acid), non-synonymous snp (nssnp) (those change the amino acid) and nonsense mutations (where a snp results in a stop codon). based on the data from the 1000 genomes project, it is estimated that on an average a human individual possesses 10 00011 000 non-synonymous substitutions compared with the reference human genome sequence . a number of databases had been developed to curate and store these human snp data, which include dbsnp, omim, snpdbe and dbnsfp . in addition to snps found in the protein coding regions, recent genome-wide association and expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) studies and the large-scale encode project also revealed many snps located outside of the protein coding regions (called regulatory snps or rsnps) that are also implicated in human diseases. however, these rsnps are not discussed here, as we only focus on the effect of snps found in the protein coding regions. synonymous snps are usually assumed to be functional neutral because they do not change the protein sequence, but in rare cases they can affect protein folding, disrupt rna secondary structure or disrupt mirna binding sites . although many nssnps are probably selectively neutral, i.e. having little functional effects, a substantial fraction of these nssnps are indeed predicted to be deleterious because they can potentially disrupt functional sites on a protein or affect their correct folding . many nssnps are also linked to human disorders; many of these disease associated snps are documented in databases, such as omim, pharmgkb and hgmd . because of the potential functional consequences of nssnps, several computational methods had been developed to in silico predict whether an nssnp is deleterious. some of these methods include sift, polyphen, polyphen2, snps3d, snap and mutationtaster . these methods usually work by estimating the likelihood that a mutation (nssnp) is tolerated based on whether the to whom correspondence should be addressed. amino acid residue is observed in other evolutionarily related orthologous or paralogous protein sequences or sequence fragments, and whether the mutation is tolerated based on protein structure and the physiochemical properties of the amino acids. the major differences among these methods are how these evolutionary and structural features are extracted, and what algorithm (classifier) is used in combining these features to make a decision. there also exist ensemble methods, such as condel and logit, which use naive bayes and logistic regression, respectively, to combine individual prediction methods (gonzalez). as described above, an accurate and unbiased multiple sequence alignment of a protein of interest with its orthologous and paralogous sequences is essential to derive a conservation profile of the protein, which can be used to estimate how a mutation is tolerated . ideally, only orthologous sequences should be used in this step because these orthologs are expected to perform similar function in related organisms, and the corresponding amino acid position is expected to have the same evolutionary, biophysical and structural constraint. however, to the best of our knowledge, all the current nssnp analysis algorithms include paralogous sequences in the multiple sequence alignment (msa) step, which perhaps was a necessity a few years ago because of the scarcity of the fully sequenced proteome sequences. however, inclusion of paralogous sequences can potentially introduce noises in generating protein sequence conservation profiles because when compared with orthologs, protein paralogs are more likely to diverge in sequence and in cellular functions. on an average, the amino acid sequence identity between paralogous protein pairs is only 30 . the recent breakthroughs in sequencing technology have generated fully sequenced genomes and proteomes for a large number of vertebrates, which potentially can eliminate the need for including paralogous protein sequences in building multiple sequence alignment. in this article, we show that, by including only orthologous protein sequences, we achieved better performance in predicting deleterious nssnps. other innovations in our method include the choice of using random forest in classification, which had been previously shown to be effective in high-dimension data classification . we benchmarked our prediction method, termed snpdryad, against other methods and showed that snpdryad consistently achieved better sensitivity and specificity on the datasets tested.summarizes the overall design of snpdryad. the input of snpdryad is a non-synonymous human snp and the sequence of the human protein that the snp is on; the output is the predicted deleterious score for the input nssnp. the higher the score, the more deleterious the input nssnp is predicted to be.in this article, we described snpdryad, a novel computational method that can predict deleterious effect of amino acid substitutions occurred in human proteins. as elaborated in this article, snpdryad outperforms other leading algorithms in accurately predicting deleterious nssnps. we demonstrated that this is primarily because snpdryad only includes orthologous sequences in building the multiple-sequence alignment, as opposed to other contemporary methods, which include paralogous sequences as well. such an innovation allows construction of a more accurate protein sequence conservation profile, allowing a more precise estimate on whether a substitution is tolerated at a specific position. this would not have been possible until now, when a large number of mammalian or vertebrate genome sequences have been completely sequenced, thanks to the drastically decreasing cost of genomic sequencing. the next-generation sequencing technology has generated a deluge of genomic sequences and subsequently, a wealth of genetic variation data such as nonsynonymous polymorphisms. we envision that an intelligent algorithm such as snpdryad can take advantage of this large amount of data and further improve the accuracy of predicting deleterious nssnps.  
