snphood : investigate, quantify and visualise the epigenomic neighbourhood of snps using ngs data motivation: the vast majority of the many thousands of disease-associated single nucleotide poly-morphisms (snps) lie in the non-coding part of the genome. they are likely to affect regulatory elements , such as enhancers and promoters, rather than the function of a protein. to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying genetic diseases, it is therefore increasingly important to study the effect of a snp on nearby molecular traits such as chromatin or transcription factor binding. results: we developed snphood, a user-friendly bioconductor r package to investigate, quantify and visualise the local epigenetic neighbourhood of a set of snps in terms of chromatin marks or tf binding sites using data from ngs experiments. availability and implementation: snphood is publicly available and maintained as an r bioconductor package atto date, thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been identified in genome-wide association studies (gwas) to be associated with complex traits and diseases (www.genome.gov/gwastudies). the vast majority of these disease-or trait-associated snps lie in the non-coding part of the genome and are likely to affect regulatory elements (i.e. enhancers and promoters) rather than the function of a protein. thus, to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying complex genetic traits and diseases, it is increasingly important to study the effect of snps on nearby molecular traits such as chromatin or transcription factor (tf) binding. current workflows for analysing chip-seq data typically involve peak calling, which summarises the signal of each binding event into two numbers: enrichment and peak size, and usually neglects additional factors like binding shape. however, when a set of regions of interest (roi) is already at hande.g. gwas snps, quantitative trait loci (qtls), etc.a comprehensive and unbiased analysis of the molecular neighbourhood of these regions, potentially in combination with genetic or allele-specific binding (asb) analyses will be more suited to investigate the underlying (epi-)genomic regulatory mechanisms than simply comparing peak sizes. currently, such analyses are often carried out by hand using basic ngs tools and genome-browser like interfaces to visualise molecular phenotype data independently for each roi. a tool for systematic analysis of the local molecular neighbourhood of roi is currently lacking. to fill this gap, we developed snphood, an r/bioconductor package to investigate, quantify and visualise the local epigenetic neighbourhood of roi using chromatin or tf binding data from ngs experiments. it provides a set of tools that are largely complimentary to currently existing software for analysing chip-seq data. many functionalities of snphood have been used in our recent study to investigate the chromatin environment of h3k27ac qtls, which has led to the conclusion that h3k27ac qtls lie in the nucleosome free regions and show the same effect across multiple histone marks and tf binding . in addition, snphood supports asb analyses, which is a powerful way for looking at the effect of genetic variants even within small sample sizes. we anticipate that it will be widely used for exploratory and quantitative functional genomics analysis of snps and other roi using ngs data.  
