genome analysis snpsea: an algorithm to identify cell types, tissues and pathways affected by risk loci we created a fast, robust and general c++ implementation of a single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) set enrichment algorithm to identify cell types, tissues and pathways affected by risk loci. it tests trait-associated genomic loci for enrichment of specificity to conditions (cell types, tissues and pathways). we use a non-paramet-ric statistical approach to compute empirical p-values by comparison with null snp sets. as a proof of concept, we present novel applications of our method to four sets of genome-wide significant snps associated with red blood cell count, multiple sclerosis, celiac disease and hdl cholesterol. availability and implementation:as genome-wide association studies (gwas) continue to find disease alleles, investigators seek to identify the set of pathways and tissue types affected by these alleles, and the physiological conditions under which they act . for example, we have previously presented statistical methods to identify immune cell types for further functional investigation by finding cell type-specific expression of genes in linkage disequilibrium (ld) with autoimmune diseaseassociated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) . presumably, alleles influence disease risk through pathways specific to these cell types. we sought a general implementation of these methods to leverage data from high-throughput functional assays that assess genome-wide transcription, protein binding, epigenetic modifications and other functional parameters across diverse cellular conditions and tissue types. each of these diverse data types can be represented as a continuous matrix of genes and conditions (e.g. cell types, tissues, pathways, experimental conditions). databases such as gene ontology (go) offer expert-defined pathways and complementary gene annotations that can be represented as binary values. investigators have already described strategies to assess enrichment of gwa results for pathways or gene sets but not for condition specificity . in contrast to these methods, we do not require genotypes, p-values, a priori gene sets or pathways or a priori definitions of genesnp associations. we require only a list of snp identifiers, use ld structures to identify plausibly influential genes and use a simple sampling approach to identify the conditions they influence. snpsea is a general algorithm to identify the conditions relevant to a trait by assessing the genes within associated loci for enrichment of condition specificity.  
