databases and ontologies snpxge 2 : a database for human snp–coexpression associations motivation: recently, genecoexpression relationships have been found to be often conditional and dynamic. many studies have suggested that single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have impacts on gene expression variations in human populations. results: the snpxge 2 database contains the computationally predicted human snpcoexpression associations, i.e. the differential coexpression between two genes is associated with the genotypes of an snp. these data were generated from a large-scale association study that was based on the hapmap phase i data, which covered 269 individuals from 4 human populations, 556 873 snps and 15 000 gene expression profiles. in order to reduce the computational cost, the snpcoexpression associations were assessed using gap/substitution models, proven to have a comparable power to logistic regression models. the results, at a false discovery rate (fdr) cutoff of 0.1, consisted of 44 769 and 50 792 snpcoexpression associations based on single and pooled populations, respectively, and can be queried in the snpxge 2 database via either gene symbol or reference snp id. for each reported association, a detailed information page is provided.it is widely accepted that eukaryotic gene expression variation may be potentially modulated by many genetic and epigenetic factors such as transcription factors, cis-regulatory elements, enhancers/repressors, transposons, mirnas, nucleosome positioning, dna methylation, histone modifications and by environmental factors . moreover, much of gene expression variation is heritable . recently, many studies have suggested that single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) also have impacts on gene expression variations in human populations.found that many regions within 1 mb of 374 expressed genes of interest had significant association of snps with expression variation. subsequently,performed association analyses of expression levels of 14 925 transcripts with snps and copy to whom correspondence should be addressed. number variants using multiple linear regression and suggested that snps captured 83.6 of the total detected genetic variation in gene expression. later on,carried out another association analysis of 2.2 million common snps with gene expression using multiple linear regression and identified at least 1348 and 180 genes with association signals in cis and trans effects, respectively.suggested that common genetic variants accounted for differences in gene expression as well as prevalence of complex diseases among ethnic groups.also reported several thousands of significant associations between expression quantitative nucleotides and transcript clusters in two of hapmap populations. in a separate study,identified that some genes, which were differentially expressed among human populations, were also associated with particular biological processes. using a bayesian hierarchical model,found strong enrichments of quantitative trait loci for gene expression (eqtls) in 250 bp upstream regions of transcription end site (tes) and around the transcription start site (tss). similarly,identified genetic variations in more than a thousand genes, which influenced the overall gene expression or splicing. in addition to individual gene expression profiles, the relationships among transcripts such as coexpression are also often studied for deciphering gene regulatory mechanisms. the identification of human genecoexpression relationships using microarray data has often relied on overall correlations between gene expression profiles across many experiments or conditions . recently, some studies have suggested that the coexpression relationships between genes are often dynamic and conditional, which may be dependent on cellular states , developmental stages , disease status (case or control) or human populations . however, few studies have related such differential coexpression to genetic bases. the effects of snps on gene expression variation in humans have been well documented, and so it is reasonable to conjecture that the differential coexpression between two genes may be associated with the genotypes of an snp, which is termed as an snpcoexpression association in this study.showed a biological switch mechanism in coexpression between correlation and inverse correlation of two genes, controlled by the genotypes of an snp. however, the switch mechanism in two genes coexpression controlled by an snp could be only part of the whole picture of snpcoexpression associations because it is also possible that two genes are well coexpressed under individual genotypes of an snppage: 404 403410unlike traditional eqtl analyses, in this study, we have associated differential coexpression relations between two genes with the genotypes of an snp on a genome scale. we found that most of the associated snps in snpcoexpression associations are located remotely from the coexpressed genes, and that the snprelated genes are enriched with regulatory functions. a potential mechanism underlying snpcoexpression associations could be thatthe associated snps affect the functions or expression of their related genes, which are regulators of downstream coexpressed genes, and thereby these associated snps could fine tune coexpression relationships between genes. gene expression is important for understanding the genetics of complex diseases. this study suggests that natural variations in human gene expression may exist in coexpression relationships. the analysis of genetically determined variation in coexpression relationships may enhance understanding of both the underlying genetics and the population differences in complex diseases. the snpxge 2 database provides information on computationally predicted human snpcoexpression associations. the interfaces of snpxge 2 are friendly and easy to use. biologists may use this database to find whether their genes of interest have coexpressed/interacting partners associated with a particular distribution of genotypes, and/or their potential upstream regulatory genes, which are difficult to detect using routine correlation analyses. biologists may also use this database to study potentially dynamic and complex relationships among the members of a biological process using go term search. snpxge 2 is a continuing project and is expected to grow substantially over the coming years as next-generation sequencing technologies like illumina, 454 plus pacbio and ion torrent have made the data generation cheaper and newer mapping technologies will lead to enormous amounts of rnaseq data for studying gene expression , which is quantitative enough to be included in human snpcoexpression association analyses. furthermore, mapping differential gene coexpression to more genetic features like dna copy numbers (generated from array cgh data) is also under investigation and will be incorporated into snpxge 2 in the next release. in addition, this study establishes preliminary results for constructing human genotype-dependent coexpression networks, which will be carried out more extensively in the future.  
