sequence analysis snvmix: predicting single nucleotide variants from next-generation sequencing of tumors motivation: next-generation sequencing (ngs) has enabled whole genome and transcriptome single nucleotide variant (snv) discovery in cancer. ngs produces millions of short sequence reads that, once aligned to a reference genome sequence, can be interpreted for the presence of snvs. although tools exist for snv discovery from ngs data, none are specifically suited to work with data from tumors, where altered ploidy and tumor cellularity impact the statistical expectations of snv discovery. results: we developed three implementations of a probabilistic binomial mixture model, called snvmix, designed to infer snvs from ngs data from tumors to address this problem. the first models allelic counts as observations and infers snvs and model parameters using an expectation maximization (em) algorithm and is therefore capable of adjusting to deviation of allelic frequencies inherent in genomically unstable tumor genomes. the second models nucleotide and mapping qualities of the reads by probabilistically weighting the contribution of a read/nucleotide to the inference of a snv based on the confidence we have in the base call and the read alignment. the third combines filtering out low-quality data in addition to probabilistic weighting of the qualities. we quantitatively evaluated these approaches on 16 ovarian cancer rnaseq datasets with matched genotyping arrays and a human breast cancer genome sequenced to 40 (haploid) coverage with ground truth data and show systematically that the snvmix models outperform competing approaches. availability: software and data are available atwe have described two statistical models based on binomial mixture models to infer snvs from aligned ngs data obtained from tumors. we demonstrated that a probabilistic approach to modeling allelic counts obviates the need for depth-based thresholding of the data, and how fitting the model to real data to estimate parameters is superior to maq, which uses fixed parameter settings on the assumption that the data come from a normal human genome. in addition, we extended the basic binomial mixture to model mapping and base qualities by using a probabilistic weighting technique. this eliminates the need to employ arbitrary thresholds on base and mapping qualities and instead lets the model determine the strength of contribution of each read to the inference of the genotype. finally, we showed that even further gains in accuracy can be obtained by combining moderate thresholding and probabilistic weighting of the base and mapping qualities. importantly, gains in accuracy by the snvmix models were shown in both transcriptome and genome data.  
