snv-ppilp: refined snv calling for tumor data using perfect phylogenies and ilp motivation: recent studies sequenced tumor samples from the same progenitor at different development stages and showed that by taking into account the phylogeny of this development, single-nucleotide variant (snv) calling can be improved. accurate snv calls can better reveal early-stage tumors, identify mechanisms of cancer progression or help in drug targeting. results: we present snv-ppilp, a fast and easy to use tool for refining gatks unified genotyper snv calls, for multiple samples assumed to form a phylogeny. we tested snv-ppilp on simulated data, with a varying number of samples, snvs, read coverage and violations of the perfect phylogeny assumption. we always match or improve the accuracy of gatk, with a significant improvement on low read coverage.recent studies on cancer tissue suggest that as the disease progresses, the original tumor progresses into several different sub-clones. these sub-clones contain not only the original mutations but also new mutations added over time; this work focuses on single-nucleotide variants (snvs). accurate snv calls can better reveal early-stage tumors, identify mechanisms of cancer progression or help in drug targeting. this phylogenetic assumption has been recently taken into account in, by proposing a tool for refining the snv calling of gatks unified genotyper , the state-of-the-art snv multi-sample caller for next-generation sequencing data. in this note, we present snv-ppilp (snv calling with perfect phylogenies and integer linear programming), a tool for refining gatks unified genotyper snv calls for multiple samples. we assume these samples form a character-based phylogeny, the characters being the snvs reported by gatk. as in, we work with the perfect phylogeny model; however, we have a new problem formulation for fitting gatks calls to such a phylogeny, which we solve exactly using integer linear programming (ilp). snv-ppilp can be run especially on low-coverage samples, without big violations of the perfect phylogeny model. for a significant improvement in accuracy, six or more samples are needed.  
