genome analysis soapfusion: a robust and effective computational fusion discovery tool for rna-seq reads motivation: rna-seq provides a powerful approach to carry out ab ini-tio investigation of fusion transcripts representing critical translocation and post-transcriptional events that recode hereditary information. most of the existing computational fusion detection tools are challenged by the issues of accuracy and how to handle multiple mappings. results: we present a novel tool soapfusion for fusion discovery with paired-end rna-seq reads. soapfusion is accurate and efficient for fusion discovery with high sensitivity (!93), low false-positive rate (1.36), even the coverage is as low as 10, highlighting its ability to detect fusions efficiently at low sequencing cost. from real data of universal human reference rna (uhrr) samples, soapfusion detected 7 novel fusion genes, more than other existing tools and all genes have been validated through reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction followed by sanger sequencing. soapfusion thus proves to be an effective method with precise applicability in search of fusion transcripts, which is advantageous to accelerate pathological and therapeutic cancer studies.fusion transcript, the new transcript transcribed casually from two parental genes, may emerge through chromosomal rearrangements or intergenic splicing . given their important roles in cancer development and progression , some known fusions have been successfully used as biomarkers for development of inhibitors triggering cancer remission, e.g. bcrabl1 fusion in treating chronic myelogenous leukemia (cml) . consequently, it is of enormous biological and therapeutic significance to locate such fusion events. early studies mainly resorted to expressed sequence tag , array cgh or end sequence profiling to seek for fusions. however, such methods were largely constrained by their limited sequencing throughput and uneconomic cost . with the emergence of next-generation sequencing technologies, rna-seq has been introduced as an excellent technique in fusion discovery , and, in particular, paired-end (pe) sequencing was proved to exhibit distinguished strengths in both productivity and sensitivity . the general idea of fusion detection from rna-seq data is to align all reads to a reference genome or transcriptome and then explore alignments carrying potential fusion features to call fusions. early computational detection approaches first narrow down regions containing possible fusions with pe reads intactly mapped to the reference, and then search for the fusion junctions with remaining reads that mapped to those regions intactly. nevertheless, with successful application of segmental alignment strategy in some splicing junction detection tools, e.g. mapsplice and soapsplice , a bunch of computational approaches have been proposed, including fusionseq , shortfuse , fusionhunter , fusionmap , defuse and tophat-fusion , to consider all segmental alignment of reads in addition to intact alignment. these current methods vary in performance and ability in fusion detection. roughly speaking, the performance of these methods rely on their ability to precisely detect the reads encompassing fusion junctions (fusion reads), as those reads served as the major evidences for fusion events and could only be segmentally mapped to references. to obtain specific fusion junctions, current tools align potential fusion reads to combinations of candidate exons (e.g. fusionseq, shortfuse, fusionhunter, fusionmap and defuse) or split those reads into fixed segments for reference alignment (e.g. fusionmap and tophat-fusion). this induces higher computational requirement on alignment and/or not easy to solve segmental mapping problems such as to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
