systems biology software support for sbgn maps: sbgn-ml and libsbgn motivation: libsbgn is a software library for reading, writing and manipulating systems biology graphical notation (sbgn) maps stored using the recently developed sbgn-ml file format. the library (available in c++ and java) makes it easy for developers to add sbgn support to their tools, whereas the file format facilitates the exchange of maps between compatible software applications. the library also supports validation of maps, which simplifies the task of ensuring compliance with the detailed sbgn specifications. with this effort we hope to increase the adoption of sbgn in bioinformatics tools, ultimately enabling more researchers to visualize biological knowledge in a precise and unambiguous manner. availability and implementation: milestone 2 was released in december 2011. source code, example files and binaries are freely available under the terms of either the lgpl v2.1+ or apache v2.0 open source licenses from http://libsbgn.sourceforge.net.the systems biology graphical notation (sbgn, le) facilitates the representation and exchange of complex biological knowledge in a concise and unambiguous manner: as standardized pathway maps. it has been developed and supported by a vibrant community of biologists, biochemists, software developers, bioinformaticians and pathway databases experts. to whom correspondence should be addressed. sbgn is described in detail in the online specifications (see http://sbgn.org/documents/specifications). here we summarize its concepts only briefly. sbgn defines three orthogonal visual languages: process description (pd), entity relationship (er) and activity flow (af). sbgn maps must follow the visual vocabulary, syntax and layout rules of one of these languages. the choice of language depends on the type of pathway or process being depicted and the amount of available information. the pd language, which originates from kitanos process diagrams and the related celldesigner tool , is equivalent to a bipartite graph (with a few exceptions) with one type of nodes representing pools of biological entities, and a second type of nodes representing biological processes such as biochemical reactions, transport, binding and degradation. arcs represent consumption, production or control, and can only connect nodes of differing types. the pd language is very suitable for metabolic pathways, but struggles to concisely depict the combinatorial complexity of certain proteins with many phosphorylation states. the er language, on the other hand, is inspired by kohns molecular interaction maps , and describes relations between biomolecules. in er, two entities can be linked with an interaction arc. the outcome of an interaction (for example, a protein complex), is considered an entity in itself, represented by a black dot, which can engage in further interactions. thus er represents dependencies between interactions, or putting it differently, it can represent which interaction is necessary for another one to take place. interactions are possible between two or more entities, which make er maps roughly equivalent to a hypergraph in which an arc can connect more than two nodes. er is more concise than pd when it comes to representing protein modifications and protein interactions, although it is less capable when it comes to presenting biochemical reactions. finally, the third language in the sbgn family is af, whichthe sbgn-ml file format and libsbgn library provide opensource software support for sbgn maps. they have been adopted by several tools already, and development is ongoing. it is expected that the availability of a community-supported api will significantly expedite sbgns adoption. we use the word milestone for versioning purposesthe latest release is milestone 2, which was released in december 2011. libsbgn is primarily focused on exchanging between sbgn software. other functionalities, such as conversion to other formats, or generating suitable layout, are not currently supported. it is certainly likely that some or all of these functionalities will be added in the future as optional modules. sbgn-ml will likely see the addition of fine-grained graphics specification, support for linking between files, and improved usage of ontologies. additionally, libsbgn will see expansion to other programming languages beyond java and c++, such as for example javascript. the sbgn-ml file format is represented as an xml schema (sbgn.xsd). examples are available as test files (xml, png). the accompanying documentation reflects the content of the schema, and clarifies a number of additional rules and conventions (e.g., coordinate system). this set of resources constitutes the sbgn-ml specifications. the libsbgn library (in c++ and java) and the file format have been released on sourceforge, under a dual license: the lesser general public licence (lgpl) version 2.1 or later, and apache version 2.0. the development process is an active community effort, organized around: regular online meetings, discussions on the mailing list, and development tools on sourceforge (bug tracker, svn repository and documentation wiki). new developers are very welcome.  
