genetics and population analysis solarius: an r interface to solar for variance component analysis in pedigrees the open source environment r is one of the most widely used software for statistical computing. it provides a variety of applications including statistical genetics. most of the powerful tools for quantitative genetic analyses are stand-alone free programs developed by researchers in academia. solar is one of the standard software programs to perform linkage and association mappings of the quantitative trait loci (qtls) in pedigrees of arbitrary size and complexity. solarius allows the user to exploit the variance component methods implemented in solar. it automates such routine operations as formatting pedigree and phenotype data. it parses also the model output and contains summary and plotting functions for exploration of the results. in addition, solarius enables parallel computing of the linkage and association analyses that makes the calculation of genome-wide scans more efficient. availability and implementation: solarius is available on cran and on github https://github.com/ ugcd/solarius.variance component (vc) models or linear mixed models are powerful tools for genetic studies particularly of quantitative traits. these models are attractive because they account for the contribution of individual genetic loci, while efficiently including polygenic and other confounding effects shared among individuals. implementation of the vc methods has been traditionally a computationally challenging task, and solar is one of the first and well-established vc tools that focuses on the analysis of quantitative trait loci (qtls) in extended pedigrees . solarius delivers to the r user three main quantitative genetic models: polygenic, linkage and association. the motivation to develop the solarius software came from the extensive experience of the group that studies the genetic analysis of idiopathic thrombophilia (gait) project . the first goal of solarius was to provide an effortless data manipulation in a polygenic analysis needed to be explored for such a large number of phenotypes. the second goal was to conduct the genomewide scans for both linkage and association mappings in an efficient way by means of parallel computing.  
