somp: web server for in silico prediction of sites of metabolism for drug-like compounds a new freely available web server site of metabolism predictor to predict the sites of metabolism (som) based on the structural formula of chemicals has been developed. it is based on the analyses of structure-som relationships using a bayesian approach and labelled multilevel neighbourhoods of atoms descriptors to represent the structures of over 1000 metabolized xenobiotics. the server allows predicting soms that are catalysed by 1a2, 2c9, 2c19, 2d6 and 3a4 isoforms of cytochrome p450 and enzymes of the udp-glucuronosyl-transferase family. the average invariant accuracy of prediction that was calculated for the training sets (using leave-one-out cross-validation) and evaluation sets is 0.9 and 0.95, respectively. availability and implementation: freely available on the web atdrug metabolism affects the drug efficiency and toxicity and is divided into phase i (oxidation, hydrolysis, reduction) and phase ii (conjugation) reactions. cytochromes p450 (cyp) are the main enzymes of phase i , which metabolize most drugs. glucuronidation is the main reaction of phase ii, which is catalysed by udp-glucuronosyltransferase (ugt) and serves as a clearance mechanism for drugs from many therapeutic classes . prediction of the sites of metabolism (som) is important during the drug discovery process to detect possible metabolic hot spots in lead compounds that can be modified to obtain more metabolically stable compounds. the som prediction can be used for an integral estimation of activity and toxicity of a compound including its possible metabolites.there are two freely available web servers, which allow predicting soms for xenobiotics that are metabolized by p450 isoenzymes. smartcyp predicts soms for compounds that are metabolized by cyp2c and cyp2d6 , and rs-webpredictor predicts soms for nine cyp isoforms (1a2, 2a6, 2b6, 2c8, 2c9, 2c19, 2d6, 2e1, 3a4). we have previously developed a method to predict soms by using only structural formulae, which distinguishes from traditional som-predicting methods that use molecular docking and molecular dynamics or quantum mechanical and semi-empirical calculations. the detailed description of the algorithm was published and shown in the supplementary text s1. in this article, we highlight the extension ofour method and show a new freely available web server for som prediction for five major isoforms of p450 and ugt.  
