somvarius: somatic variant identification from unpaired tissue samples motivation: somatic variant calling typically requires paired tumor-normal tissue samples. yet, paired normal tissues are not always available in clinical settings or for archival samples. results: we present somvarius, a computational method for detecting somatic variants using high throughput sequencing data from unpaired tissue samples. we evaluate the performance of the method using genomic data from synthetic and real tumor samples. somvarius identifies somatic variants in exome-seq data of $150 coverage with at least 67.7 precision and 64.6 recall rates, when compared with paired-tissue somatic variant calls in real tumor samples. we demonstrate the utility of somvarius by identifying somatic mutations in formalin-fixed samples, and tracking clonal dynamics of oncogenic mutations in targeted deep sequencing data from pre-and post-treatment leukemia samples. availability and implementation: somvarius is written in python 2.7 and available at http://www. sjdlab.org/resources/assessment of somatic and germ line mutations to tailor personalized diagnosis and treatment is becoming a corner stone for precision medicine in oncology initiatives (;). somatic mutations are typically detected by comparing sequencing data from target (e.g. tumor) and matched control tissues (e.g. benign tissue from the same patient). initiatives such as the icgc-tcga dream genomic mutation calling challenge have shown that popular algorithms can detect somatic mutations from paired tumor-normal tissue samples with reasonably high accuracy . however, in many practical situations matched control tissues are not available, and it remains challenging to distinguish between somatic and germ line variants in those cases. for instance, matched normal samples are not routinely obtained in clinical care . additionally, a considerable proportion of the older ffpe and fresh frozen tumor samples have no matched control tissues available. popular variant calling tools are not designed to identify somatic and germ line variants from unpaired tissue samples, and there have been only limited efforts to detect somatic mutations from unpaired samples . we present somvarius, a computational method for detecting somatic variants using high throughput sequencing data from unpaired tissue samples. somvarius accepts sorted alignment files (.bam) as input, and outputs predicted somatic mutations in the variant call format (.vcf), thereby enabling its easy integration into any standard genome analysis pipeline. it also generates an optional output providing information about the status of known  
