systems biology sorad: a systems biology approach to predict and modulate dynamic signaling pathway response from phosphoproteome time-course measurements motivation: signaling networks mediate responses to different stimuli using a multitude of feed-forward, feedback and cross-talk mechanisms , and malfunctions in these mechanisms have an important role in various diseases. to understand a disease and to help discover novel therapeutic approaches, we have to reveal the molecular mechanisms underlying signal transduction and use that information to design targeted perturbations. results: we have pursued this direction by developing an efficient computational approach, sorad, which can estimate the structure of signal transduction networks and the associated continuous signaling dynamics from phosphoprotein time-course measurements. further, sorad can identify experimental conditions that modulate the signaling toward a desired response. we have analyzed comprehensive phosphoprotein time-course data from a human hepatocellular liver carcinoma cell line and demonstrate here that sorad provides more accurate predictions of phosphoprotein responses to given stimuli than previously presented methods and, importantly, that sorad can estimate experimental conditions to achieve a desired signaling response. because sorad is data driven, it has a high potential to generate novel hypotheses for further research. our analysis of the hepatocellular liver carcinoma data predict a regulatory connection where akt activity is dependent on ikk in tgf stimulated cells, which is supported by the original data but not included in the original model. availability: an implementation of the proposed computational methods will be available atbinding of the ligand on the cell surface receptor initiates a signaling cascade that is propagated via several parallel pathways through phosphorylation of specific amino acid residues in signaling proteins. building a mechanistic understanding of signaling pathway dynamics from experimental data has remained challenging for several reasons. although mass spectrometry based techniques have witnessed considerable progress recently, it is laborious to measure active forms of proteins in a highly quantitative and high-throughput manner. furthermore, unraveling functional interactions between phosphoproteins demands a large number of experiments where the key signaling molecules are perturbed, or even co-perturbed, by using direct gene knockouts, gene knockdowns, specific inhibitors or other external stimuli. a number of different computational strategies have been proposed to model signal transduction. a methodology based on bayesian networks for describing the interconnections between signaling proteins has been used to study t cell signaling (used an approach based on fuzzy logic, an extension to the two valued boolean algebra, to study the downstream signaling of tumor necrosis factor, epidermal growth factor and insulin receptors. while logic-based approaches provide models that are easy to interpret and analyze computationally, they do not allow biophysically motivated mechanistic modeling approaches, which inevitably require the use of dynamic and continuous models of signaling networks (reviewed in). ordinary differential equations (ode), which represent the average of detailed chemical reaction models in a cell population, have thus become preferable in studies focusing on signaling dynamics. for example,constructed an ode model to describe receptor-dependent mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling based on prior biological knowledge about the network structure, and also identified a novel regulatory motif. reverse engineering of dynamic models of molecular networks has also been extensively studied in the context of transcriptional regulation, and several ode modeling methods have been proposed (a ijond lahdesmakilahdesma). our approach differs from the previous methods by using continuous non-parametric dynamics and, importantly, by providing a way to modulate networks response as described below. to whom correspondence should be addressed. a far-reaching goal is to use mathematical models and computational methods to modulate signaling pathway responses in healthy and diseased conditions. for example,attempted to detect drug targets from phosphoproteomic data by identifying changes in a pathway induced by a treatment relative to an untreated control. given the complexity of signaling pathway dynamics, accurate modulation strategies inevitably require the use of a mechanistic model of network dynamics. modelbased intervention approaches have been studied in the context of probabilistic boolean network models , but there is an interest on how the intervention strategies can be implemented for continuous and dynamical models. here, we present a flexible non-parametric ode model and propose an efficient and scalable network structure learning algorithm to identify signaling pathways and their dynamics from phosphoprotein data. this modeling method, called sorad, assumes the standard ode formulation but alleviates the detailed parametric model specifications by using nonparametric functions. this has important consequences for the signaling pathway reconstruction as we have to estimate only the kinetic parameters and and the hyperparameters of the covariance function, but no parameters directly related to the regulatory functions. when applied to previously unseen stimuli, sorad provides quantitatively accurate signaling pathway responses. more importantly, we show how sorad can be used to design interventions for the modulation of said pathways response and dynamics. this novel and unique method enabling the design of optimal stimuli (e.g. receptor stimuli, drug treatment) encourages the discovery of new methodologies for experimental design, drug discovery and therapeutic applications. to demonstrate sorads performance, we make use of the dream project, an initiative to foster collaboration between experimental and computational biologists , and validate our predictions on independent experimental data from a human carcinoma cell line (part of dream4) originally published in .  
