sequence analysis sortaller: predicting allergens using substantially optimized algorithm on allergen family featured peptides sortaller is an online allergen classifier based on allergen family featured peptide (affp) dataset and normalized blast e-values, which establish the featured vectors for support vector machine (svm). affps are allergen-specific peptides panned from irredundant allergens and harbor perfect information with noise fragments eliminated because of their similarity to non-allergens. sortaller performed significantly better than other existing software and reached a perfect balance with high specificity (98.4) and sensitivity (98.6) for discriminating allergenic proteins from several independent datasets of protein sequences of diverse sources, also highlighting with the matthews correlation coefficient (mcc) as high as 0.970, fast running speed and rapidly predicting a batch of amino acid sequences with a single click. availability and implementation: http://sortaller.allergy symptoms affect more than 25 of the population in industrialized countries . the allergy mechanism is an immunological reaction against an allergen that is often ige mediated, but non-ige mediated (i.e. cell mediated) or mixed ige and non-ige mediated reaction may be more important in food allergy . biotechnology is rapidly developing, which involves the introduction of novel proteins into drugs or foods, and those proteins can be allergenic . it is essential to avoid transferring a gene that encodes a major allergenic protein (from any source) into a drug/food crop that did not previously contain that protein. to accurately discriminate candidate genes from allergens before transferring those into a drug/food organism would aid preventive efforts to curb the rising incidence of allergies. sequence comparison of novel proteins for similarity to known allergens is a critical part of the weight of evidence approach used to ascertain the safety of the gene(s) to be transformed. over  
