spacem 3 : a software for biological module detection when data is incomplete, high dimensional and dependent among classical methods for module detection, spacem 3 provides ad hoc algorithms that were shown to be particularly well adapted to specific features of biological data: high-dimensionality, interactions between components (genes) and integrated treatment of missingness in observations. the software, currently in its version 2.0, is developed in c++ and can be used either via command line or with the gui under linux and windows environments. availability: the spacem 3 software, a documentation and datasets are available from http://spacem3.few of the module detection algorithms made available to scientists for molecular biology data analysis (see2005 and references therein for a representative list) directly model observations as measures carried out on individuals and integrate interaction data. generally, either the latter is omitted i.e. individuals are considered as independent or individual observations are transformed into a pairwise metrics, the choice of which is intricate and can have a terrible impact on downstream analysis. the spacem 3 software (spatial clustering with em and markov models) provides efficient statistical tools to deal with hightroughput biological data such as gene expression data. its main advantages are (i) the possibility to handle missing observations and (ii) the possibility to integrate available interaction network information. in a gene expression context, such interactions either come from prior knowledge or from measures like two-hybrid experiments. the integrated markovian approach, which is at the heart of the software, is presented in section 2. an example of application follows in section 3.spacem 3 provides a stand-alone analysis tool to retrieve meaningful modules of biological objects. it relies on powerful recent developments on algorithms devoted to the inference of probabilistic graphical models so that complex individual and interaction biological data can be modelled together as shown in blanchet and vignes (2009) and vignes and forbes (2009). the gui makes it easy for biologists to use. further developments of the software will follow theoretical work under progress to deal with additional features of biological data: possibly spurious interactions in databases and application to genetical genomics to reconstruct biological networks.  
