structural bioinformatics spatial clustering of protein binding sites for template based protein docking motivation: in recent years, much structural information on protein domains and their pair-wise interactions has been made available in public databases. however, it is not yet clear how best to use this information to discover general rules or interaction patterns about structural proteinprotein interactions. improving our ability to detect and exploit structural interaction patterns will help to provide a better 3d picture of the known protein interactome, and will help to guide docking-based predictions of the 3d structures of unsolved protein complexes. results: this article presents kbdock, a 3d database approach for spatially clustering protein binding sites and for performing template-based (knowledge-based) protein docking. kbdock combines residue contact information from the 3did database with the pfam protein domain family classification together with coordinate data from the protein data bank. this allows the 3d configurations of all known hetero domaindomain interactions to be superposed and clustered for each pfam family. we find that most pfam domain families have up to four hetero binding sites, and over 60 of all domain families have just one hetero binding site. the utility of this approach for template-based docking is demonstrated using 73 complexes from the protein docking benchmark. overall, up to 45 out of 73 complexes may be modelled by direct homology to existing domain interfaces, and key binding site information is found for 24 of the 28 remaining complexes. these results show that kbdock can often provide useful information for predicting the structures of unknown protein complexes.proteinprotein interactions (ppis) are central to many cellular processes. proteins often perform their function by interacting with other proteins to form proteinprotein complexes. in order to understand and predict ppis reliably, and to relate such to whom correspondence should be addressed. interactions to biological function, knowledge of the 3d structures of proteinprotein complexes is vitally important. to date, over 65 000 protein structures have been deposited in the protein data bank (pdb;). however, it has been estimated recently that only 12 of these structures correspond to heteromeric complexes . therefore, to bridge this gap, there is much interest in developing computational techniques to predict how two proteins fit together to form a complex . however, until recently, many of the hetero complexes in the pdb have been enzyme-inhibitor complexes, which are relatively easy to model directly. hence, so-called template-based protein docking has not yet attracted much attention from the research community . since it is well known that protein folds are often more evolutionarily conserved than their sequences , and since it has been shown that proteins with similar sequences often interact in similar ways , it follows that close structural homologues should also be expected to interact in similar ways. several studies have found that the locations of protein interaction sites are often conserved, especially within domain families, regardless of the structures of their binding partners . additionally, it has also been observed that many protein families employ only one or a small number of binding sites , suggesting that the same surface patch is often re-used. indeed, it has been demonstrated previously that the structure of an unknown protein complex may often be successfully modelled using the known binding sites of homologous domains . this may be described as templatebased docking or docking by homology . in recent years, much structural information on protein domains and on ppis has been made available in on-line databases . however, beyond listing the residues observed at the interface between a given pair of proteins or protein domains, there is no generally accepted way to define what actually constitutes a protein binding site or to quantify whether or not two binding sites are structurally similar. for example, recent methods to compare structural interfaces have used techniques based on e.g. geometric hashing of cliques of interface c atoms , combining geometric hashing with a physicochemical complementarity scoring functionpage: 2821 28202827kbdock provides a systematic way to store and analyse the 3d structures of protein domain binding sites. by superposing the structures of all hetero ddis involving a given query domain, and by using the simple notion of an interface direction vector to define the central region a protein binding site, a small number of spatially distinct binding sites may be identified for each pfam domain family. using this approach, we find that the majority of the 1029 pfam domain families have a small number (up to four) of hetero binding sites, and over 60 have just one hetero binding site. kbdock can be used to find automatically homologous hetero ddis with which to model the unknown 3d structure of given protein complex. in 60 of the docking benchmark examples studied, kbdock finds a small number of high quality ddi templates with which to model the target complex. furthermore, one of the unique strengths of kbdock is that it can find semihomologous templates even when no full homology template is available. hence, kbdock provides a useful knowledge-based approach for template-based protein docking and for helping to describe and understand structural ppis on a genomic scale.  
