specific identification and quantification of circular rnas from sequencing data motivation: circular rnas (circrnas) are a poorly characterized class of molecules that have been identified decades ago. emerging high-throughput sequencing methods as well as first reports on confirmed functions have sparked new interest in this rna species. however, the computational detection and quantification tools are still limited. results: we developed the software tandem, dcc and circtest. dcc uses output from the star read mapper to systematically detect back-splice junctions in next-generation sequencing data. dcc applies a series of filters and integrates data across replicate sets to arrive at a precise list of circrna candidates. we assessed the detection performance of dcc on a newly generated mouse brain data set and publicly available sequencing data. our software achieves a much higher precision than state-of-the-art competitors at similar sensitivity levels. moreover, dcc estimates circrna versus host gene expression from counting junction and non-junction reads. these read counts are finally used to test for host gene-independence of circrna expression across different experimental conditions by our r package circtest. we demonstrate the benefits of this approach on previously reported age-dependent circrnas in the fruit fly. availability and implementation: the source code of dcc and circtest is licensed under the gnu general public licence (gpl) version 3 and available from https://github.com/dieterich-lab/ [dcc or circtest].circrnas are a recently rediscovered class of abundant and universally expressed rna species . the development of software solutions for detecting and quantifying circrnas is slowly gaining momentum despite the increasing interest in circrnas. circrnas are characterized by a back-splicing event where the downstream 3 0 splicing tail joins back with the upstream 5 0 splicing head to form a circular rna structure (see supplementary). this structure becomes visible in sequencing data as scrambled exons as the co-linearity of genome and transcript is violated. however, the existence of back-splicing junction reads does not prove the circularity of the transcript of origin. other mechanisms (e.g. trans-splicing) may yield such reads, but only circrnas are depleted in polya-enriched samples and resistant to rnase r treatment. so far, all available algorithms are using these back-splicing reads as a key element in circrna detection. as a consequence, detection performance heavily depends on the employed read mapper and its ability to map circrna junction reads to the underlying genome or transcriptome. the two most recent addition to the circrna detection tool set are ciri and knife . other circrna detecting pipelines have been published along with research papers but seem to perform worse than the two in the corresponding benchmarks.it has been recently shown that circrnas may vary in their abundance relative to their host gene . it is interesting to statistically discern cases where circrna and linear isoform expression are tightly coupled from the ones where expression diverges between the two. to this end, read counts over the back-splice junction are typically used as an estimate of circrna expression and read counts from exons or linear splice junctions as an estimate of the host gene expression.we present a software tandem for circrna detection (dcc) and relative quantification (circtest). we could show that dcc has a higher precision than its competitors for single and paired-end data sets. moreover, we adapt a statistical framework based on the beta-binomial distribution for identifying host gene independent changes in circrna expression. additional information are provided in supplementary text.  
