sequence analysis speed: fast computation of sensitive spaced seeds multiple spaced seeds represent the current state-of-the-art for similarity search in bioinformatics, with applications in various areas such as sequence alignment, read mapping, oligonucleotide design, etc. we present speed, a software program that computes highly sensitive multiple spaced seeds. speed can be several orders of magnitude faster and computes better seeds than the existing leading software programs. availability: the source code of speed is freely available atapproximate string searching is at the core of many fundamental algorithms in bioinformatics. since the quadratic-time dynamic programming algorithm of smithwaterman is too slow, heuristic methods have to be used. the most popular of those is implemented in blast and uses the hit-and-extend approach: 11 consecutive matches are considered a hit and the neighborhood is investigated further for potentially local similarity. such a match is called a seed. it has been noticed bythat requiring the matches to be non-consecutive increases the chance of finding similarities, andintroduced the idea of optimal spaced seeds, that is, seeds where the matches are distributed so as to maximize the sensitivity (i.e. probability to find a local similarity). multiple spaced seeds go much further and approach perfect sensitivity. since then multiple spaced seeds have been used in many software programs in a variety of applications, such as sequence alignment read mapping , oligonucleotide design , to name a few. it is therefore very important to compute seeds with very high sensitivity. the relevant problems are hard and all heuristic algorithms for computing seeds require exponential time with the exception of the one of ilie and ilie (2007). our goal in this note is to engineer this algorithm into an efficient software for computing multiple spaced seeds. the new program, speed, has two execution modes, fast and best. we have compared speed with the two leading software programs, mandala to whom correspondence should be addressed.and iedera for a variety of seeds used in practice. speed-best computes always the best seeds with speedfast coming often in the second place, whereas speed-fast is three to five orders of magnitude faster than all the other ones.we have compared speed with the two leading software programs, mandala and iedera seeds were computed by mandala, iedera and speed (fast and best) with the same parameters as those of shrimp, patternhunter ii and bfast. the number of iterations was: 100 000 for iedera and 10 for mandala (both according to the authors instructions) and 5000 for speed-best. the maximum time allowed for all programs was 1 day; we give the times until the best seed was obtained.  
