data and text mining spici: a fast clustering algorithm for large biological networks motivation: clustering algorithms play an important role in the analysis of biological networks, and can be used to uncover functional modules and obtain hints about cellular organization. while most available clustering algorithms work well on biological networks of moderate size, such as the yeast protein physical interaction network, they either fail or are too slow in practice for larger networks, such as functional networks for higher eukaryotes. since an increasing number of larger biological networks are being determined, the limitations of current clustering approaches curtail the types of biological network analyses that can be performed. results: we present a fast local network clustering algorithm spici. spici runs in time o(v log v + e) and space o(e), where v and e are the number of vertices and edges in the network, respectively. we evaluate spicis performance on several existing protein interaction networks of varying size, and compare spici to nine previous approaches for clustering biological networks. we show that spici is typically several orders of magnitude faster than previous approaches and is the only one that can successfully cluster all test networks within very short time. we demonstrate that spici has state-of-the-art performance with respect to the quality of the clusters it uncovers, as judged by its ability to recapitulate protein complexes and functional modules. finally, we demonstrate the power of our fast network clustering algorithm by applying spici across hundreds of large context-specific human networks, and identifying modules specific for single conditions. availability: source code is available under the gnu public license athigh-throughput experimental technologies, along with computational predictions, have resulted in large-scale biological networks for numerous organisms. in recent years, much research effort has focused on analyzing these biological networks in order to obtain hints about cellular organization and functioning. clustering is perhaps the most common approach for global network analysis, and is frequently applied to uncover functional modules and protein to whom correspondence should be addressed. complexes, and to infer protein function . as a result, numerous clustering algorithms for biological networks have been developed (e.g.). previous methods for clustering biological networks work well on networks of moderate size. however, the size and number of biological networks continue to grow. for example, by extensive data integration, proteome-scale functional networks have been built for hundreds of organisms across the evolutionary spectrum . recently, by additionally considering specific biological processes (bps) of interest, hundreds of context-specific functional networks for human have been built . moreover, in the near future, biological networks will include numerous additional biological entities such as non-coding rnas as well as a wider range of interaction types. large networks present considerable challenges for existing clustering approaches. here, we develop a new efficient network clustering algorithm spici (spicy, speed and performance in clustering). spici builds clusters greedily, starting from local seeds that have high weighted degree, and adding nodes that maintain the density of the clusters and are adjacent to a suitable fraction of nodes within them. the intuition underlying spici is similar to that of dpclus . however, spici exploits a simpler cluster expansion approach, uses a different seed selection criterion and incorporates interaction confidences. approaches based on enumeration have also been developed; these aim to uncover all clusters with specific density requirements. cfinder finds clusters such that each consists of a maximal connected component of adjacent cliques of size k where two cliques are adjacent if they share k 1 nodes. an alternate approach relaxes the requirement of complete cliques and instead finds all subsets of nodes with high density . while these approaches guarantee that they output all clusters with a particular property, they are computationally intensive. in contrast, spici takes a heuristic approach with respect to the clusters it outputs, but guarantees a runtime of o(v logv +e), where v and e are the number of vertices and edges in the network. we demonstrate spicis excellent runtime and its state-of-the-art performance via several analyses. first, we compare spici to nine previous network clustering algorithms (2002;) on a test set of five existing biological networks . spici is more than 41000 times faster than the previous approaches on the networks for which the approaches terminate within 12 h on a standard desktop machine. moreover, it is the only algorithm of those tested that is able to cluster all the networks within a reasonable amount of time. second, we show that even though spici is much faster than previous clustering approaches, the clusters it uncovers in biological networks recapitulate functional modules just as well. third, we perform a robustness analysis on synthetic networks, as described by brohee and van helden (2006), and show that spici has very good performance in recapitulating protein complexes, deteriorating only on extremely incomplete networks. we also find spici to be robust to perturbations in dense functional networks. finally, we use spici to cluster 230 large, context-specific human networks and identify modules specific for single conditions; because of the size and number of networks, this type of analysis was made feasible only by utilizing our new fast clustering approach.  
