spladder: identification, quantification and testing of alternative splicing events from rna-seq data motivation: understanding the occurrence and regulation of alternative splicing (as) is a key task towards explaining the regulatory processes that shape the complex transcriptomes of higher eu-karyotes. with the advent of high-throughput sequencing of rna (rna-seq), the diversity of as transcripts could be measured at an unprecedented depth. although the catalog of known as events has grown ever since, novel transcripts are commonly observed when working with less well annotated organisms, in the context of disease, or within large populations. whereas an identification of complete transcripts is technically challenging and computationally expensive, focus-ing on single splicing events as a proxy for transcriptome characteristics is fruitful and sufficient for a wide range of analyses. results: we present spladder, an alternative splicing toolbox, that takes rna-seq alignments and an annotation file as input to (i) augment the annotation based on rna-seq evidence, (ii) identify alternative splicing events present in the augmented annotation graph, (iii) quantify and confirm these events based on the rna-seq data and (iv) test for significant quantitative differences between samples. thereby, our main focus lies on performance, accuracy and usability. availability: source code and documentation are available for download at http://github.com/rats chlab/spladder. example data, introductory information and a small tutorial are accessible viaalternative splicing (as) is an mrna processing mechanism that cuts and re-joins maturing mrna in a highly regulated manner, thereby increasing transcriptome complexity. depending on the organism, up to 95 of expressed genes are transcribed into multiple transcript variants , where various transcripts with differing exon composition can arise from the same gene locus. (throughout this text, we will use the term transcript to identify a variant of a gene that was generated through transcriptional processing.) although these transcripts might never coexist at the same time and place, each one of them can be essential for cell differentiation, development or play an important role within signaling processes . thus, the two major challenges in computational transcriptome analysis are complexity and completeness. in spladder, we leverage evidence from rna-seq data to compute a more complete representation of the splicing diversity within a sample and tackle the complexity with a reduction to alternative splicing events instead of full transcripts. we provide open source implementations for spladder in matlab and python that contain all features described below and produce v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.  
