genetics and population analysis splatche2: a spatially explicit simulation framework for complex demography, genetic admixture and recombination splatche2 is a program to simulate the demography of populations and the resulting molecular diversity for a wide range of evolutionary scenarios. the spatially explicit simulation framework can account for environmental heterogeneity and fluctuations, and it can manage multiple population sources. a coalescent-based approach is used to generate genetic markers mostly used in population genetics studies (dna sequences, snps, strs or rflps). various combinations of independent, fully or partially linked genetic markers can be produced under a recombination model based on the ancestral recombination graph. competition between two populations (or species) can also be simulated with user-defined levels of admixture between the two populations. splatche2 may be used to generate the expected genetic diversity under complex demographic scenarios and can thus serve to test null hypotheses. for model parameter estimation, splatche2 can easily be integrated into an approximate bayesian computation (abc) framework. availability and implementation: splatche2 is a c++ program compiled for windows and linux platforms. it is freely available at www.splatche.com, together with its related documentation and example data.splatche2 (for spatial and temporal coalescences in heterogeneous environments, version 2.0) is derived from the program splatche released in 2004 . this coalescent-based program has been developed to model complex and spatially explicit demographic scenarios, such as range expansions, in a heterogeneous and dynamic environment, and to simulate the resulting molecular diversity of sampled individuals at arbitrary locations. it thus makes it possible to realistically model the environment in order to study the impact of ecological factors on the genetic structure of populations. this approach has already proved to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. invaluable to study the patterns of genetic variation in spatially explicit contexts or the genetic consequences of range expansion . many improvements and new functionalities have been added here as compared to the original version of splatche, allowing the simulation of a much wider range of evolutionary scenarios. some of these new features have already been used in published studies, such as the simulation of admixture and competition between populations or the possibility of defining multiple source populations . those extensions have now been incorporated into splatche2, together with the ability (i) to simulate linked or partially linked loci, (ii) to have multiple coalescent events per generation and (iii) to generate single-nucleotide polymorphism (snps). moreover, splatche2 is also available as a non-graphical console program that can be used on computer clusters. here, we briefly describe the main features of splatche2, noting that a more detailed description can be found in a user manual.splatche2 can be used to simulate complex and realistic demographic models and to generate the associated molecular diversity of sampled individuals. alternative population or environmental histories can be modelled and compared through their impacts on resulting genetic diversity. due to its explicit handling of spatial information and of environmental and temporal heterogeneities, splatche2 is particularly well suited for studying spatially distributed population samples over relatively short evolutionary time scales (i.e. a few thousand generations).  
