sequence analysis spliceman—a computational web server that predicts sequence variations in pre-mrna splicing it was previously demonstrated that splicing elements are positional dependent. we exploited this relationship between location and function by comparing positional distributions between all possible 4096 hexamers around a database of human splice sites. the distance measure used in this study found point mutations that produced higher distances disrupted splicing, whereas point mutations with smaller distances generally had no effect on splicing. reasoning the idea that functional splicing elements have signature positional distributions around constitutively spliced exons, we introduce splicemanan online tool that predicts how likely distant mutations around annotated splice sites were to disrupt splicing. spliceman takes a set of dna sequences with point mutations and returns a ranked list to predict the effects of point mutations on pre-mrna splicing. the current implementation included the analyses of 11 genomes: human, chimp, rhesus, mouse, rat, dog, cat, chicken, guinea pig, frog and zebrafish.pre-mrna splicing is an important regulatory step in gene expression pathway: introns are removed and exons are joined to form mrna. the splicing process is performed by the spliceosome, a macromolecular ribonucleoprotein complex that rivals the ribosome in size and complexity. the intricate assembly of the spliceosome is guided by the consensus splice site sequences (i.e. branch point, polypyrimidine tract, 3 and 5 splice sites) and a family of subsidiary elements known as intron and exon splicing enhancers and silencers. estimates of the fraction of disease mutations that cause aberrant splicing had been reported to range from 15 to 62 . in a previous study , we demonstrated that splicing elements had signature positional distributions around constitutively spliced exonsthey were abundant where they functioned positively and rare when they were inhibitory. we captured these positional properties for hexamers with the l1 distance metric (section 2) and used it to cluster positional distributions of all possible 4096 hexamers around human splice to whom correspondence should be addressed. sites. in addition to recognizing consensus splice site sequences, our method successfully identified various classes of intronic and exonic splicing enhancers and silencers. experimental verifications of the computational results strongly indicated the power of this method to be predictive. specifically, we found point mutations that produced higher l1 distances disrupted splicing in an in vivo minigene system, whereas point mutations with small distances generally had no affect on splicing. to facilitate the analysis of splicing mutations, we present splicemanan online tool that predicts how likely a genomic variation is to disrupt splicing. while the effect of mutations found in the consensus splice donor and acceptor sites can often be predicted with high accuracy, spliceman also excludes splice sites positions in order to predict distant splicing enhancers and silencers.  
