gene expression splicingcompass: differential splicing detection using rna-seq data motivation: alternative splicing is central for cellular processes and substantially increases transcriptome and proteome diversity. aberrant splicing events often have pathological consequences and are associated with various diseases and cancer types. the emergence of next-generation rna sequencing (rna-seq) provides an exciting new technology to analyse alternative splicing on a large scale. however, algorithms that enable the analysis of alternative splicing from short-read sequencing are not fully established yet and there are still no standard solutions available for a variety of data analysis tasks. results: we present a new method and software to predict genes that are differentially spliced between two different conditions using rna-seq data. our method uses geometric angles between the high dimensional vectors of exon read counts. with this, differential splicing can be detected even if the splicing events are composed of higher complexity and involve previously unknown splicing patterns. we applied our approach to two case studies including neuroblastoma tumour data with favourable and unfavourable clinical courses. we show the validity of our predictions as well as the applicability of our method in the context of patient clustering. we verified our predictions by several methods including simulated experiments and complementary in silico analyses. we found a significant number of exons with specific regulatory splicing factor motifs for predicted genes and a substantial number of publications linking those genes to alternative splicing. furthermore, we could successfully exploit splicing information to cluster tissues and patients. finally, we found additional evidence of splicing diversity for many predicted genes in normalized read coverage plots and in reads that span exonexon junctions. availability: splicingcompass is licensed under the gnu gpl and freely available as a package in the statistical language r atalternative splicing is a central cellular process that produces different mrna isoforms from a single gene. the qualitative and quantitative identification of such isoforms is essential for understanding the different roles of alternatively spliced genes in a cell. in addition, the detection of disease-specific isoforms is an important task because aberrant splicing is known to be responsible for various diseases (reviewed in) and associated with different cancer types (e.g.). isoform structures and abundances can be inferred from short sequence reads generated by rna sequencing (rna-seq). in contrast to hybridization-based approaches using, for example, microarrays, such sequencing-based approaches better allow for the detection of previously unknown splicing events and can avoid cross-hybridization and limited dynamic range (reviewed in). computational methods for analysing differential expression and differential splicing from rna-seq data are only beginning to emerge (reviewed in). existing methods detect alternative splicing mainly by considering sequencing reads that map uniquely to single isoforms or by assembling transcripts and estimating the most likely isoform abundance levels according to the given sequencing reads [an overview and discussion of limitations is given in martin and wang (2011) and. short-read assemblers have been developed for genome and transcriptome assembly [e.g. velvet , scripture , cufflinks and others (reviewed in martin and. despite the success of such approaches, assembly artifacts remain a common phenomenon (, and in the context of transcriptome assembly, many reads cannot be assigned to single isoforms unambiguously. when trying to interpret these reads, different sets of to whom correspondence should be addressed. possible assemblies are theoretically compatible with the sequencing data , and this leads to the misassembly of false transcripts and a wrong estimation of specific isoform expression levels. this problem becomes more severe in the presence of complex alternative splicing patterns and depends on factors like the sequencing depth and the length of generated reads. these considerations are also the basis for recent developments that aim at identifying alternative splicing patterns from de-bruijn graphs without actually assembling complete isoforms or methods that integrate rna-seq data with existing gene annotations and ests to predict more reliable splice graphs and annotate ambiguous events as unresolved . a systematic assessment of transcriptome assemblies is difficult because appropriate quality metrics have not been established yet and require a well-defined gold standard that is difficult to find . during the revision of this article,published a tool called dexseq for the detection of differential exon usage from rna-seq data. rather than using an assembly approach and comparing abundance levels of predicted transcripts, dexseq avoids the assembly step and calculates p-values for every annotated exon (or parts of exons if an exon modification event can be derived from the provided annotation). similarly, our method directly identifies genes with significantly altered ratios of (potentially unknown) isoforms. the power to detect significant expression differences depends on the number of available reads and therefore on the sequencing depth and length of the region of interest. regions that are specific to a single isoform (like cassette exons) are often much shorter compared to full transcripts, and the detection of significant differences may be severely hampered by their low number of reads. besides this, the number of statistical tests that are required to detect previously known and unknown events for all expressed genes in the observed cells raises to such an extent that makes it challenging to avoid high false-positive levels or to reach statistical significance after using multiple testing correction. a critical aspect for all methods is the potentially complex composition of isoforms. some genes generate many different transcripts in varying abundances that comprise a large variety of different combinations of exons. rna-seq data gives the opportunity at hand to yield a global insight into this situation. consequently, we developed a new method (and implemented it into the software tool splicingcompass) to predict genes that show differential splicing taking all of their exons into account. to our knowledge, our method is the first approach that detects differential splicing on a gene level by taking into account all exons of a gene at once instead of considering single exons independently. this reduces the number of statistical tests considerably and better accounts for combined effects. we applied our method to high-throughput sequences of the transcriptomes from human brain and liver samples as well as from neuroblastoma patients with low-risk and high-risk tumours and to simulated data. in addition, we present results that show the validity of our method as well as its applicability in the context of clustering tissues and cancer patients.  
