systems biology spsens: a software package for stochastic parameter sensitivity analysis of biochemical reaction networks spsens is a software package for the efficient computation of stochastic parameter sensitivities of biochemical reaction networks. parameter sensitivity analysis is a valuable tool that can be used to study robustness properties, for drug targeting, and many other purposes. however its application to stochastic models has been limited when monte carlo methods are required due to extremely high computational costs. spsens provides efficient, state of the art sensitivity analysis algorithms in a single software package so that sensitivity analysis can be easily performed on stochastic models of biochemical reaction networks. spsens implements the algorithms in c and estimates sensitivities with respect to both infinitesimal and finite perturbations to system parameters, in many cases reducing variance by orders of magnitude compared to basic methods. included among the features of spsens are serial and parallel command line versions, an interface with matlab, and several example problems. availability: spsens is distributed freely under gpl version 3 and can be downloaded from http://sourceforge.net/projects/spsens/. the software can be run on linux, mac os x and windows platforms.stochastic models are used now more than ever to study, to analyse, and to predict the complex dynamics occurring in biology, chemistry and ecology. when the discrete and random nature of the system is not accurately captured by deterministic or stochastic differential equation models, stochastic reaction networks are often modeled in the framework of stochastic chemical kinetics . a stochastic chemical kinetic model cannot be solved exactly except in the simplest cases and precludes the use of simulation and analysis methods commonly available for deterministic or stochastic differential equation models. one such analysis tool that is of particular importance is parameter sensitivity analysis, which quantifies how system output variables are affected by perturbations in model parameters. the stochastic model depends upon a set of reaction rate parameters, and it is of great interest to assess the dependence of system behaviour on these models via parameter sensitivity analysis. such knowledge has wide applications, but the computation of the stochastic sensitivity coefficients is burdensome. in particular monte carlo (mc) methods are used, but are very often computationally demanding because they require large numbers of simulations to be performed in order to generate accurate statistics. although software packages have been developed for sensitivity analysis using the linear noise approximation and fisher information matrix , such an approach is not appropriate for systems with particularly large fluctuations in molecular populations, such as those exhibiting bistability. several mc methods for efficiently estimating stochastic parameter sensitivities of biochemical reaction networks have been reported recently . existing software packages have been developed to increase efficiency of stochastic simulations; however, such packages do not include methods for sensitivity analysis. to perform sensitivity analysis one must either write custom code or make significant modifications to existing code. spsens addresses this problem by including efficient, state of the art parameter sensitivity analysis methods in a single software package. the capabilities, implementation and features are described in what follows.spsens is a freely available and easy to use software package that implements efficient methods for parameter sensitivity analysis of discrete stochastic biochemical reaction networks. spsens allows users to quickly and easily switch between algorithms to find the most efficient method for their particular problem. in general it is impossible to say which algorithm is best for a given problem, as the performance of each method depends on a number of factors. however there are some general guidelines that can be followed in practice. glr is the only unbiased method, but it is often very inefficient and requires significant computational effort to produce accurate results. the fd methods with irn and crn are significantly less efficient than the cfd and crp methods in most situations and are provided mainly for demonstration purposes. the rpd method is extremely efficient for a wide variety of problems when applicable, but requires judicious choice of the regularization parameter for efficient performance. which of the three highly efficient methods (rpd, cfd and crp) is most efficient will depend on the  
