systems biology srv: an open-source toolbox to accelerate the recovery of metabolic biomarkers and correlations from metabolic phenotyping datasets motivation: supervised multivariate statistical analyses are often required to analyze the high-density spectral information in metabolic datasets acquired from complex mixtures in metabolic phenotyping studies. here we present an implementation of the srvstatistical recoupling of variablesalgorithm as an open-source matlab and gnu octave toolbox. srv allows the identification of similarity between consecutive variables resulting from the high-resolution buck-eting. similar variables are gathered to restore the spectral dependency within the datasets and identify metabolic nmr signals. the correlation and significance of these new nmr variables for a given effect under study can then be measured and represented on a loading plot to allow a visual and efficient identification of candidate biomarkers. further on, correlations between these candidate bio-markers can be visualized on a two-dimensional pseudospectrum, representing a correlation map, helping to understand the modifications of the underlying metabolic network. availability: srv toolbox is encoded in matlab r2008a (mathworks, natick, ma) and in gnu octave. it is available free of charge at http:// www.prabi.fr/redmine/projects/srv/repository with a tutorial.given the complexity of metabolic samples used in metabonomics to understand the metabolic response of an organism to pathophysiological stimuli , the development of efficient approaches to fully analyze datasets is a growing field . an nmr spectrum typically contains a few hundreds of resonances over a 10-ppm-wide chemical shift range. a high-resolution bucketing, using 0.001-ppm-wide buckets, leads to an efficient sampling of the signal, matching the high resolution of the nmr spectra, and results in a few thousands of variables to handle for further statistical analyses. multivariate statistical analyses, such as orthogonal partial least squares (o-pls) regressions , are thus efficient tools to explore these high-density information datasets and combine collective modifications of metabolite concentrations to allow a discrimination of the samples with respect to the effect under study. however, the interpretation of the latent variables, which are the results of multivariate statistical analyses, is far from trivial. the mainly used approach is to combine the representation of the latent variable with the pearson correlation coefficients of each variable with the information matrix, encoding the different classes . the difficulty with this approach is that multiple buckets represent a single nmr peak. it thus shows different levels of correlation, despite the fact that it represents a single metabolic signal. a second difficulty is the definition of a correlation threshold above which a signal can be considered as valuable to designate a candidate biomarker. statistical recoupling of variables (srv) is an algorithm designed to overthrow these main difficulties . the conducting idea is to restore the spectral dependency that was lost by high-resolution bucketing. the statistical relationships between consecutive variables allow aggregating them into clusters following the highest direction of covariance/correlation ratio, thus defining nmr peaks. neighbouring clusters can then be merged into superclusters to recover nmr multiplets. these superclusters correspond to nmr variables of interest. srv thus acts as an automated variable-size bucketing procedure coupled with an efficient noise-removing filter. we then use a significance-testing filter using multiple hypothesis testing corrections. the benjaminiyekutieli measurement of the false discovery rate seems adapted to nmr-based metabonomics , but other less strict corrections could be considered. a typical threshold of 0.05 can then be defined, and a simple identification of statistically significant signals allows the recovery of candidate biomarkers. based on the statistical total correlation spectroscopy , it is possible to establish a two-dimensional (2d) pseudospectrum defined as a correlation map between the superclusters. these correlations can eventually be interpreted on the global metabolic network to extract the perturbed metabolic network associated with a major or minor perturbation . here we present an open-source implementation of the srv algorithm as matlab/gnu octave functions leading to the visualization of the latent variables after o-pls analysis for the discrimination between two groups, with the correlation and significance testing representation, and the 2d pseudospectrum allowing the identification of coordinated metabolic variations.  
