phylogenetics stability analysis of phylogenetic trees motivation: phylogenetics, or reconstructing the evolutionary relationships of organisms, is critical for understanding evolution. a large number of heuristic algorithms for phylogenetics have been developed , some of which enable estimates of trees with tens of thousands of taxa. such trees may not be robust, as small changes in the input data can cause major differences in the optimal topology. tools that can assess the quality and stability of phylogenetic tree estimates and identify the most reliable parts of the tree are needed. results: we define measures that assess the stability of trees, sub-trees and individual taxa with respect to changes in the input sequences. our measures consider changes at the finest granularity in the input data (i.e. individual nucleotides). we demonstrate the effectiveness of our measures on large published datasets. our measures are computationally feasible for phylogenetic datasets consisting of tens of thousands of taxa. availability: this software is available at http://bioinformatics.phylogenetics, or reconstructing the evolutionary history of organisms, is important for many areas of biological research. rapid increases in the amount of available sequence data and computational advances have enabled construction of phylogenetic trees with tens of thousands of species (e.g.). however, it often is difficult to assess the quality and reliability of large phylogenetic trees. an ideal method for assessing tree quality should be computationally tractable for extremely large datasets, quantify the confidence in relationships within the tree and compare the quality of the best tree to alternate trees. in this article, we describe a novel method for computing the stability of phylogenetic trees. we say that a tree is stable if its topology is largely robust to small changes in the input data used to infer the tree. conversely, unstable trees may be subject to major structural changes with only a few alterations in the input data. often the quality of trees is determined using nodal support measures, such as non-parametric bootstrapping , jackknifing , relative support or bayesian posterior probabilities . these methods assess a large number of trees that represent a range of possible solutions. perhaps, the most commonly used method is the non-parametric bootstrapping . this method builds a collection of trees from pseudoreplicate datasets obtained by sampling with replacement from the original dataset. because the phylogenetic analysis has to be repeated for each bootstrap replicate, it can be computationally expensive for large datasets; bootstrap analysis of tens of thousands of sequences can take years of processing time . also, the bootstrap methods consider only a few of the possible alterations in the input data. the bremer support or decay index measures, for all groups in the tree, the minimum number of additional parsimony steps needed to find a tree without that group. this is similar to a stability measure. however, it does not examine how similar the alternate suboptimal topologies are to the original tree. several recent methods seek to identify rogue taxa , or taxa that cannot be placed reliably anywhere in the tree. the issue of stability of phylogenetic trees has been proposed in the past . in other areas of research, what-if analyses have been discussed under the name of post-optimality analysis or sensitivity analysis (see). in this article, we describe a framework of phylogenetic stability measures based on sensitivity and post-optimality analysis. our methods measure stability of trees with respect to the input data, allowing the data from each taxon to be modified independently. our framework provides a measure of the minimum change in the input sequences that are required to alter significantly the topology of a given phylogenetic tree. thus, they assess if and how much a particular tree relies on the accuracy of a small number of character states. the more changes in input data required to alter a tree significantly, the more stable the tree is. further, nodal measures developed within this framework can be computed quickly. we demonstrate that our stability measures provide a new computationally feasible perspective on the quality of large phylogenetic trees. the main contributions of this work are as follows:(1) we present an original framework for assessing the stability of phylogenetic trees and define several measures of stability. these measures capture information about stability of trees relative to changes in the input data.(2) we apply our stability measures to published datasets. in these examples, we identify unstable subtrees and discuss why they are unstable. to whom correspondence should be addressed.background and preliminary information is presented in section 2. we then formally define the notions of stability and discuss their relevance in section 3. in section 4, we discuss how data obtained from stability measures can be used to analyse subtrees. the computational challenges for computing stability and our solutions to them are described in section 5. we present experimental results in section 6 and finally conclude in section 7.implementation details: we have implemented our algorithm using java. we were able to compute all the taxa stability measures on the datasets described in this article in 572 h. this includes a dataset with 455 000 taxa. further, this computation can be easily parallelized. datasets: in our experiments, we used three datasets that represent the variation found in current large-scale molecular phylogenetic studies.(1) the mammals dataset is a phylogeny of 169 species of mammals published in . the length of the alignment is 35 603. the sequence length varies from 3893 to 32 201 with an average length of 29 373 and a standard deviation of 3669.(2) the saxifragales data is a phylogeny of 950 plant species (d. soltis et al., submitted for publication). the length of the alignment is 48 465 positions. the sequence length ranges from 227 to 26 863 with an average length of 2511 and a standard deviation of 3298.(3) the plants dataset is a phylogeny of 55 473 plant species . the length of the alignment is 9853 positions. the sequence length ranges from 197 to 9135 with an average length of 1641 and a standard deviation of 1410.we have presented a novel framework to evaluate the stability of phylogenetic trees. these measures may be used to assess the stability of individual sequences, clades or entire trees. they provide information that may be used to direct further phylogenetic research and also suggest alternate plaubile topologies. thus, the stability measures presented in this article may be used to improve quality of phylogenetic analyses and the performance of iterative algorithms. our experiments demonstrate that our stability measures can be easily computed for the largest published empirical datasets. it is important to note that the success of these measures is dependent on the choice of editing and tree distance measures used. while we have used edit and rf distance measures, any set of measures can be used. we can easily replace the edit distance with a distance estimated using the general time reversible model (tavare,tavare, 1986) or the rf distance with a weighted rf distance. in our current search strategy, spr or tree bisection and reconnection (tbr) distance measures may not be useful. criteria for the selection of e and r strongly depends on the choice of distance functions. this is a complex issue, but we briefly suggest how this problem may be approached. a simple approach could be to use percentages of average or current sequence length and tree height for determining e and r respectively. alternatively, it is possible to rank the nodes in the order of their stability with respect to a e or r. finally, it is possible to compute the statistical properties of sequence length and move distances to determine outliers with respect to mean and 23 standard deviations for range. our analyses on published large datasets identified strengths and weaknesses of these phylogenetic hypotheses. our measures found that the plants and saxifragales datasets were highly unstable. both include many closely related species, and both contain taxa with short sequences and with much missing data. it is therefore not surprising that small changes in the sequences can lead to large tree rearrangements. our measures also recognized the stability in the mammals dataset, which has far fewer taxa and much more sequence data. it is important to note that the stability measures discussed here complement, rather than replace, existing measures of phylogenetic support. as a sanity check, we performed a limited comparison to a method that identifies rogue taxa running roguenarok . while there was some overlap between the unstable taxa and the rogue taxa, the rankings were not obviously correlated. we do not pursue a detailed comparison with the measures of rogue taxa identification as their objectives are different from stability. the intent of the stability measures is not to invalidate a tree or a method, but to provide explicit guarantees on situations where a specific tree on a give dataset will not be unstable. the placement of any subtrees and taxa identified as unstable should be interpreted with caution. the ranked list of unstable nodes should help prioritize areas of the tree that need further study or data.(b)  
