databases and ontologies star: an integrated solution to management and visualization of sequencing data motivation: easily visualization of complex data features is a necessary step to conduct studies on next-generation sequencing (ngs) data. we developed star, an integrated web application that enables online management, visualization and track-based analysis of ngs data. results: star is a multilayer web service system. on the client side, star leverages javascript, html5 canvas and asynchronous communications to deliver a smoothly scrolling desktop-like graphical user interface with a suite of in-browser analysis tools that range from providing simple track configuration controls to sophisticated feature detection within datasets. on the server side, star supports private session state retention via an account management system and provides data management modules that enable collection, visualization and analysis of third-party sequencing data from the public domain with over thousands of tracks hosted to date. overall, star represents a next-generation data exploration solution to match the requirements of ngs data, enabling both intuitive visualization and dynamic analysis of data. availability and implementation: star browser system is freely available on the web atusing genome-browser software to visualize sequence data is often a productive first step to take when tasked with extracting biological meaning from experimental results. existing genomebrowsers fall mainly into two categories: stand-alone and internet-based. stand-alone programs, such as seqminer, cisgenome, mapview, eagleview, ngsview, magicviewer, integrative genomics viewer and genomeview , are installed locally and allow users to perform analysis and data visualization to the limit of their local machine. users must ensure software remains up-to-date and are often required to download and reformat datasets for use with the application without a clear channel to share data with others. in contrast, internet-based browsers require no download, installation or update, typically delegate computational load to remote servers, and store data centrally for all users to immediately browse. some internet-based data exploration platforms such as cistrome and cistrome finder also provide visualization function. other popular web-based browsers, such as university of california, santa cruz (ucsc) genome browser , ucsc cancer genomics browser and ensembl genome browser , provide the benefits of web applications but suffer from continued reliance on first-generation web application technology such as postback and server-side drawing, making little use of the computational power of clients. several publicly released genome browsers, such as the national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) epigenome viewer , generic genome browser (gbrowse2.0) , anno-j , jbrowse and the washu epigenome browser, offer an enhanced user experience through the use of second-generation (web 2.0) technologies such as advanced third-party javascript libraries, asynchronous communications (ajax), restful architecture, and client-side rendering. these browsers deliver a more desktop-like user experience than their first-generation counterparts and distribute computation more evenly between the server and the client, thereby helping to reduce network loading. although second-generation browsers have significantly enhanced the user experience, they have room for improvement to whom correspondence should be addressed. on some daily used functions. the ncbi epigenome viewer allows smooth panning and zooming but does not support comparative analysis between data tracks. gbrowse2.0 and jbrowse do not provide registries of public data tracks for ready-to-use visualization and make use of statically generated server-side images that limit client-side interactivity. the washu epigenome browser displays data tracks from the human epigenome atlas [produced by the national institutes of health (nih) roadmap epigenomics project and the encyclopedia of dna elements (encode) project (encode project)] along with interactive visualization and analysis functions such as correlation and statistics test, but there is no sequencing data analysis tool like peak calling, and it is not fully compatible to microsoft internet explorer and firefox web browsers. a feature lacking from all second-generation browsers is the inclusion of sophisticated analysis tools as an integrated component. we present star, a next-generation web-based application that aims to provide an integrated solution for both visualization and analysis of deep-sequencing data, along with simple access to public datasets. on the client side, star features a next-generation browser that is based on the anno-j genome browser, modifying it extensively to add enhanced visualization options, bug-fixes, improved cross-browser compatibility, dynamic access to an extensive collection of public datasets and a suite of in-browser analysis tools (such as correlation analysis and peak calling). the browser features client-side rendering via html5 canvas, smooth navigation via asynchronous data transfer, dynamic track state changes (zoom, scale, resize) via javascript, cross-domain data retrieval and modular track development architecture. on the server side, star provides distributed mechanism to collect and process data from public data sources, user access control to protect private data, data track management and data configuration management, portable personal server setup and utilities for storage, parsing and analysis of sequence data.the star system aims to provide an integrated solution to help researchers easily visualize and analyze sequencing data. toachieve good user experience, fast data access and quick response are crucial aspects. such features are usually limited by network communications and computational load on servers. for a traditional web-based genome browser, usually the web server or application server retrieves data from a database and renders an html page to the client. almost all the computing load is on the server side and heavy request traffic places heavy load on servers. the star system distributes computation between the client and the server(s). graphical representations of data are constructed purely on the client side and modifications to view state (such as scaling or color) do not require any form of server interaction thanks to the use of html canvas. (page refreshes are completely avoided through the use of ajax to provide a smoother browsing experience.) most modern, w3c-compliant web browsers are in the process of fully adopting the new html5 specification, which includes the canvas element (although most such as safari, chrome, opera and firefox already supported canvas many years ago). to provide compatibility with older versions of internet explorer, googles explorercanvas plug-in provides the required functionality. when users zoom out to view a larger genomic region, more data must be retrieved from the data server, which takes more time and disk space. to deal with this, jbrowse provides a solution similar to google maps by pre-generating small images at different zooming levels. however, because those images are generated on the server side, it is usually difficult to provide a flexible way to interact with the data and change view mode rapidly when compared with the performance of star. instead of generating static images, star pre-calculates the coverage of positions at each zooming level. the server retrieves data from a pre-calculated database at each view resolution. this significantly reduces the data amount retrieved and the time for data processing. for the purpose of simplicity, star uses the berkeley db (bdb) file system, rather than a relational database such as mysql to deposit sequencing data. this provides key features such as optimized indexing and caching to deposit and retrieve data from files using several customized languagespecific apis. this design has a better performance than most relational databases, and there is no need to run a large system to maintain the sequencing data. to reduce searching space, the input data are deposited into separate file databases in which each file contains all the data features for a specific chromosome. combined with pre-calculation, file system database and cache technologies, the data preparation is fast and provides almost constant access time regardless of the zooming level. to reduce network transit time, all data are compressed (where supported by the client). upon receipt and unpacking, data parsing times in the browser are minimal due to the fact that javascript object notation (json) format is natively supported by javascript. if custom data file is too large for network transferring (star limits the maximum upload size up to 2 gb), or unpublished data need to be kept private, user would probably prefer to storing data in their own data server and this is supported by star. this function is available in the ucsc genome browser using indexed data formats, such as bam and bigwig to contain data features. data files are distributed on web accessible servers and queried via http to retrieve the portion that is needed for the chromosomal position that users are currently viewing. in contrast, star provides a high efficiency c program fornote: display settings refer to whether the user can adjust the display properties of the data track such as color and signal shape. data scaling is how to normalize data to show readable and comparable signals between multiple tracks and locations. n/a, the feature is not implemented or the information is not available. data processing and an in-house common gateway interface (cgi) server program for processing data requests. there are several advantages of this design. first, users do not need to install and configure a complicated web server such as apache. the star system handles data request using a simple program that is easy to install and launch. second, star uses a simple data processing program to convert multiple input formats to a uniform internal format, which is easy for data processing. third, it provides a better solution for data service provision, such as pre-calculation and cache functions to improve system performance. once the meta-information for each track is generated and submitted through the star upload page, data are available for direct viewing and sharing with other users. we compared the star browser system with several other web-based genome browsers . relative to other web 2.0-enabled browsers, star provides a large collection of sequencing data tracks, allowing users to visualize most public datasets. in addition to the features that are available in many recently developed genome browsers, such as rich visualization features and high interactivity, star has implemented sophisticated in-browser analysis tools such as peak calling that are not yet available in other browsers. the functionality of in-browser analysis makes data analysis intuitive and straightforward, which is particularly useful for users without much data analysis experience. we are aware that there is still more room to improve the functionality and usability of the star system. in the future, we plan to further improve the user-friendly interface, add more graphical features to the browser and include more annotation tracks to help researchers easily extract biological information from sequence data.  
