starcode: sequence clustering based on all-pairs search motivation: the increasing throughput of sequencing technologies offers new applications and challenges for computational biology. in many of those applications, sequencing errors need to be corrected. this is particularly important when sequencing reads from an unknown reference such as random dna barcodes. in this case, error correction can be done by performing a pairwise comparison of all the barcodes, which is a computationally complex problem. results: here, we address this challenge and describe an exact algorithm to determine which pairs of sequences lie within a given levenshtein distance. for error correction or redundancy reduction purposes, matched pairs are then merged into clusters of similar sequences. the efficiency of star-code is attributable to the poucet search, a novel implementation of the needlemanwunsch algorithm performed on the nodes of a trie. on the task of matching random barcodes, starcode outper-forms sequence clustering algorithms in both speed and precision. availability and implementation: the c source code is available atall sequencing technologies have a certain degree of imprecision. for instance, the illumina platform has a 12 error rate consisting of substitutions and the pacbio platform has a 15 error rate consisting of insertions and deletions . the enormous throughput of such technologies has recently created additional needs for developing efficient error correction algorithms. sequencing errors can be discovered by comparing the reads to a reference genome. however, such a reference is not always available. when the sequences are random or taken from an unknown source, clustering is the main strategy to correct the errors. for instance, this situation arises when using random barcodes to track cells or transcripts . sequencing errors will create erroneous (nonexistent) barcodes that have to be removed. sequence clustering can be viewed as a community detection problem on graphs, where nodes represent sequences and edges represent matches between related sequences. the process consists of a matching phase (the most computationally intensive), where the graph is constructed, and a clustering phase where communities are identified. here, we describe a sequence clustering algorithm called starcode in reference to clusters of random barcodes, which typically have a star shape. starcode is based on all-pairs search, i.e. all the pairs of sequences below a given levenshtein distance are identified during the graph construction phase. matching is carried out by lossless filtration, followed by an exhaustive search on the branches of a prefix trie. the novelty of the algorithm is the poucet strategy, which uses the redundancy of alphabetically sorted sequences to avoid unnecessary recomputations and gain speed. in this article, we present and benchmark starcode. we show that on real biological datasets, starcode is orders of magnitude faster than existing sequence clustering software. even though starcode was designed for error correction, we also show that it can be  
