systems biology static network structure can be used to model the phenotypic effects of perturbations in regulatory networks motivation: biological processes are dynamic, whereas the networks that depict them are typically static. quantitative modeling using differential equations or logic-based functions can offer quantitative predictions of the behavior of biological systems, but they require detailed experimental characterization of interaction kinetics, which is typically unavailable. to determine to what extent complex biological processes can be modeled and analyzed using only the static structure of the network (i.e. the direction and sign of the edges), we attempt to predict the phenotypic effect of perturbations in biological networks from the static network structure. results: we analyzed three networks from different sources: the egfr/mapk and pi3k/akt network from a detailed experimental study, the tnf regulatory network from the string database and a large network of all nci-curated pathways from the protein interaction database. altogether, we predicted the effect of 39 perturbations (e.g. by one or two drugs) on 433 target proteins/genes. in up to 82 of the cases, an algorithm that used only the static structure of the network correctly predicted whether any given protein/gene is upregulated or downregulated as a result of perturbations of other proteins/genes. conclusion: while quantitative modeling requires detailed experimental data and heavy computations, which limit its scalability for large networks, a wiring-based approach can use available data from pathway and interaction databases and may be scalable. these results lay the foundations for a large-scale approach of predicting phenotypes based on the schematic structure of networks.analysis of regulatory networks has been used to explore the molecular mechanisms that underlie biological processes and to identify new regulatory modules . network-based modeling tools are often used to account for the difference between healthy and diseased cells . they have also been used to predict the effect of perturbations, e.g. inhibiting one protein/gene or more, on other proteins/genes in the network . for example, ruths et al. successfully predicted changes in protein levels in the mapk/ akt signaling network in breast tumor cells in response to perturbation of two genes . a wide variety of methods have been developed to analyze regulatory networks and provide predictions at different levels of detail . the input for these methods ranges from quantitative kinetic parameters, such as reaction rates, to logical constraints defining the interactions (e.g. and/or relationships). continuous methods such as ordinary differential equations (odes) model the rate of change of each component in the network and provide detailed quantitative information regarding the networks dynamics . however, odes require comprehensive knowledge of kinetic parameters, which are unknown for most networks, and therefore their applicability is limited . alternatively, in discrete logic-based models, each component in the network has a discrete level, which is determined at every time step through a logical function. two main methods in this category are boolean networks and petri nets . both have been used to model regulatory networks and proven useful for gaining mechanistic insights and for predicting phenotypes . such approaches do not depend on quantitative data but rather on the structure of the network along with a set of logical constraints. although the low resolution of logic-based models imposes limitations on their predictive power, they are applicable to systems that could not be modeled with odes owing to lack of kinetic information . high-throughput technologies are being used extensively to identify physical and functional relationships between proteins and genes on a large scale. these data are often deposited in interaction databases such as intact , biogrid and string . pathway databases such as kegg and the pathway interaction database (pid) , which are manually curated, also rely on these data. they are typically represented by schematic diagrams, with no quantitative parameters or logical constraints. consequently, continuous models or logic-based models are not applicable to most of the available interaction data and to most known networks. to whom correspondence should be addressed. despite this limitation, these data have previously been used to gain insight and suggest novel molecular mechanisms. for example, ideker et al. used binary proteinprotein and protein dna interactions to generate mechanistic hypotheses that explain experimental expression data . this work was later extended and used to infer regulatory pathways from subsets of candidate genes using a literature-derived network of biological relationships . more recently, an elegant method applying edge consistency in directed and signed networks was used to infer causal perturbations . although the representation of biological networks as schematic diagrams is widespread, it is clearly a harsh oversimplification of reality and can only give a partial view of the real chain of events . however, as a large portion of physical and functional interaction data are available only at this level of abstraction, it is important to explore to what extent these networks capture the complexity of biological processes. to this end, we devised a simple algorithm for modeling regulatory networks, based on their schematic wiring alone. in particular, given a regulatory network that depicts known pairwise relationships within a biological process, this algorithm predicts, for each protein/gene, whether it will be upregulated, downregulated or will remain unchanged if one or more of the proteins/ genes in the network is perturbed (e.g. inhibited by a drug). to determine the effect of a perturbation of one protein/gene on another protein/gene in the network, all the paths between them are assessed. we tested this approach on three different networks from three independent sources, for which experimental perturbation data were available. first, we attempted to predict the effect of drug perturbations on a relatively small but carefully constructed protein signaling network that originated in a detailed experimental study by). this study also included a comprehensive set of drug perturbations and their experimental readouts that were used to validate our predictions. next, we tested a small gene regulatory network derived from string . finally, we predicted the effect of drug perturbations on a large network of hundreds of nodes, including all the national cancer institute (nci)curated pathways available in the protein interaction database . the experimental drug perturbation data used to evaluate our predictions for the two last networks were gleaned from microarray data from the connectivity map (cmap) project . our approach was able to correctly predict between 71 and 82 of experimental readouts, depending on the quality of the pairwise data that were used to construct the network. this shows that the network structure itself captures a significant part of the dynamic behavior of the network. we compare our approach with a method proposed by) who used network structure to predict the effect of perturbations where the paths between the perturbed node and the readout are consistent. our method provides correct predictions in many cases where the previous method could not be applied (e.g. when there are multiple contradicting paths, which in some networks constitute 450 of the cases). finally, our analysis demonstrates how it is possible to integrate data from a variety of databases and repositories, such as high-throughput microarray experiments, drug-target information and interaction databases, to create a useful platform to predict and evaluate the effect of perturbations in the cell.  
