statistical model-based testing to evaluate the recurrence of genomic aberrations motivation: in cancer genomes, chromosomal regions harboring cancer genes are often subjected to genomic aberrations like copy number alteration and loss of heterozygosity. given this, finding recurrent genomic aberrations is considered an apt approach for screening cancer genes. although several permutation-based tests have been proposed for this purpose, none of them are designed to find recurrent aberrations from the genomic dataset without paired normal sample controls. their application to unpaired genomic data may lead to false discoveries, because they retrieve pseudo-aberrations that exist in normal genomes as polymorphisms. results: we develop a new parametric method named parametric aberration recurrence test (part) to test for the recurrence of genomic aberrations. the introduction of poisson-binomial statistics allow us to compute small p-values more efficiently and precisely than the previously proposed permutation-based approach. moreover, we extended part to cover unpaired data (part-up) so that there is a statistical basis for analyzing unpaired genomic data. part-up uses information from unpaired normal sample controls to remove pseudo-aberrations in unpaired genomic data. using part-up, we successfully predict recurrent genomic aberrations in cancer cell line samples whose paired normal sample controls are unavailable. this article thus proposes a powerful statistical framework for the identification of driver aberrations, which would be applicable to ever-increasing amounts of cancer genomic data seen in the era of next generation sequencing. availability: our implementations of part and part-up are available fromcancer genomes often exhibit chromosomal aberrations like copy number alteration and loss of heterozygosity (loh). a chromosomal aberration potentially leads to the functional alteration of cancer genes and could be a driver for oncogenesis. for example, if the copy number of some locus is amplified, residing oncogenes would be functionally activated. conversely the presence of tumor suppressor genes are associated with chromosomal deletion and loh. however, most aberrations are so-called passengers, which accompany driver aberrations by chance and do not have any causal relationship with oncogenesis. therefore, it is important problem to discriminate the driver aberrations from the passenger ones. given that driver aberrations recurrently occur around driver cancer genes whereas to whom correspondence should be addressed. passenger aberrations randomly exist across chromosomes, finding recurrent chromosomal aberrations is deemed a powerful approach for discovering driver aberrations and associated driver genes. in the past decade, microarray technology has enabled genomewide profiling of copy number and homozygosity . the application of microarrays to cancer genomes has revealed prevalent aberrations in cancer cells, and produced a large amount of genomic data, which are rich resources for the identification of potential driver loci . by examining the presence of aberrations across all chromosomal positions in multiple samples, we have a binary aberration profile matrix whose rows and columns correspond to chromosomal positions and samples, respectively. we wish to find chromosomal positions where a significantly large fraction of samples are subjected to aberration. there are a number of computational methods to statistically screen for recurrent genomic aberrations, most of which are based on permutation tests . for example, gistic calculates the value of statistic scoring recurrence for each genomic position while the null distribution of the statistic is obtained using null aberration profile matrices, which are generated by permuting positions of the binary aberration profile matrix for each sample. finally, gistic reports the significance of recurrence at each position and predicts driver loci by detecting the peaks of the significance plot. . although the permutation approach is successful in finding driver aberrations, it is computationally intensive, especially when we need to calculate small p-values precisely. usually, aberration profiling of a cancer genome is performed by comparing a tumor sample with the paired normal sample. for example, loh is called for a position whose genotype changes from a heterozygous state in a normal genome to a homozygous state in the paired-tumor genome. when the paired normal sample is not available, aberration profiling is also possible: loh could be called for a chromosomal segment that has successive homozygous state in the tumor genome . however, it has been reported that we would confront false positive calls in such unpaired experimental designs: an obtained loh might be only a polymorphic homozygous segment that exists in the paired normal genome . to find recurrent aberrations, we developed a novel parametric test, parametric aberration recurrence test (part). using poissonbinomial statistics , part can be used for efficient and precise calculation of small p-values, as compared with the permutation approach. moreover, we extend part to cover unpaired data (part-up) to find recurrent aberrations in unpaired experimental designs. part-up computes the significance of aberration recurrence by taking into consideration the false positive rate, which is calculated from the unpaired normal sample data. by applying part-up to simulated and real data, we demonstrate thatcopyedited by: trj manuscript category:in this study, we presented a novel statistical method, part, to test the recurrence of genomic aberration. although a a bnumber of methods have been developed for similar purposes, most of them take permutation approaches to assess statistical significance. conversely, our method takes a novel parametric approach by employing poisson-binomial statistics. there are pros and cons between the two approaches. our parametric approach needs less computational time and can calculate small p-values more accurately than the permutation approach. this property is important for genomic analysis, because we usually need to calculate small p-values to correct large-scale multiple hypothesis testing. conversely although our approach must take the count of aberrant samples as a test statistic, the permutation approach is flexible for the type of statistic and can enable more biologically plausible tests. for example, the gistic statistic takes into consideration aberration strength in addition to recurrence . however, in spite of these differences, we found that part and gistic produce consistent results on the copy number data (see supplementary note). the most notable advantage of our parametric approach is highlighted by the extension of part to part-up. although it is preferable that genomic aberration profilings are performed in paired experimental designs, it is not always possible to obtain paired normal samples. however, part-up is applicable only if data are accompanied with unpaired normal samples from the same cohort, which are generally easier to obtain. although previously proposed methods are not able to deal with such unpaired data, the introduction of poisson-binomial statistics enables us to test recurrent aberrations in unpaired data while considering the rate of pseudo-aberrations that originate from normal genomes. although a method has been proposed to call aberrations in individual tumor samples using the pooled unpaired normal sample as a reference , testing for the recurrence of aberrations in a group of unpaired tumor samples is a novel approach. it is expected that combining these complementary approaches will reduce false positives and lead to higher performance.  
