statistical models for rna-seq data derived from a two-condition 48-replicate experiment motivation: high-throughput rna sequencing (rna-seq) is now the standard method to determine differential gene expression. identifying differentially expressed genes crucially depends on estimates of read-count variability. these estimates are typically based on statistical models such as the negative binomial distribution, which is employed by the tools edger, deseq and cuffdiff. until now, the validity of these models has usually been tested on either low-replicate rna-seq data or simulations. results: a 48-replicate rna-seq experiment in yeast was performed and data tested against theoretical models. the observed gene read counts were consistent with both log-normal and negative binomial distributions, while the mean-variance relation followed the line of constant dispersion parameter of $0.01. the high-replicate data also allowed for strict quality control and screening of bad replicates, which can drastically affect the gene read-count distribution. availability and implementation: rna-seq data have been submitted to ena archive with project id prjeb5348.high-throughput sequencing of rna (rna-seq,) estimates gene expression by counting the number of sequenced rna fragments that map back to a given gene within a reference genome or transcriptome . differential gene expression (dge) experiments compare this relative measure of transcriptional activity across several biologically interesting conditions to attempt to identify those genes that are fundamental to the difference between the conditions. this task is complicated by expression noise resulting from biological and technical variability, which introduces a level of uncertainty that has to be taken into account when the expression values from two or more conditions are compared. there are two major obstacles to identifying whether the observed difference in the expression of a gene between the two conditions is statistically significant, or whether it is consistent with arising through chance. first, the observed read counts are a product of both the library size (total number of reads) and the fractional expression of the gene. the gene expression values thus need to be appropriately normalized before they can be meaningfully compared across conditions. second, due to cost, time and v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.  
