stochhmm: a flexible hidden markov model tool and cþþ library hidden markov models (hmms) are probabilistic models that are well-suited to solve many different classification problems in computation biology. stochhmm provides a command-line program and c library that can implement a traditional hmm from a simple text file. stochhmm provides researchers the flexibility to create higher-order emissions, integrate additional data sources and/or user-defined functions into multiple points within the hmm framework. additional features include user-defined alphabets, ability to handle ambiguous characters in an emission-dependent manner, user-defined weighting of state paths and ability to tie transition probabilities to sequence. availability and implementation: stochhmm is implemented in c and is available under the mit license. software, source code, documentation and examples can be found atsince the first application of hidden markov models (hmms) to biological sequences in the 1980s, they have become a fundamental tool in bioinformatics. this is because of their robust statistical foundation, conceptual simplicity and malleability that allow researchers to adapt them to fit diverse classification problems . many hmm-based programs have adapted the basic hmm framework to solve unique biological problems, such as development of generalized hmm (ghmm) to simplify state durations , stochastic sampling to predict alternative splicing and integration of additional data sources into the decoding algorithms to improve gene predictions . currently, there are a small number of different applications, libraries and compilers available to quickly develop hmms, such as mamot (schutzschutz and), hmmoc , hmmlib , ghmm , hmmconverter , r hmm and matlab. each tool differs in the level of expertise required to use them and the features available to the users (see). stochhmm is a program and c library that provides the ability to implement hmms quickly from a simple text file. it provides accessibility to a broader audience by providing many of the features available in the higher-level libraries, without requiring the same level of programming skill. in addition to providing traditional hmm algorithms, stochhmm implements a few stochastic decoding algorithms and provides multiple ways to integrate additional data sources into the model either as multiple independent or joint emissions. the c library provides the flexibility to integrate additional user-defined functions into the hmm framework, thereby allowing us to integrate existing bioinformatics tools into the hmm. in the human genome . in collaboration with diane schroeder, we created a simple 2-state model, which uses a unique alphabet based on percent methylation of cpg sites, to classify high and partial methylation domains in multiple methyl-seq datasets . the stochhmm library was used to implement ploidamatic, a 12-state hmm to identify copy-number variation using nextgeneration whole genome sequence from a diploid organism (porter et al., submitted for publication). we are currently using stochhmm to create gene prediction models that integrate existing bioinformatics tools and additional data sources into the hmm framework to improve gene prediction.  
