strategies to improve the performance of rare variant association studies by optimizing the selection of controls motivation: when analyzing a case group of patients with ultra-rare disorders the ethnicities are often diverse and the data quality might vary. the population substructure in the case group as well as the heterogeneous data quality can cause substantial inflation of test statistics and result in spurious associations in case-control studies if not properly adjusted for. existing techniques to correct for confounding effects were especially developed for common variants and are not applicable to rare variants. results: we analyzed strategies to select suitable controls for cases that are based on similarity metrics that vary in their weighting schemes. we simulated different disease entities on real exome data and show that a similarity-based selection scheme can help to reduce false positive associations and to optimize the performance of the statistical tests. especially when data quality as well as ethnicities vary a lot in the case group, a matching approach that puts more weight on rare variants shows the best performance. we reanalyzed collections of unrelated patients with kabuki make-up syndrome, hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome and catelmanzke syndrome for which the disease genes were recently described. we show that rare variant association tests are more sensitive and specific in identifying the disease gene than intersection filters and should thus be considered as a favorable approach in analyzing even small patient cohorts.in genome wide association studies (gwas), spurious associations from population substructure are known pitfalls, as statistical tests in case-control studies assume that differences in the compositions of genotypes are solely due to their difference in disease status and not to any difference in genetic background. especially in large association studies comprising thousands of individuals, the assumption of population homogeneity is often violated. this can increase the familywise error rate (fwer) which is the probability to report at least one false association. an inappropriate genetic matching of cases and controls in the presence of population substructure can lead to inflation, unless properly accounted for in the analysis. over the recent years several effective methods have been developed to control the inflation of test statistics in association studies. these can be subdivided into approaches that select suitable controls for cases prior to the statistical test such as genotype-based matching or a stratification score-based matching and strategies that correct the p-values afterwards due to differences in the group substructure such as genomic control , principal component analysis or other variance component models . most of these methods have been extensively studied in association studies that work with common variants in complex diseases. however, as the genetic risk modifiers that were identified in many gwas do explain the disease susceptibility only to a limited degree, it was suggested to extend the search to rare variants to find the missing heritability . the statistical tests that have to be applied for rare variants differ substantially from those, which are suitable for common variants. like in other studies, we will use in hereinafter the abbreviations cvas and rvas to make a clear distinction between common and rare variant association studies . over the last few years many new statistical approaches have been developed or adapted to analyze associations for collections of rare variants. these methods can be divided into two main types, namely multiple-marker tests and univariate tests that are applied to genotype data that are combined within a region of interest, e.g. a gene . the issue of appropriate methods for multiple testing corrections has been extensively discussed in cvas and it took several years to agree on 5 10 8 as an acceptable significance threshold for indefinitely dense maps of common single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) . for rvas, a careful analysis of significance testing has just begun and is an ongoing field of research . in the meantime, computationally intensive permutation tests can be used to correct the p-values empirically and to compare different test statistics . gwas for common variants in complex diseases usually require hundreds of samples for sufficient power. for rare variants that are functionally relevant and thus exhibit higher effect sizes, significant associations might already be detectable for smaller case groups . however, the limited number of cases that are available for the analysis of ultra-rare diseases will remain a challenge and in such studies ranking genes by p-values may serve as a stopgap solution to identify promising disease loci in the genome. in this article, we analyze how test statistics perform on exome datasets of individuals from diverse ethnic backgrounds and varying data quality. we focused especially on strategies for selecting controls and studied how this may influence the disease gene discovery. we show that an appropriate choice of controls is of utmost interest when studying individuals with rare disorders, as these collections show usually a substantial population substructure due to diverse ethnicities.the increasing availability of high-throughput sequencing technology has revealed the cause of multiple rare monogenic disorders over the recent years. many of these discoveries could be made because classical linkage analysis in large affected pedigrees could limit the genomic search space. however, it seems that many of the low hanging fruits have been picked by now and that collections of unsolved cases are building up that require different analysis strategies. in some of the rare disorders a single pathogenic allele does not need to be fully penetrant and might require additional modifiers to develop the phenotype. in autism spectrum disorders it seems to be the mutational load of functionally compromising variants in several genes that seems to matter . especially in these instances case group association studies that focus on rare variants, might help to find further disease-related loci. although gwas have been a big success in identifying target genes for complex disorders there are some key differences when it comes to rare. mathieson andshowed that population substructure from rare variants is systematically different from stratification that is due to common variants. they demonstrated that existing methods to correct for confounding effects in cvas cannot account for the substructure introduced by rare variants. as correction of substructure is not feasible in rvas, strategies to identify suitable controls seem to be a promising alternative. in our work we therefore focused on methods that match controls based on their similarity. for associations studies that build on snp data there has already been pioneering work byon genotype-based matching approaches and the metrics that we analyze for selecting controls also build on these efforts. we studied systematically how ngs data quality, as well as different population backgrounds influence the chances of identifying the disease gene in small case groups of individuals with ultra-rare. we also found that in rvas a similarity metric that puts a stronger weight on sharing rare alleles shows the best performance in the statistical analysis, especially if the data quality is heterogeneous. we also showed that the profiles of rare variants between different european populations and different sequencing studies do vary considerably, which has important consequences for the setup of rvas. whenever ancestral components are potential confounders, stratification-based matching approaches such as described byshould also be considered. from a statistical point of view it is often not optimal to include as many controls as possible, if they are not matching due to data quality or ethnicity. the best performance may be achieved if samples that are prone to cause spurious associations are not included. whenever there is high variability in the quality of the datasets in the case group a matching approach that is also sensitive to the rate of genotyping errors seems to be the method of choice. however, there is no simple rule of thumb for a selection strategy that applies to any case cohort. in some datasets simulations with known pathogenic mutations such as described in this work might help to decide whether sequencing of additional controls would improve the statistical power.observed log10p hpmrs (n a =7) f. rvas for three recently resolved monogenic disorders. kabuki makeup syndrome, mabry syndrome, and catelmanzke syndrome are mendelian disorders for which pathogenic mutations have been identified in new disease genes by intersections of candidate variant sets in case groups of unrelated, affected individuals comprising 10, 7 or 13 cases. for fewer cases the approach of an intersection filter would have been inconclusive. by a rvas approach with 40 controls, however, the probability of identifying the disease gene in such cohorts is still considerable even when the number of cases with pathogenic mutations in these cohorts is reduced markedly (a, c and e). additionally, a selection of similarity-matched controls may also help to reduce spurious associations effectively: the qq plots (b, d and f) show the observed versus the expected p-values for instances of the rvas simulations where 5, 3 and 7 individuals had pathogenic mutations in the disease genes kmt2d, tgds and pgap2 and showed the lowest p-value only when similarity-matched controls were used. when random controls are used, the p-values of highly variable genes such as nfx1, krt1 or cshl1 are inflated  
