data and text mining stratifying tumour subtypes based on copy number alteration profiles using next-generation sequence data motivation: the role of personalized medicine and target treatment in the clinical management of cancer patients has become increasingly important in recent years. this has made the task of precise histological substratification of cancers crucial. increasingly, genomic data are being seen as a valuable classifier. specifically, copy number alteration (cna) profiles generated by next-generation sequencing (ngs) can become a determinant for tumours subtyping. the principle purpose of this study is to devise a model with good prediction capability for the tumours histological subtypes as a function of both the patients covariates and their genome-wide cna profiles from ngs data. results: we investigate a logistic regression for modelling tumour histological subtypes as a function of the patients covariates and their cna profiles, in a mixed model framework. the covariates, such as age and gender, are considered as fixed predictors and the genome-wide cna profiles are considered as random predictors. we illustrate the application of this model in lung and oral cancer datasets, and the results indicate that the tumour histological subtypes can be modelled with a good fit. our cross-validation indicates that the logistic regression exhibits the best prediction relative to other classification methods we considered in this study. the model also exhibits the best agreement in the prediction between smooth-segmented and circular binary-segmented cna profiles. availability and implementation: an r package to run a logistic regression is available innext-generation sequencing (ngs) technology has greatly transformed our way of interrogating genomes and advanced our understanding of genomic changes such as copy number alterations (cnas). we have previously shown that cna data can be generated from routine diagnostic biopsy specimens in a very efficient manner using multiplexed, low-coverage sequencing and developed a robust algorithm to analyse these data in individual patients . our objective in this current study is to analyse multiple samples from two tumour subtypessimultaneously and develop informatic techniques to separate them using their cna profiles, so that subsequent patients could be better stratified in a predictive manner. currently, methods for studying groups of cna profiles tend to focus on looking for similarities in a homogeneous group of samples or to look for regions of the genome where two groups of samples are very different . we are focusing less on the genomic regions involved, and more on the problem of separating similar groups of samples and predicting to which group a new sample belongs. more specifically, our focus is in utilizing the whole (genome-wide) cna profiles to stratify tumour subtypes, in addition to other covariates or patients characteristics. this strategy enables us to have a wider picture of the contribution of each genomic region in the stratification, in light of the contribution of the other regions. to model the tumour subtypes, we investigate logistic regression within a random effects model framework, where the contributions of patients clinical characteristics are considered as fixed effects and those of the cna profiles are considered as random effects. because our interest is in the prediction of tumour subtypes of new samples, we perform a cross-validation to identify the prediction error of the model. we compare this prediction error with those from other classification methods. as a test dataset, we have analysed a cohort of lung tumours, all of which are from the two closely related subtypes, squamous cell carcinoma (scc) and adenocarcinoma (adc). until recently these have been treated as part of the larger subgroup non-small cell lung carcinoma (nsclc), but there is growing evidence that the two groups should be treated as separate diseases . as a validation dataset, we analysed another cohort of two related tumour subtypes, oral squamous cell carcinoma (oscc) and oral verrucous carcinoma (ovc). these subtypes have very different prognoses and clinical management, but there can be histological uncertainty in distinguishing between them . the results of our analysis indicate that the logistic regression enables us to stratify tumour subtypes and investigate genome-wide contribution of each genomic region to the stratification. the results also indicate that the logistic regression has good predictive value for new samples: advantageously, this prediction is achieved regardless of the segmentation methods involved in the estimation of cna. the latter advantage is important because a number of tools exist to obtain cna estimates from ngs data, and they use a variety of pre-processing steps, such as normalization, and a number of different segmentation methods. before we discuss those results, we discuss first the logistic regression in the next section.in this section, we mainly present the results for the lung cancer dataset. for the oral cancer dataset, we present its results mainly in the supplementary material.in predicting tumour histology, the main challenge is to consider a model with low classification error. further than that, we are also interested in the agreement between smooth-and cbs-segmented cna profiles in the prediction of new tumour sample. this is critical when we consider that the cna profiles are derived from lowcoverage ngs data that have undergone several preparation steps. this includes, but is not limited to, mapping to the reference genome, filtering, optimal window estimation, normalization (including normalization due to contamination) and segmentation. to have a classification method with a good prediction while having a minimum dependency on a previous pre-processing step is a great advantage. the logistic regression described in section 2.3 (also known as tikhonov regularization) is well-known to tend to group variables (genomic window) together . this property of. the observed tumour histology against its model fit based on the full logistic regression model using smooth and dnacopy cna profiles in the lung cancer dataset. the vertical lines mark the 50 probability to be in the squamous histological group. probability 50 are normally classified to the squamous groupfig. 6. classification error from 100 cross-validations (38 observations in each of the training set and validation set) using only the smooth-and cbssegmented cna profiles in the lung cancer dataset across different classification models: logistic regression (log), knn with k 1; 2 (k1-k2), diagonal quadratic (da1) and linear (da2) discriminant analysis, plss, elastic net (net), lasso (las), neural network (nn), support vector machines with c-classification (sv1), nu classification (sv2), and bound-constraint classification (sv3) and slr. the horizontal dotted line is the median of classification error of the logistic regression. figures with k3-k7 are presented in the supplementary material. the significance of the classification error between pair of methods are also presented in the supplementary material) that have significant differences of cna profiles between the squamous and adc groups, using a permutation method. a more detailed view of the random effects estimates in each chromosome is presented in the supplementary material the logistic regression is likely to predominate in prediction, in terms of classification error and agreement between the segmentation methods, because there are some dependencies of cna between neighbouring genomic windows. the lasso and elastic net models achieve comparable classification error as the logistic regression only when the cna profiles are cbs-segmented. the cbs (dnacopy) segmentation generally outputs long segments, and the variable selection effect that the two methods produce does not impair the prediction because the genomic regions that survive the penalization are able to represent the information of the whole segment. we have demonstrated the ability of the proposed method to distinguish between two subtypes of lung cancer. we then validated this method in a separate cohort of oral cancer patients, whose diagnosis is not always straightforward, but whose prognosis is very different. however, in theory, it could be used to distinguish between any subtypes of tumour, or to make predictions about disease progression, drug resistance or outcome. currently, several molecular classifiers are used to distinguish cancer subtypes, among them mrna or protein expression. these are both selective methods. the study of mrna usually involved the removal of non-coding rna and micro rna, the roles of which are increasingly becoming apparent. the study of protein expression usually involves only a few known proteins. both of these methods will also involve further depletion of valuable sample material. where there is no known mrna or protein signature, our method may prove useful in finding previously unsuspected differences in the genomes of two sample groups. low coverage sequencing is also possible with extremely low quantities of badly degraded dna . if mrna or protein tests are available, then their results can be easily added to the logistic regression method as additional predictors and will further improve performance.we have investigated that the use of logistic regression to model tumour histology and include the genome-wide cna profiles as predictors. the model enables us to include clinical characteristics as fixed covariates and cna profiles as random predictors in a single modelling framework. the model exhibits a good fit and, in a cross-validation, shows minimal classification error. the model also demonstrates the best agreement in prediction between cna profiles produced by two very different segmentation methods.. classification error from 100 cross-validations (52 and 50 observations in the training set and validation set, respectively) in the oral cancer dataset using only the smooth-and cbs-segmented cna profiles across different classification models: logistic regression (log), knn with k 1; 2 (k1-k2), diagonal quadratic (da1) and linear (da2) discriminant analysis, plss, elastic net (net), lasso (las), neural network (nn), support vector machines with c-classification (sv1), nu classification (sv2), and boundconstraint classification (sv3) and slr. the horizontal dotted line is the median of classification error of the logistic regression. figures with k3-k7 are presented in the supplementary material. the significance of the classification error between pair of methods are also presented in the supplementary material. agreement between smooth segmentation and cbs segmentation in prediction from 100 cross-validations in the lung cancer dataset (top panel) and oral cancer dataset (bottom panel) across different classification models: logistic regression (log), knn with k 1; 2 (k1-k2), diagonal quadratic (da1) and linear (da2) discriminant analysis, plss, elastic net (net), lasso (las), neural network (nn), support vector machines with c-classification (sv1), nu classification (sv2), and bound-constraint classification (sv3) and slr. for the oral cancer dataset (bottom panel) the agreement for da1 and da2 are below 0.6. the horizontal dotted line is the median of agreement in the logistic regression. figures with k3-k7 are presented in the supplementary material  
