structural distinctions of fast and slow bacterial luciferases revealed by phylogenetic analysis motivation: bacterial luciferases are heterodimeric enzymes that catalyze a chemical reaction, so called bioluminescence, which causes light emission in bacteria. bioluminescence is vastly used as a reporter system in research tools and commercial developments. however, the details of the mechanisms that stabilize and transform the reaction intermediates as well as differences in the en-zymatic kinetics amongst different bacterial luciferases remain to be elucidated. results: amino acid sequences alignments for 21 bacterial luciferases (both a-and b-subunits) were analyzed. for a-subunit, containing the enzyme active center, 48 polymorphic amino acid positions were identified. according to them, the sequences fell into two distinct groups known as slow and fast based on the decay rate of the bioluminescence reaction. the differences in the enzyme active site induced by structural polymorphism are analyzed. availability and implementation: three-dimensional models of photobacterium leiognathi lucifer-ase and vibrio harveyi luciferase (with reconstructed mobile loop) are freely available at pmdb database: pm0080525 and pm0080526, respectively.luminous bacteria are known as the most abundant and ubiquitous bioluminescent organisms. their traditional classification was rooted in the morphological peculiarities, metabolism and ecological distribution of light emitting species. currently, according to the sequence analysis of 16s rrna and gyrb genes, all known luminous bacteria are assigned to three gammaproteobacteria families: vibrionaceae, shewanellaceae and enterobacteriaceae . in spite of several studies, many details about the mechanism of bacterial bioluminescence including the differences in reaction kinetics are yet to be known. although the investigations has identified the sequence of about 21 bacterial luciferases, but could only solve the crystal structure of luciferase from vibrio harveyi . bacterial luciferase consists of a-and b-subunit folded into the same type of (b/a) 8 or tim barrel structure and encoded by luxa and luxb genes. in addition to the structure similarities, a-and b-subunits share about 32 of sequence identity, indicating that luxb gene might have evolved as a result of luxa gene duplication . however, a-subunit is larger due to additional 29 amino acid residues, which constitutes a mobile loop flanking the active site of the enzyme and playing an important role in binding to the substrates . all known bacterial luciferases catalyze the same oxidative reaction , where r-cho and r-cooh are a long-chain aliphatic aldehyde and corresponding carboxylic acid, fmnhstudy of the conservative motifs critical for the interaction of the bacterial luciferase with substrates and intermediates stabilization is far reaching in terms of understanding the mechanism of bioluminescence. in this study, we presented a phylogenetic analysis of amino acids important for light emitting reaction. our data suggested the conservative positions in structure of all known bacterial luciferases, and amino acids causing the division into fast and slow types of this enzyme. we found two sets of critical amino acids exactly matching each types of luciferases and probably responsible for kinetic decay rate. through protein structure homology modelling, we observed the formation of two different binding platforms that probably stabilize the reaction intermediates. two evolutionary fixed types of reaction kinetics could indicate the appearance of two different functions carried by bacterial luciferases that never been discussed before from the structural point of view.  
