structure-based de novo prediction of zinc-binding sites in proteins of unknown function motivation: zinc-binding proteins are the most abundant metallo-proteins in protein data bank (pdb). accurate prediction of zinc-binding sites in proteins of unknown function may provide important clues for the inference of protein function. as zinc binding is often associated with characteristic 3d arrangements of zinc ligand residues, its prediction may benefit from using not only the sequence information but also the structure information of proteins. results: in this work, we present a structure-based method, temsp (3d template-based metal site prediction), to predict zinc-binding sites. temsp significantly improves over previously reported best methods in predicting as many as possible true ligand residues for zinc with minimum overpredictions: if only those results in which all zinc ligand residues have been correctly predicted are defined as true positives, our method improves sensitivity from less than 30 to above 60, and selectivity from around 25 to 80. these results are for predictions based on apo state structures. in addition, the method can predict the zinc-bound local structures reliably, generating predictions useful for function inference. we applied temsp to 1888 protein structures of the unknown function class in the pdb database. a number of zinc-binding sites have been discovered de novo, i.e. based solely on the protein structures. using the predicted local structures of these sites, possible functional roles were analyzed.about one-third of all proteins in nature require metal ions for their normal structures and functions . in the protein structure database pdb , zinc is the most abundant metal ion . it has been suggested that zinc-binding proteins may comprise up to to whom correspondence should be addressed. 10 of the entire human proteome . in zincbinding proteins, the zinc ions or their binding motifs often play important functional roles. for example, about 40 of the zincbinding proteins in the human proteome are transcription factors, in which the zinc-containing motifs are involved in dna binding . the remaining 60 are primarily enzymes, in many of them zinc plays important catalytic roles . thus, the prediction of zinc-binding sites in proteins is of general interest for the inference of protein function. metal binding sites, especially zinc sites, can be predicted based on the sequences of target proteins. many reasonably successful methods are available for this purpose . in some methods, comparative modeling of the structures of the target proteins are attempted to verify or improve the predictions . recently, a method using the sequence profiles of known zinc-binding domains in pdb assisted by the so-called metal-binding patterns has been proposed and tested . because it needs only the sequence information of the target proteins, the method can be applied to annotate full zinc proteomes from genome sequences . however, as metal binding is very sensitive to the local arrangements of ligand residues in the 3d space, if the 3d structure of a target protein is available, it can be expected that much higher accuracy can be achieved by making predictions directly based on the structure. several methods were recently proposed to predict metalbinding sites, especially zinc sites, directly based on the 3d structures. among them, the method metsite uses neural networks trained on sequence profiles, secondary structure states, the solvent accessible surface areas (sasas) as well as the inter-residue distance matrices . the empirical fold-x force field has been developed to predict binding sites and binding affinities for water and for metal ions . goyal and mande reported a method based on statistically derived geometrical constraints on zinc-binding sites . the method ched makes use of the properties of triads of zinc-coordinating ligand residues to make predictions based on apoprotein structures . the method feature uses a bayesian classifier based on analyses of the properties of amino acid residues in concentric shells around zinc ions . the method sitepredict uses random forest classifiers trained on diverse ligand residue-based site properties topage: 1263 12621268  
