data and text mining structure-based variable selection for survival data motivation: variable selection is a typical approach used for molecular-signature and biomarker discovery; however, its application to survival data is often complicated by censored samples. we propose a new algorithm for variable selection suitable for the analysis of high-dimensional, right-censored data called survival maxmin parents and children (smmpc). the algorithm is conceptually simple, scalable, based on the theory of bayesian networks (bns) and the markov blanket and extends the corresponding algorithm (mmpc) for classification tasks. the selected variables have a structural interpretation: if t is the survival time (in general the time-to-event), smmpc returns the variables adjacent to t in the bn representing the data distribution. the selected variables also have a causal interpretation that we discuss. results: we conduct an extensive empirical analysis of prototypical and state-of-the-art variable selection algorithms for survival data that are applicable to high-dimensional biological data. smmpc selects on average the smallest variable subsets (less than a dozen per dataset), while statistically significantly outperforming all of the methods in the study returning a manageable number of genes that could be inspected by a human expert. availability: matlab and r code are freely available fromsurvival-analysis studies the occurrence and timing of events of interest. often in medicine and biology, the event of interest is death, hence the name survival analysis; however, the field is much broader as the event of interest could be disease relapse or any other event. a typical characteristic of survival data is that they are often right-censored, i.e. the data may record subject i as alive (not having experienced the event) until time f i (follow-up time) but may not contain the exact time t i the event actually occurred. excluding the censored data from the analysis systematically excludes the instances with higher probability of survival, and thus severely skews the results. thus, typical variable selection and regression methods cannot be applied to model the time-to-event t. unfortunately, it is often the case that analysis techniques cannot to whom correspondence should be addressed. be trivially extended for survival data. arguably, this is one reason why only a handful of variable selection methods are available for this type of data. variable selections primary aim is often to improve understanding of the data-generating process. for example, a biologist may be more interested in the genes predictive of survival, than in the actual predictive model. presumably, the variables involved in an optimally predictive, minimal, irreducible model carry unique information that provides insight into the data-generating process (we discuss this issue in more detail in the sections to follow). given the above observations, algorithms with clear semantics for the selected variables, and optimality properties are desirable. in this article, we adapt and evaluate an existing, successful and scalable method for variable selection called the maxmin parents and children algorithm (mmpc;) to survival analysis; the method is based on the theory of bayesian networks (bn) and markov blanket-based variable selection that has been recently shown to perform exceptionally well with complete (non-censored) data . the maxmin part of the name refers to the heuristic used in the algorithm regarding the order of consideration of the variables; the parents and children part of the name refers the structural interpretation of the selected variables: under certain conditions, they are the parents and children (adjacent nodes) of t in the bn representing the data distribution. we call the novel algorithm survival mmpc (smmpc). under certain conditions, the selected nodes consist of an optimal set for prediction and minimum in terms of size. in other words, the selected variables contain no irrelevant (noise) or superfluous (redundant) variables, facilitating the interpretation of the model. for microarray data, the selected gene expressions always provide predictive information for survival, even when any other combination of gene expressions is known. under certain conditions, this implies that no other gene is expected to be causally mediating the dependence. the set of parents and children is also connected to the set of direct causes of t ; the causal interpretation of the returned variables is also discussed. smmpc is evaluated against a variety of prototypical and state-of-the-art variable selection algorithms that can scale up to the dimensionality often encountered in bioinformatics: univariate association filtering, forward stepwise selection, bayesian variable selection (bvs) based on greedy search, lasso cox regression (used as selection method) and bayesian selection based on markov-chain monte-carlo (mcmc). the variable selection methods are coupled with several survival regression methods. the evaluation is performed on several real, publicly available, highdimensional, gene expression survival datasets. the results include  
