structure-ppi: a module for the annotation of cancer-related single-nucleotide variants at protein–protein interfaces motivation: the interpretation of cancer-related single-nucleotide variants (snvs) considering the protein features they affect, such as known functional sites, proteinprotein interfaces, or relation with already annotated mutations, might complement the annotation of genetic variants in the analysis of ngs data. current tools that annotate mutations fall short on several aspects, including the ability to use protein structure information or the interpretation of mutations in protein complexes. results: we present the structureppi system for the comprehensive analysis of coding snvs based on 3d protein structures of protein complexes. the 3d repository used, interactome3d, includes experimental and modeled structures for proteins and proteinprotein complexes. structureppi annotates snvs with features extracted from uniprot, interpro, appris, dbnsfp and cosmic databases. we illustrate the usefulness of structureppi with the interpretation of 1 027 122 non-synonymous snvs from cosmic and the 1000g project that provides a collection of 172 700 snvs mapped onto the protein 3d structure of 8726 human proteins (43.2 of the 20 214 swissprot-curated proteins in uniprotkb release 2014_06) and proteinprotein interfaces with potential functional implications. availability and implementation: structureppi, along with a user manual and examples, isavailable at http://structureppi.bioinfo.cnio.es/structure, the code for local installations at https://github.com/rbbt-workflowspredicting how single-nucleotide variant (snv) alters the function of protein products is a topic of growing interest in genomics and bioinformatics (reviewed in). one of the key limitations of the current computational tools for the prediction of the impact of snvs is that proteinprotein interactions are poorly considered or completely ignored. this is surprising since we know that proteins work as part of protein complexes and interaction networks, and a number of databases with high-quality 3d structurally resolved protein interactome networks are available , and increasingly used to understand human genetic diseases (; for a recent review about this topic, see). in spite of this, methods that allow a systematic analysis of snvs, considering known functional residues in spatial contact with the mutation, and including full atom-level description of proteinprotein interfaces, are not available. indeed, only a few methods, e.g. pmut , snpeffect , snps3d ,we present structureppi, a system to facilitate the comprehensive analysis of cancer-related snvs, which combines 3d proteinfor more details). the 3d protein complex interface between ensp00000419692 and human liver x nuclear receptor beta is also shown (pdb id: 4nqa) structures of protein complexes with functional annotations from different databases. the system implements the generally accepted idea that strong indicators of positive selection for tumorigenesis (driver mutations) are located in functional domain/sites or they affect amino acid residues that have been shown to be important by 3d protein structure. furthermore, the system provides information about known functional-residues in close physical proximity to query snvs. thus, structureppi can provide both mechanistic and biological insights into the role of snvs in a given cancer.  
