studying the co-evolution of protein families with the mirrortree web server the mirrortree server allows to graphically and interactively study the co-evolution of two protein families, and investigate their possible interactions and functional relationships in a taxonomic context. the server includes the possibility of starting from single sequences and hence it can be used by non-expert users. availability and implementation: the web server is freely available at http://csbg.cnb.csic.es/mtserver. it was tested in the main web browsers. adobe flash player is required at the client side to perform the interactive assessment of co-evolution.a lot of biological knowledge is hidden in the complex networks of relationships of different nature between molecular entities. in the case of proteins, their biological roles can only be fully understood in the context of their interaction with others. this importance in deciphering as much as possible of the complex network of interactions and functional relationships between proteins has led to the development of specific experimental and computational techniques for this task. one family of these computational techniques is based on the observed relationship between protein interactions and co-evolution. this approach, termed mirrortree, has been applied not only to look for interaction partners in large datasets of proteins (e.g.), but also to study in depth the co-evolution and interactions in particular pairs of protein families (e.g.). many authors developed variations and different implementations of this approach [e.g. see references in pazos and, but none of them are intended to be operated by non-experts users. they are either very specific for certain needs or are distributed as non-interactive command-line programs or require a complex preparation of the input data (e.g. generation of the multiple sequence alignments (msas) and/or phylogenetic trees). to whom correspondence should be addressed. this precludes these techniques from being used by most molecular biologists. in this work, we present the mirrortree server, an automatic system for the interactive assessment of co-evolutionary features between two protein families. the system only requires as input the sequence of a single representative of each family to start, which allows it to be used by non-bioinformaticians. all the subsequent steps (search for homologues, localization of orthologues, generation and filtering of msas and trees, and tree comparison) are fully automatic. nevertheless, expert users have the possibility of providing their (manually curated) msas or trees. moreover, the tree comparison is done in an interactive interface that allows users to study in depth the co-evolution of their families and investigate their interactions in a taxonomic context.the mirrortree server is the first system for interactively assessing the co-evolution between two protein families in order to evaluate their possible interactions in a taxonomic framework. there are related systems such as tsema which, based on the same relationship between protein interactions and tree similarity, are nevertheless intended for predicting the mapping (connections between the leaves) between two families already known to interact. moreover, that server does not include the possibility of automatically generating msas and hence it is more difficult to be used by non-experts. an important requirement for a computational tool to be used by biologists is simplicity. that left most existing tools for studying co-evolution and predicting protein interactions out of their standard toolkit. the mirrortree server was developed with the goal of being amenable to be used by non-experts, in such a way that any user can interactively study the co-evolution between his/her families of interest in a taxonomic context starting with single sequences.  
