subclonal variant calling with multiple samples and prior knowledge motivation: targeted resequencing of cancer genes in large cohorts of patients is important to understand the biological and clinical consequences of mutations. cancers are often clonally heterogeneous, and the detection of subclonal mutations is important from a diagnostic point of view, but presents strong statistical challenges. results: here we present a novel statistical approach for calling mutations from large cohorts of deeply resequenced cancer genes. these data allow for precisely estimating local error profiles and enable detecting mutations with high sensitivity and specificity. our probabilistic method incorporates knowledge about the distribution of variants in terms of a prior probability. we show that our algorithm has a high accuracy of calling cancer mutations and demonstrate that the detected clonal and subclonal variants have important prognostic consequences. availability: code is available as part of the bioconductor packagein recent years, genome sequencing has greatly enhanced our understanding of cancer biology . tumors are evolving entities and display complex clonal architectures with many mutations present in only a subset of cells . subclonal mutations provide insights into disease evolution and influence prognosis . subclonal variants can be detected using the deep coverage of next-generation sequencing technologies, but their distinction from sequencing errors, library preparation and alignment artifacts suffers from an unfavorable signal to noise level . a series of powerful variant callers has been developed in recent years for calling variants from genome or exome sequencing data of tumornormal pairs . for detecting subclonal variants, or mutations in samples with a low purity, which are both reported by small fractions of reads only, it is mandatory to accurately quantify the abundance of sequencing artifacts, which may otherwise lead to large numbers of false positives. with increasing numbers of genomic datasets being generated, it becomes apparent that sequencing artifacts tend to occur in a systematic way and on specific sites. targeted resequencing experiments, in which a selected set of candidate genes is resequenced across hundreds or thousands of samples, are increasingly prepared to evaluate findings from large-scale sequencing studies. such datasets present an opportunity to precisely estimate the distribution of sequencing artifacts by aggregating information across samples, rather than across sites as is commonly done in tumornormal variant calling. this will help avoid artifacts and likewise enable calling more variants on sites with lower error rates. the growing catalogs of somatic mutations in cancer also make it possible to define genomic loci more likely to be mutated. therefore, one may attempt to incorporate this prior knowledge to facilitate variant calling on mutational hotspots while remaining conservative on the remaining sites. hence, a well-chosen prior will increase sensitivity at a given level of specificity. here we present a novel approach for detecting clonal and subclonal variants that exploits the power of a large sample set for precisely defining the local error rates and which uses prior information to call variants with high specificity and sensitivity.we benchmark our algorithm against data from two large gene screens in hematological cancers, a subset of 738 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (mds) we have published recently . in these screens, 111 cancer genes were sequenced using barcoded libraries prepared from whole genome amplified dna. samples were sequenced in batches of 96 per lane on a hiseq2000 and reads were aligned with bwa (0.5.9 r16 rugo) to the grch37 human reference genome. technical replicates existed for 20 samples with acute myeloid leukemia (aml) assayed by the same gene panel. moreover, we included 32 normal samples to quantify specificity. here we focus on a subset of 43 genes with good coverage and in which we had previously found oncogenic mutations (;). the availability of survival data in the mds cohort allows for evaluating the quality of variant calls by their prognostic potential, which is an orthogonal measure to technical replication.in this article, we presented a statistical approach for detecting clonal and subclonal single nucleotide variants in targeted gene screens. the availability of large numbers of samples allows for precisely estimating the rate of artifacts, which is important for reliably detecting subclonal mutations that can have a disadvantageous signal to noise level. our model incorporates prior information on mutational hotspots, which selectively increases the sensitivity for known mutations. shearwater automatically determines the noise levels from the data, and we therefore expect it to deal well with sequencing data from other sequencing platforms and aligners. shearwater has both a high specificity and good power to detect variants. the genotypes obtained by shearwater have a higher prognostic value than those from established variant callers, and are likely to contain fewer artifacts. to an extent this behavior is expected because of our algorithms ability to exploit the power of a large cohort of samples and to incorporate prior knowledge about which mutations are more likely than others. as our algorithm uses unmatched samples, it relies on the quality of polymorphism databases such as single nucleotide polymorphism database or ensembl variation, which can generally be expected to become better in the future. the same holds true for the quality of databases of somatic mutations that will get richer over time and contain more precise information about the mutational patterns in each cancer type. here we used the same probability for each gene to be mutated, but once unbiased estimates for the mutation frequencies in each cancer type exist from systematic gene screens, one will be able to further improve the accuracy of our algorithm. the idea of using a prior for recurrent mutations may also be incorporated easily into other variant callers. finally, our core algorithm may also be improved in many ways. for example, one could account for base qualities by a weighted counting scheme, instead of a simple phred quality threshold. one limitation of our approach is its reliance on a variant to be present on reads from both directions due to the specifics of the null model m 0. this was introduced as it greatly increases the specificity of calls, but leads to a decrease in power in regions with low coverage and also at the flanks of the target regions, where often reads in only one direction are available. our implementation allows the user to choose an essentially strand-agnostic null model m 0 : 0 0 , but this may be less specific. to analyze matched samples, one could derive the joint probability of a variant being present in only the tumor but not the normal, or simply remove the intersection of variants in tumor and matched normal. in summary, we have presented a coherent statistical methodology and robust algorithm for calling subclonal variants in cancer samples with great specificity. as genomic sequencing is about to enter clinical diagnostics, we believe that our method will have broad applicability.  
