systems biology subnet: a java application for subnetwork extraction the extraction of targeted subnetworks is a powerful way to identify functional modules and pathways within complex networks. here, we present subnet, a java-based stand-alone program for extracting subnetworks, given a basal network and a set of selected nodes. designed with a graphical user-friendly interface, subnet combines four different extraction methods, which offer the possibility to interrogate a biological network according to the question investigated. of note, we developed a method based on the highly successful google pagerank algorithm to extract the subnetwork using the node centrality metric, to which possible node weights of the selected genes can be incorporated.biological systems are complex entities composed of interacting components and can be modeled as different types of biological networks. recently developed high-throughput genomic methods have generated large biological networks on the whole genome level, which are in general too complex, if possible at all, to be analyzed as a whole. such analytical intractability makes it necessary to focus only on parts of the large networksthe subnetworksthat are most relevant to the research question. not only do they make network analysis feasible and more focused, subnetworks can also help to predict pathways, discover network components (e.g. genes or proteins) not known to belong to a functionally related group and assign function to novel genes by revealing their neighbors in the networks. several algorithms have been developed to extract subnetworks, given a basal network and a set of selected nodes (the seeds). although the majority of themthe takahashi matsuyama , the klein ravi and the pairwise k-shortest path algorithmsare based on the shortest paths between nodes in the network, one of them, the k-walks algorithm, uses random walks on the network to find the relevant nodes and edges to generate the subnetwork. although these algorithms can extract subnetworks based on well-established operations on networks, they cannot use informative node weights of seeds, if present, derived from prior knowledge.here, we present subnet, a java-based application with a graphical user-friendly interface combining four different methods to identify and extract subnetworks of interest. we developed one of the extraction methods based on the highly successful google pagerank algorithm . this method is rigorous, efficient and can incorporate prior knowledge about the seeds.  
