genome analysis supercomputing for the parallelization of whole genome analysis motivation: the declining cost of generating dna sequence is promoting an increase in whole genome sequencing, especially as applied to the human genome. whole genome analysis requires the alignment and comparison of raw sequence data, and results in a computational bottleneck because of limited ability to analyze multiple genomes simultaneously. results: we now adapted a cray xe6 supercomputer to achieve the parallelization required for concurrent multiple genome analysis. this approach not only markedly speeds computational time but also results in increased usable sequence per genome. relying on publically available software, the cray xe6 has the capacity to align and call variants on 240 whole genomes in $50 h. multisample variant calling is also accelerated. availability and implementation: the megaseq workflow is designed to harness the size and memory of the cray xe6, housed at argonne national laboratory, for whole genome analysis in a platform designed to better match current and emerging sequencing volume.with the advent of massively parallel dna sequencing, the rate at which human genome variation can be determined is limited less by sequence generation but instead by the computational tools required to analyze these data. with current sequencing technology using short sequence reads of $100 bp, whole genome analysis (wga) requires the cleaning, aligning and interpreting of a billion sequence reads per single genome. with focus on scalability, we sought to improve the timeline required to process whole genome sequencing (wgs) by optimizing extraction, alignment, processing and variant calling. we reasoned that supercomputing capacity was better suited to parallelize wga and allow for the rapid simultaneous analysis of multiple genomes. beagle is a cray xe6 supercomputer housed at argonne national laboratory and administered by the computation institute at the university of chicago. beagle has $726 compute nodes each with 32 gb of memory. each node has 24 cores, 2.1 ghz cores on two amd magny-cours processors. the xe6 can work in both extreme scalability mode for scalable applications and cluster compatibility mode for use with programs that are designed for smaller machines or clusters, such as the freely available genomics tools that are now routinely implemented for wga . while parallelization is possible on smaller systems, both memory and computational core number limit the capacity for simultaneous computation. beagle uses a parallel computation environment and a parallel file system (lustre) based on shared storage. having both a parallel computation environment and external disk storage based on a parallel file system ensures that each node (and core) is able to access all data at any time without waiting for transfer of data across nodes. in this system, nodes have no local storage, and therefore no disk-to-disk transfer is required. on clusters without a shared file system, data transfer across nodes during analysis can be a time-intensive process. here, we describe a workflow referred to as megaseq that uses the mapreduce approach to take advantage of supercomputing size and memory.  
