super-focus: a tool for agile functional analysis of shotgun metagenomic data analyzing the functional profile of a microbial community from unannotated shotgun sequencing reads is one of the important goals in metagenomics. functional profiling has valuable applications in biological research because it identifies the abundances of the functional genes of the organisms present in the original sample, answering the question what they can do. currently, available tools do not scale well with increasing data volumes, which is important because both the number and lengths of the reads produced by sequencing platforms keep increasing. here, we introduce super-focus, subsystems profile by database reduction using focus, an agile hom-ology-based approach using a reduced reference database to report the subsystems present in metagenomic datasets and profile their abundances. super-focus was tested with over 70 real metagenomes, the results showing that it accurately predicts the subsystems present in the profiled microbial communities, and is up to 1000 times faster than other tools. availability and implementation: super-focus was implemented in python, and its source code and the tool website are freely available at https://edwards.sdsu.edu/superfocus. contact:prokaryotes and the viruses that infect them are the most abundant organisms on earth , and it is important to understand both who they are and what they are doing. in many environments, the majority of the microbes cannot be cultured by using standard laboratory techniques, and metagenomics is the preferred way to study them as a whole community . next-generation dna sequencing (ngs) technologies have sped up the sequencing process, reduced the cost, increased the sampling resolution and opened new horizons in the biological sciences . understanding microbial communities is important in many areas of biology. for example, metagenomes can distinguish taxonomic and functional signatures of microbes associated with humans , sponges , red seaweed and diseased and healthy states of corals .  
