approximately independent linkage disequilibrium blocks in human populations we present a method to identify approximately independent blocks of linkage disequi-librium in the human genome. these blocks enable automated analysis of multiple genome-wide association studies. availability and implementation: code: http://bitbucket.org/nygcresearch/ldetect; data: http://bit-bucket.org/nygcresearch/ldetect-data.the genome-wide association study (gwas) is a commonly used study design for the identification of genetic variants that influence complex traits. in this type of study, millions of genetic variants are genotyped on thousands to millions of individuals, and each variant is tested to see whether an individuals genotype is predictive of their phenotypes. because of linkage disequilibrium (ld) in the genome , a single genetic variant with a causal effect on the phenotype leads to multiple statistical (but noncausal) associations at nearby variants. one initial analysis goal in a gwas is to count the number of independent association signals in the genome while accounting for ld. the most commonly used approach to counting independent single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) that influence a trait is to count peaks of association signalsthis can be done manually when the number of peaks is small (e.g. wellcome trust case) or in a semi-automated way when the number of peaks is larger (e.g.). there are also fully automated methods that use ld patterns estimated from large reference panels of individuals . in some contexts (e.g. when performing identical analysis on multiple gwas with the goal of comparing phenotypes), it is useful to define approximately independent ld blocks a priori rather than letting them vary across analyses performed on different phenotypes . to define approximately independent ld blocks,used non-overlapping segments of 1 megabase, and pickrell (2014) used non-overlapping segments of 5000 snps. the breakpoints of these segments undoubtedly sometimes fall in regions of strong ld, thus potentially splitting a single association signal over two blocks (and leading to over-counting of the number of associated variants). a better approximation could be obtained by considering the empirical patterns of ld in a reference panel (e.g.). in the remainder of this article, we present an efficient signal processing-based heuristic for choosing approximate segment boundaries.  
