supertriplets: a triplet-based supertree approach to phylogenomics motivation: phylogenetic tree-building methods use molecular data to represent the evolutionary history of genes and taxa. a recurrent problem is to reconcile the various phylogenies built from different genomic sequences into a single one. this task is generally conducted by a two-step approach whereby a binary representation of the initial trees is first inferred and then a maximum parsimony (mp) analysis is performed on it. this binary representation uses a decomposition of all source trees that is usually based on clades, but that can also be based on triplets or quartets. the relative performances of these representations have been discussed but are difficult to assess since both are limited to relatively small datasets. results: this article focuses on the triplet-based representation of source trees. we first recall how, using this representation, the parsimony analysis is related to the median tree notion. we then introduce supertriplets, a new algorithm that is specially designed to optimize this alternative formulation of the mp criterion. the method avoids several practical limitations of the triplet-based binary matrix representation, making it useful to deal with large datasets. when the correct resolution of every triplet appears more often than the incorrect ones in source trees, supertriplets warrants to reconstruct the correct phylogeny. both simulations and a case study on mammalian phylogenomics confirm the advantages of this approach. in both cases, supertriplets tends to propose less resolved but more reliable supertrees than those inferred using matrix representation with parsimony. availability: online and java standalone versions of supertriplets are available at http://www.supertriplets.univ-montp2.fr/ contact: vincent.ranwez@univ-montp2.frrepresenting the evolutionary history of a set of taxa is usually performed by using a phylogenetic tree. external nodes (leaves) correspond to operational units, and the root corresponds to its origin. the whole branching order from the root to each leaf provides a representation of the evolutionary relationships among the operational units studied. however, one could readily observe variations among different trees inferred for a given phylum, depending on stochastic errors due to site and taxon sampling, systematic errors induced by model misspecifications during probabilistic inferences, and biological errors due to hidden paralogy, lateral gene transfer and incomplete lineage sorting of ancestral polymorphism (see, for a discussion to whom correspondence should be addressed. on the causes of incongruence). summarizing various trees obtained from independent inferences into a single tree is therefore a recurrent issue in molecular systematics and phylogenomics. having a single tree at hand is not just a simplification facilitating the management of topological information; it is in most cases a necessity to enable further analyses (see). pooling a collection of phylogenetic trees when all of them are defined on the same leaf set can be done with a consensus tree , such as the widely used strict or majority one (see, for an overview). actually, the consensus tree is a particular case of the more general problem of combining trees defined on partially overlapping leaf sets. the latter case is known as the supertree problem , whereby the aim is to build a tree (the supertree) summarizing the topological information induced by a collection of source (input) trees as well as possible. it has long been proposed that the median tree, i.e. the tree minimizing the sum of distances to the source trees, could be considered as an adequate supertree candidate . defining the supertree as a median turns out to be not only an intuitive definition but also a guarantee of the consistency of so-defined supertree methods . even though this ensures the consistency of any median supertree, these authors stressed the importance of choosing appropriate metrics with regards to the biological setting and expected computing times. the triplet distance, based on rooted, binary, three-leaf topologies, has the advantage of being fine-grained and easy to compute in polynomial time (see methods section for more formal definitions). we thus worked on designing a supertree method that seeks the triplet median supertree (tms). among the numerous supertree techniques that have been proposed over the past 20 years, matrix representation with parsimony (mrp;) is the most widely used. in brief, mrp first encodes the whole topological signal induced by the source trees into a matrix of binary pseudocharacters (i.e. the matrix representation of the source trees, here noted mr), and secondly considers the optimal supertree(s) as the most parsimonious (mp) tree(s) reconstructed from the mr. if there is more than one mp tree, the standard approach is to consider the supertree as the strict consensus of these mp trees (e.g.for some combinatorial properties). although alternative consensus methods are available to merge the topological information of all optimal mp trees into a supertree , considering their strict consensus is a standard way for inferring a non-ambiguous supertree from a collection of source trees. for these reasons, all mrp-based supertrees considered in this manuscript. matrix representation based on triplets (t-mr). topology t is decomposed into its set of triplets. the closer phylogenetic affinities of a and b relative to c, or d or e are indicated by the abc, abd and abe triplets. this correspondence is also indicated by black circles. rooting is ensured by an artificial all-zero taxon.summarizing various trees obtained from different inferences into a single one is a frequent task in phylogenetic analysis of multigene datasets. supertree methods are able to achieve this task even when the source trees only have partially overlapping taxon sets. a natural candidate supertree is the tree that is the closest to the source trees in terms of a given dissimilarity measure. supertriplets is a method specially designed to find the asymmetric median supertree according to triplet dissimilarity t , and that has several advantages over the closely related t-mrp method. in the first step of the t-mrp approach, the t-mr of the source trees depicts them as a set of binary sequences (one sequence per taxon, plus an extra one consisting only of 0 for an artificial outgroup leaf corresponding to the root of all source trees). given a fully i121we propose supertriplets, a method that first constructs a supertree using a polynomial agglomerative scheme, and, secondly, performs fast local search to find the asymmetric median supertree according to a triplet dissimilarity. we point out that, by using triplet representation (i.e. t-mr), this median supertree is one of the mp binary trees. computer simulations and a biological case study indicate that supertriplets tends to propose more reliable but less resolved supertrees than mrp methods. we think that this work provides new prospects for designing supertree methods. on the one hand, supertriplets could certainly be significantly improved. heuristics searching for the mp tree(s) have strongly benefited from more than 20 years of improvements, and have a considerable advantage with respect to method tuning and implementation tricks (e.g.) as compared to recently proposed approaches. on the other hand, the confidence values displayed by supertriplets at the supertree edges are wellfounded, and having an indication of the supertree branch support is an important feature. several related confidence values dedicated to supertree-based comparative studies have already been proposed . comparing their relevance and accuracy is far from easy, as pointed out by, who concluded: our example at least shows that there is no single correct view of support for supertrees. this remark is relevant for supertree approaches but also reflect the intrinsic difficulty of comparing any clade support value in the supertree or supermatrix context .  
