systems biology surreyfba: a command line tool and graphics user interface for constraint-based modeling of genome-scale metabolic reaction networks constraint-based modeling of genome-scale metabolic networks has been successfully used in numerous applications such as prediction of gene essentiality and metabolic engineering. we present surreyfba, which provides constraint-based simulations and network map visualization in a free, stand-alone software. in addition to basic simulation protocols, the tool also implements the analysis of minimal substrate and product sets, which is useful for metabolic engineering and prediction of nutritional requirements in complex in vivo environments, but not available in other commonly used programs. the surreyfba is based on a command line interface to the glpk solver distributed as binary and source code for the three major operating systems. the command line tool, implemented in c++, is easily executed within scripting languages used in the bioinformatics community and provides efficient implementation of tasks requiring iterative calls to the linear programming solver. surreyfba includes jymet, a graphics user interface allowing spreadsheet-based model presentation, visualization of numerical results on metabolic networks represented in the petri net convention, as well as in charts and plots.an understanding of how cellular phenotypes emerge from interactions between molecular parts, encoded in the genome, requires computer simulation of genome-scale molecular interaction networks. due to the scarcity of quantitative information, these simulations have been limited to the special case of metabolic networks operating under quasi-steady state, which is modeled by a set of linear relationships between reaction fluxes. the model is explored by employing linear programming optimization, where the optimal flux toward any reaction or substance in the model can be determined. this approach is referred to as constraint based , because it evaluates metabolic capabilities under the set of constraints representing stoichiometry, maximal capacity and reversibility of the reactions. this information can be obtained for a particular repertoire of enzymatic activities, predicted from to whom correspondence should be addressed. the genome, which has permitted reconstruction of genome-scale metabolic reaction networks (gsmns) for major model organisms, pathogens, industrial microorganisms and humans. the review of the numerous applications of gsmns is beyond the scope of this article. the software presented here stemmed from our work on metabolic engineering and prediction of gene essentiality in pathogens . constraint-based simulations are implemented in the cobra toolbox running under the matlab environment. the simpheny software (www.genomatica.com) is a commercial solution with a database backend providing visualization of numerical results on pathway maps. visualization is also available in the fba-simviz and metafluxnet programs, although none of them implements iterative simulations such as flux variability analysis (fva) or reaction essentiality scans. here we present surreyfba, a gnu gpl software for constraintbased simulations of metabolic reaction networks. in addition to the standard methods, available in existing tools, it implements analysis of minimal substrate and product sets. the command line tool is available as a binary and source code for linux, windows and macos systems and can be used without dependencies on mathematical modeling environments. it can be easily run using common scripting languages, which makes it particularly suitable for the integration with bioinformatics analysis pipelines. we have already implemented jymet, a jython graphics user interface, which provides visualization of networks and numerical results, integrated into network diagrams.  
