gene expression survmicro: assessment of mirna-based prognostic signatures for cancer clinical outcomes by multivariate survival analysis micrornas (mirnas) play a key role in post-transcriptional regulation of mrna levels. their function in cancer has been studied by high-throughput methods generating valuable sources of public information. thus, mirna signatures predicting cancer clinical outcomes are emerging. an important step to propose mirna-based biomarkers before clinical validation is their evaluation in independent cohorts. although it can be carried out using public data, such task is time-consuming and requires a specialized analysis. therefore, to aid and simplify the evaluation of prognostic mirna signatures in cancer, we developed survmicro, a free and easy-to-use web tool that assesses mirna signatures from publicly available mirna profiles using multivariate survival analysis. survmicro is composed of a wide and updated database of 440 cohorts in different tissues and a web tool where survival analysis can be done in minutes. we presented evaluations to portray the straightforward functionality of survmicro in liver and lung cancer. to our knowledge, survmicro is the only bioinformatic tool that aids the evaluation of multivariate prog-nostic mirna signatures in cancer. availability and implementation: survmicro and its tutorial are freely available atmicrornas (mirnas) are $22-nt molecules that play an important post-transcriptional regulatory role . this molecular mechanism has been widely studied in cancer. it is known that some mirnas act like oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes (esquela) and whose regulatory roles are linked to cancer hallmarks . mirnas have also been proposed as drug targets and biomarkers . the roles of mirnas in the tumor cell have been explored using high-throughput techniques such as microarrays and sequencing. these data have also been used to associate mirnas to clinical outcome in patients generating signatures for diagnostics and prognostics that are composed of several mirnas . a mirna signature trial has been recently announced (mrx34 trial). a key issue for mirna signatures for cancer is their validation in diverse cohorts . such task generates difficulties even though many public cohorts are available. these are related to timeconsuming tasks, such as exploration of repositories, acquisition and processing and the modeling of mirna levels, to assess their value as prognostic biomarkers. the current approaches for mirnas signature validation are limited. progmir and mirumir implement only univariate analyses even though signatures are composed of several mirnas . moreover, both tools are restricted regarding the available cohorts. these characteristics limit the assessment of multivariate mirna biomarkers. to provide assessment of multivariable prognostic mirna biomarkers and to simplify the evaluation in several cohorts, we developed survmicro. survmicro is a curated and updated web tool of mirna expression levels associated with clinical outcome that provides survival analysis and risk assessment in cancer.  
