systems biology susceptibility of the human pathways graphs to fragmentation by small sets of micrornas motivation: micrornas (mirnas) are short sequences that negatively regulate gene expression. the current understanding of mirna and their corresponding mrna targets is primarily based on prediction programs. this study addresses the potential of a coordinated action of mirnas to manipulate the human pathways. specifically, we investigate the effectiveness of disrupting the topology of human pathway graphs through a regulation by mirnas. results: from a set of mirna candidates that is associated with a pathway, an exhaustive search for all possible doubles and triplets (coined mir-duo, mir-trios) is performed. the impact of each mir-combination on the connectivity of the pathway graph was quantified. about 170 human pathways were tested, and the mir-duos and mir-trios were scored for their ability to disrupt these pathway graphs. we show that 75 of all pathways are effectively disconnected by a small number of pathway-specific mir-trios. only 15 of the human pathways are resistant to fragmentation by mir-duos or mir-trios. significantly, the combination of the most effective mir-trios is unique. thus, a specific regulation of a pathway within the cell is guaranteed. the impact of the selected mir-duo/trios on various diseases is discussed. conclusions: the methodology presented shows that the synthesis of the topology of a network with a detailed understanding of the mirnas regulation is useful in exposing critical nodes of the network. we propose the mir-trio approach as a basis for rationally designed perturbation experiments.non-coding micrornas (mirnas) play a role in stem cell differentiation, cell division, immunological cell function, stress response and cells identity [reviewed in (. furthermore, mirnas are involved in the human pathogenesis including cancer and viral infection . recent studies confirmed the presence of hundreds of mirnas in healthy and diseased tissues to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors.. a growing number of tools and algorithms were developed for predicting mirna-target pairs . currently, mirbase is the most comprehensive collection of mirnas with over 1000 mirnas from human and 700 from mouse . the mirnas are estimated to target over a third of the genes in human . more than dozen mirna-target predictors assigned potential targets for individual mirnas. however, the consistency among the principal mirnatarget predictors is relatively small . a direct pairing of mirnas and mrnas was revealed using deep sequencing technology from argonaute bound sequences . currently, the tarbase and the mirecords databases are used as sound sources for validated mirnas and their targets. the presence of multiple mirnas binding sites, on the same transcript, augments its regulation level . the parallel overexpression of three mirnas resulted in a synergistic effect on the transcription level of the candidate genes . for example, the regulation of the tumor suppressor fus1 in cancer cells depends on the coordinated action of three mirnas . importantly, introducing several mirnas not only affected gene candidates but also impacted regulatory pathways . considering pathways and diseases as the predictions objective reduces the noisy predictions of mirna-gene targets, as demonstrated by mirnapath and diana-mirpath . this study raises the possibility that a cooperative action of a small, selected group of mirna can alter the expression of genetargets that belong to some pathways, without scarifying specificity. more importantly, the concept that is investigated argues that disruption of the pathways topology has the potential to alter the outcome of the targeted pathway. a support for this notion stems from the following: (i) a number of mirnas can act cooperatively; (ii) multiple mirnas disrupt disease pathways; (iii) genes that comprise the regulatory and signaling pathways are amenable to mirna regulation; (iv) the quantities of mirnas in cells are strongly regulated; (v) diseases and developmental stages are often specified by altered expression of a number of mirnas. herein, we prioritize each pathway according to its susceptibility to a regulation by a small group of mirnas. we included the most reliable resources for human pathways from pathway interaction database (pid) (hosted by the national cancer institute, nci) and kegg . many of thewe compiled the manually curated pathways from kegg and pid (nci human pathways) resources, covering 93 and 79 human pathways, respectively. the conversion relies on a simplification of the kegg pathway by excluding non-protein components and localization information. the conversion creates pathway graphs that are used throughout this study. about half of the pathway graphs are composed of only one or two connected components (ccs,). the quantitative properties of kegg pathways are listed in supplementary table s1. the conversion of the kegg pathway to a graph is illustrated for insulin signaling pathway .in this study, we combine the importance of regulatory pathway graph topology with the concept of coordinated regulation by mirnas. we test the notion that a small set of a combinatorial mirna action constitutes an effective seed for pathways manipulations. the protocol applied in this study introduces several sequential filters for the selection of few mirnas that are potentially effective toward a specific pathway. as a byproduct of this study, we identified human pathways that are not susceptible for mirna regulation and others that are sensitive. the later serve as an unbiased resource to test the rebalance of mirna combination in health and disease.  
