genetics and population analysis svamp: sequence variation analysis, maps and phylogeny svamp is a stand-alone desktop application to visualize genomic variants (in variant call format) in the context of geographical metadata. users of svamp are able to generate phylogenetic trees and perform principal coordinate analysis in real time from variant call format (vcf) and associated metadata files. allele frequency map, geographical map of isolates, tajimas d metric, single nucleotide polymorphism density, gc and variation density are also available for visualization in real time. we demonstrate the utility of svamp in tracking a methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus outbreak from published next-generation sequencing data across 15 countries. we also demonstrate the scalability and accuracy of our software on 245 plasmodium falciparum malaria isolates from three continents. availability and implementation: the qt/c software code, bin-aries, user manual and example datasets are available at http://cbrc.associating sequence variants [single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) and indels] with sample metadata such as geographical location and drug susceptibility have played a key role in studying the population structure , identifying mechanisms of drug resistance and tracking the transmission of an infectious disease . with the increasing application of deep sequencing as an approach, the number and volume of population studies with geo-biological information and associated genomic data will continue to grow. this increases the demand for tools to integrate, visualize and analyse complex genomic epidemiological data in real time, including browsing genome variation patterns and assessing population structure or geo-phylogeny. although software such as polylens and gengis can integrate geographical and genetic sequence data, there is a need to scale up to whole genome variation in the standardized vcf format with informative population genetic analysis. this motivated us to develop svamp, a stand-alone qt/c application capable of analysing variants in the context of geography and aiding in making inferences on the population structure. svamp is built on the open-source software varb .we have evaluated the application and scalability of svamp using two published datasets: (i) a bacterial population study on methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (commonly known as mrsa) and (ii) a worldwide to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
