sv-bay: structural variant detection in cancer genomes using a bayesian approach with correction for gc-content and read mappability motivation: whole genome sequencing of paired-end reads can be applied to characterize the landscape of large somatic rearrangements of cancer genomes. several methods for detecting structural variants with whole genome sequencing data have been developed. so far, none of these methods has combined information about abnormally mapped read pairs connecting rearranged regions and associated global copy number changes automatically inferred from the same sequencing data file. our aim was to create a computational method that could use both types of information, i.e. normal and abnormal reads, and demonstrate that by doing so we can highly improve both sensitivity and specificity rates of structural variant prediction. results: we developed a computational method, sv-bay, to detect structural variants from whole gen-ome sequencing mate-pair or paired-end data using a probabilistic bayesian approach. this approach takes into account depth of coverage by normal reads and abnormalities in read pair mappings. to estimate the model likelihood, sv-bay considers gc-content and read mappability of the genome, thus making important corrections to the expected read count. for the detection of somatic variants, sv-bay makes use of a matched normal sample when it is available. we validated sv-bay on simulated data-sets and an experimental mate-pair dataset for the clb-ga neuroblastoma cell line. the comparison of sv-bay with several other methods for structural variant detection demonstrated that sv-bay has better prediction accuracy both in terms of sensitivity and false-positive detection rate. availability and implementation: https://github.com/institutcurie/sv-baywhole genome sequencing (wgs) has become routine for detection of both small and large somatic mutations, i.e. point mutations, small indels and structural variants (svs) in cancer genomes. pairedend sequencing of mate-pair libraries is often employed when the aim of the study is the detection of large svs, i.e. variants of greater length than the read length . a long insert size of mate-pair libraries (usually 34 kb) allows for high physical coverage of sv junctions.each type of large svs (translocation, duplication, deletion, inversion, etc.) corresponds to a particular paired-end mapping signature (pem signature) . as such, deletions are characterized by a larger than expected distance between mapped paired reads (insert size), while insertions have an insert size shorter than expected (supplementary). additionally, svs often result in a change of copy number status around the breakpoint junction, which is reflected in changes in read depth of coverage (doc). for instance, deleted regions have a relatively low doc, whereas duplicated regions are characterized by high doc . thus, differences in doc and abnormal positioning of mapped reads often indicate the same genomic abnormality (e.g., a deletion or a tandem duplication). however, there has been no effort made to combine these two types of information into one unified computational approach. most of the current sv detection approaches can be classified into three categories: methods based on (i) pem signatures, (ii) doc and (iii) split read mappings . each of these approaches has its limits in terms of the type and size of svs that it is able to detect. pem-based algorithms can be grouped into two categories: those based on read clustering, and those based on fragment length distribution. the former identify discordant pems as pems with unexpected orientation or insert size, cluster them and apply statistical tests to validate candidate clusters , whereas the latter compare the observed insert-size distribution of all read pairs in a given window versus the expected distribution. windows with a significant proportion of read pairs having unexpected insert-sizes are annotated as containing svs . in some cases, the same package, e.g. breakdancer , provides two complementary methods for sv detection: clustering-based (breakdancermax) and distribution-based (breakdancermini) to detect large and small size svs, respectively. doc-based methods detect regions of gain and loss in the genome using doc normalized for gc-content bias . a deviation from the expected doc suggests putative gain or loss of genomic material. doc-based methods do not provide information about the adjacency of dna regions involved in copy number changes. thus, such methods are not able to indicate the type of sv (e.g. tandem duplication, fragment reinsertion, translocation) causing genomic loss or gain. additionally, the resolution of such methods rather is low for low doc datasets: a 30 coverage dataset allows approximately a resolution of 1 kb for rearrangement breakpoints. split-read-based methods use partial read alignments for sv detection . although such methods may be efficient for data with high read coverage, they may fail to identify svs with breakpoints located in repetitive elements of the genome. ideally, these types of approach should be combined with paired-end signatures; this idea was implemented in svmerge , prism , meerkat , smufin and delly . combining information about discordant pems with changes in doc is a promising solution for the sv detection problem. probabilistic models integrating both the doc signal and pem signatures provide higher specificity at equal or greater sensitivity than tools that simply use paired-end signatures . however, most of these methods do not take into account certain important parameters that affect read count for both normal and abnormal mappings: gc-content and read mappability. another general drawback of the majority of these methods is their lack of ability to detect all possible types of sv that can be present in cancer data including co-amplifications, tandem duplications with inversions, linking insertions, etc. here, we propose a bayesian framework for sv detection using paired-end or mate-pair libraries, implemented as the software sv-bay. in this framework, we combine both pem signatures and information about changes in doc in regions flanking each candidate rearrangement. our method takes into account gc-content and mappability. the use of a bayesian framework based on both pem and doc information allows us to significantly decrease the level of false positive predictions while retaining high sensitivity. additionally, sv-bay infers 15 different types of structural variant from the detected novel genomic adjacencies (supplementary).we applied sv-bay to simulated and experimental datasets and were able to demonstrate that it had a higher prediction accuracy than four other published methods: gasvpro , lumpy and the two most popular methods for sv detection, breakdancer (breakdancermax) and delly . we have selected gasvpro and lumpy, since like sv-bay, these tools take into consideration information about doc changes in the proximity of candidate breakpoints. however, unlike sv-bay, they consider only short proximity of breakpoints while sv-bay calculates read counts in maximally large regions around the breakpoint, which increases the statistical power of its probabilistic approach. in addition, gasvpro, lumpy and delly integrate split-reads into the analysis. the version of each software and parameters used are summarized in supplementary table s1. lumpy was applied to paired-end data only as it does not provide an option to run on mate-pair datasets. in the analysis below, we assumed that an sv calling method correctly detected a given sv when (i) predicted breakpoints laid within a certain distance d from the correct breakpoints, and (ii) there was a match in read orientation. distance d corresponded to the maximal fragment length, i.e. 5179 bp for simulated matepair data, 446 bp for simulated paired-end data, and 3542 bp for the experimental mate-pair data.we have proposed a new method sv-bay for the detection of large svs in cancer genomes. sv-bay is based on a bayesian probabilistic model. this allows it to be both sensitive and selective, discardingabbreviations: paired-ends (pe); mate-pairs (mp).the extremely long execution time of gasvpro on mate-pair data is explained by the use of split reads to refine the breakpoint position. in mate-pair data, the range where the breakpoint can be located according to abnormal read mappings can be extremely large; testing all possibilities requires many hours. many artefact clusters of mismapped read pairs. indeed, in comparison with other methods, sv-bay demonstrated a noticeably better sv detection accuracy both for simulated and experimental datasets. sv-bay not only detects novel genomic adjacencies but also, where possible, groups them into more complex svs such as co-amplifications, linking insertions, tandem duplications with inversion, etc. overall, sv-bay allows the user to skip such data post-processing steps like filtering out links with low number of fragments that do not correspond to copy number changes, filtering out events present both in the tumor and the matched normal control (artefacts and germline svs), and performing manual inference of complex sv from the detected genomic adjacencies. sv-bay does not use split reads to improve the resolution of predicted breakpoints. there are two main reasons for this. first, the read coverage on breakpoints can be sufficiently high only for paired-end libraries, whereas we intended our method to also be applicable to mate-pair data. second, structural variants in cancer often occur in low mappability repetitive regions or regions that have partial homology; additionally, there can be insertions of one of several genomic shards between two regions connected by a sv . these incidents reduce the capacity of read mappers to align correctly reads coming from sv junctions. like other methods, sv-bay is tolerant to a certain degree to contamination of the tumor sample by normal cells. in the future, we intend to extend our model to handle both high normal cell contamination levels and be able to detect sub-clonal svs when values of tumour purity and sub-clonal cellularity are provided. the current version of sv-bay is able to analyze only one tumor/ normal pair at once. one of the interesting possible extensions to our method would be to add the ability to analyze several tumour datasets extracted from the same patient in order to increase the sensitivity of sv detection.we have presented sv-bay, a computational method and software to detect structural variants in cancer using whole genome sequencing data with or without matched normal control sample. sv-bay does not only use information about abnormal read mappings but also assesses changes in the copy number profile and tries to associate these changes with candidate svs. the likelihood of each novel genomic adjacency is evaluated using a bayesian model. in its final step, sv-bay annotates genomic adjacencies according to their type and, where possible, groups detected genomic adjacencies into complex svs as balanced translocations, co-amplifications, and so on. a comparison of sv-bay with breakdancer, lumpy, delly and gasvpro demonstrated its superior performance on both simulated and experimental datasets.  
