svdetect: a tool to identify genomic structural variations from paired-end and mate-pair sequencing data we present svdetect, a program designed to identify genomic structural variations from paired-end and mate-pair next-generation sequencing data produced by the illumina ga and abi solid platforms. applying both sliding-window and clustering strategies, we use anomalously mapped read pairs provided by current short read aligners to localize genomic rearrangements and classify them according to their type, e.g. large insertions deletions, inversions, duplications and balanced or unbalanced inter-chromosomal translocations. svdetect outputs predicted structural variants in various file formats for appropriate graphical visualization. availability: source code and sample data are available atthe identification of genomic structural variations is a key step in understanding human genetic diversity and evolution as well as disease etiology. numerous genetic diseases, including cancer, have been associated with structural variants . although array-based techniques have been successful in many studies for detecting svs, the relatively low resolution in the detection of breakpoints and the characterization of small svs remained challenging. with the arrival of high-throughput sequencing technologies such as the illumina genome analyzer or the applied biosystems solid system, using short-insert pairedend or mate-paired reads (referred here as paired-ends) has improved our ability to detect svs . with a priori information from paired-ends such as order, orientation and insert size of pairs as constraints during read alignment to the reference genome, anomalously mapped pairs indicate potential genomic variations from the reference. the need for algorithms specifically designed for sv prediction from paired-end mapping (pem) data has recently led to the development of new software packages, including to whom correspondence should be addressed. gasv , breakdancer and others (see review,). here, we present a new freely available program called svdetect for sv detection and type prediction from pem data. svdetect identifies different types of svs, e.g. large insertionsdeletions and inversions, with both clustering and sliding-window strategies, and helps to visualize them at the genomic scale. compared to other tools, the novelty of our method consists in its multiple ability to: (i) analyze both paired-end and mate-pair sequencing data; (ii) use unique pem constraints to improve sv detection; (iii) predict various types of tandem duplication and to distinguish between balanced and unbalanced rearrangements; (iv) compare svs across multiple samples; (v) construct copy number profiles; and (vi) create various output file formats for graphical views of sv.  
