genome analysis svgmap: configurable image browser for experimental data spatial data visualization is very useful to represent biological data and quickly interpret the results. for instance, to show the expression pattern of a gene in different tissues of a fly, an intuitive approach is to draw the fly with the corresponding tissues and color the expression of the gene in each of them. however, the creation of these visual representations may be a burdensome task. here we present svgmap, a java application that automatizes the generation of high-quality graphics for singular data items (e.g. genes) and biological conditions. svgmap contains a browser that allows the user to navigate the different images created and can be used as a web-based results publishing tool. availability: svgmap is freely available as precompiled java package as well as source code at http://bg.upf.edu/svgmap. it requires java 6 and any recent web browser with javascript enabled. the software can be run on linux, mac os x and windows systems. contact:modern biological experiments generally generate big datasets that need to be visualized effectively in order to interpret the results. some available tools for genomic data analysis focus on representing huge datasets in one figure using visualization techniques like heat maps and circular plots . this focus on big data should not leave out the development of tools to represent singular data, for example representing expression of a single gene. in such cases, the viewer can be provided with figures that are more straightforward to understand, like a textbook figure. particularly, figures in svg format, the w3c standard to design high-quality images and graphics, are well suited for the graphical representation of biological data. with svgmap, we present a tool that is well fitted for the visualization of biological data through the generation of individualized figures in a generic and interactive way. it is a standalone java application and can be executed on any system with to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. java 6 or higher installed. the software instantiates a web server that can be accessed through common web browsers. svgmap can be executed on a personal computer or can be incorporated into an existing web server optionally using an external database.the development of svgmap and its svgmap browser was motivated to cover the need we had in collaboration with an experimental group to support the study of gene expression in arabidopsis thaliana roots, but has been programmed in a generic manner, such that it can be adapted to any other data types. our tool helped them to study their genes of interest and gave insight in which tissue they are expressed and with which level of expression. furthermore, it serves as well as a platform for the publication of their data and images. in this collaboration, svgmap has been proved to be straightforward and very useful. in our opinion, svgmap has a wide range of applications to represent biological data. to illustrate that we have prepared four diverse examples: (i) visualization of expression levels of yeast cell cycle genes in each part of the cell cycle (m,g1,s,g2) ; (ii) visualization of copy number variation data for 10 different types of cancer from intogen data ; (iii) visualization of gene expression in different drosophila tissues from flyatlas and (iv) visualization of cell compartments affected by transcriptomic alterations in 10 cancer types . with the flexible svg format as basis of our tool, it is important to stress that svg images can be reused and adapted because the graphics are described by text. any svg that has been published in public domain, like the wikimedia documents (http://commons.wikimedia.org), can be loaded in a svg editor in order to add or remove objects and annotate them.  
