genetics and population analysis sweepfinder2: increased sensitivity, robustness and flexibility sweepfinder is a widely used program that implements a powerful likelihood-based method for detecting recent positive selection, or selective sweeps. here, we present sweepfinder2, an extension of sweepfinder with increased sensitivity and robustness to the confounding effects of mutation rate variation and background selection. moreover, sweepfinder2 has increased flexibility that enables the user to specify test sites, set the distance between test sites and utilize a recombin-ation map. availability and implementation: sweepfinder2 is a freely-available (www.personal.psu.edu/mxd60/ sf2.html) software package that is written in c and can be run from a unix command line.polymorphism frequency spectra provide sensitive statistics for identifying signatures of positive selection. sweepfinder is a widely used program that uses an empirical background frequency spectrum for identifying genomic sites affected by recent positive selection. specifically, sweepfinder performs a composite likelihood ratio test for positive selection , in which the likelihood of the null hypothesis is calculated from the neutral (or genome-wide) frequency spectrum, and the likelihood of the alternative hypothesis is calculated from a model in which the neutral spectrum was altered by a recent selective sweep. footprints of positive selection can be confounded by other evolutionary forces. one important confounding factor that is rarely considered in the studies of positive selection is background selection, which is a loss of neutral variation due to purging of linked deleterious alleles by negative selection . recent studies have shown that background selection is ubiquitous in humans , with estimates of mean reductions in genetic diversity due to background selection ranging from 19 to 26 and 12 to 40 on autosomes and the x chromosome, respectively . thus, the influence of background selection on genetic diversity has important ramifications for making inferences about past adaptive processes from patterns of diversity. in particular, when a beneficial allele is carried to fixation by positive selection, there is a substantial decrease in diversity locally in the genome and a reduction in diversity relative to divergence with other species, both of which can span megabases in length (maynard). background selection can similarly affect diversity levels , particularly in regions of low recombination. v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com  
