swispot: modeling riboswitches by spotting out switching sequences motivation: riboswitches are cis-regulatory elements in mrna, mostly found in bacteria, which exhibit two main secondary structure conformations. although one of them prevents the gene from being expressed, the other conformation allows its expression, and this switching process is typically driven by the presence of a specific ligand. although there are a handful of known ribos-witches, our knowledge in this field has been greatly limited due to our inability to identify their alternate structures from their sequences. indeed, current methods are not able to predict the presence of the two functionally distinct conformations just from the knowledge of the plain rna nucleotide sequence. whether this would be possible, for which cases, and what prediction accuracy can be achieved, are currently open questions. results: here we show that the two alternate secondary structures of riboswitches can be accurately predicted once the switching sequence of the riboswitch has been properly identified. the proposed swispot approach is capable of identifying the switching sequence inside a putative, complete riboswitch sequence, on the basis of pairing behaviors, which are evaluated on proper sets of configurations. moreover, it is able to model the switching behavior of riboswitches whose generated ensemble covers both alternate configurations. beyond structural predictions, the approach can also be paired to homology-based riboswitch searches. availability and implementation: swispot software, along with the reference dataset files, is available atgene regulation is essential to achieve organism versatility, giving cells control over structure and functions and being the basis for cellular differentiation, morphogenesis, and adaptability. since the discovery of ribozymes, it has become more and more evident that rna molecules are also actively involved in regulatory mechanisms, including the regulation of gene expression . riboswitches are rna elements, mainly found in bacteria, that are embedded in 5 0-untranslated regions of mrna . they are able to sense cellular metabolites with no involvement of protein factors, and consequently modulate either mrna transcription or translation by adopting one out of two possible structures , known as on and off conformations. riboswitches are usually built around an aptamer domain, which binds to the ligand, and an expression platform domain, which undergoes a structural rearrangement upon the ligandaptamer binding . furthermore, a central role in regulation has been recognized to an overlapping region between these two domains, referred to as switching sequence (or swseq for short hereafter). from an evolutionary standpoint, aptamers are typically highly conserved, as a consequence of its recognition specificity towards the ligand. in contrast, expression platforms are usually far less conserved . previous works have shown that riboswitches can regulate gene expression via three main mechanisms: (i) transcription termination, through the formation of a terminator hairpin or a competitive antiterminator structure, (ii) translation inhibition, by sequestering or releasing the shine-dalgarno (sd) sequence and (iii) alternative splicing regulation, via sequestration/release of alternative splicing sites . understanding the mechanisms of riboswitch structural switching is of broad interest and applicable to a wide range of scientific fields, such as systems biology or drug design, e.g. to design novel engineered genetic circuits , or develop riboswitch-targeting drugs . previous computational efforts targeting riboswitches can be categorized in riboswitch gene finders, and conformational switch predictors . the former category includes several tools, such as infernal, the founding component of the rfam database , and more specific tools such as ribex (abreu) or ribosw . such methods are primarily used for genome-wide analyses, and are based on machine learning approaches. the second category encompasses various methods based on a structural classification of alternative structures, such as parnass , rnashapes and rnabor . family-specific approaches for on/off structure prediction have been employed as well . here we present a novel computational method that can predict the two functional conformations of riboswitches, using merely as input the plain rna nucleotide sequence. importantly, this developed procedure can also be coupled with a classifier to identify putative riboswitch sequences, i.e. to uncover riboswitches based on its potential to generate two alternate configurations.the method presented here is capable of predicting the presence of a riboswitchincluding its two alternate conformationsusing as input only its nucleotide sequence. the procedure consists in three major steps, including: (i) prediction of the switching sequence (swseq), (ii) prediction of the alternate secondary structure conformations and (iii) scoring, and consequent classification, of the sequence as a putative riboswitch . the proposed approach has been tested on the reference dataset, obtaining the results reported in supplementary table s4; moreover, it has been used to investigate a complete set of annotated putative riboswitches from the rfam database (rfam 12.0). our method is fully applicable to any prokaryotic organism at a genome-wide level, targeting single sequences up to 300 nt each.several methods for riboswitch prediction have been proposed, which are based either on predicting the presence of conformational switches, or on predicting riboswitches using homology-based searches . however, none of the current methods is focused on predicting the two riboswitch conformational structures. such a capability would be extremely useful in driving riboswitch engineering and for synthetic biology. for this reason, we propose swispot, a novel computational method to directly address conformational prediction of riboswitches. the scarceness of precise data on riboswitch conformations makes it impossible to build a riboswitch predictor that merely uses a statistical or machine learning approach. despite the mentioned data shortage, a reference dataset has been defined to properly assess the proposed approach. the proposed modeling effort stems from the first significant result presented in this work: we find a strong computational evidence of the role of the switching sequence in the characterisation of the whole riboswitch system. moreover we find that the switching sequence incorporates most of the information required to drive the switching mechanisms. the novelty of our approach relies on the ability to locate switching sequences, which are then used to predict the alternative conformations, and to finally classify the target rna sequence as a riboswitch or not. notably, previous genome-wide methods to search for riboswitches only looked for aptamer motifs , thus completely ignoring structural predictions. on the other hand, we show that swispot can be paired to these methods, leading to more reliablernabor results, run on the same sequence, show only one peak for the off structure. a smaller peak with partially free sd is present predictions of putative riboswitches. importantly, from this experience we observe that the quality of results depends on the capability of selecting the proper subsequence to analyze, around the aptamer, down to the expression platform, and not beyond. lessons learned in using the proposed algorithms indicate possible future improvements, although apparently difficult to apply. neglecting the energy contribution of the ligand and kinetic/cotranscriptional aspects of the folding process can likely lead to biased samplings of the energy landscapes, where conformations similar to both the alternative structures are not adequately represented. this issue could be addressed by introducing additional, diverse forms of sampling. unfortunately, the lack of real structural data prevents any solid assessment of this kind of improvement. furthermore, the limitation of excluding pseudoknots could be removed, devising new algorithms for the swseq extractor and the constrained folder . future work will investigate possible improvements within each single module, as well as the provision of new functionalities in additional modules.  
