genome analysis sylarray: a web server for automated detection of mirna effects from expression data a useful step for understanding the function of micrornas (mirna) or sirnas is the detection of their effects on genome-wide expression profiles. typically, approaches look for enrichment of words in the 3 utr sequences of the most deregulated genes. a number of tools are available for this purpose, but they require either in-depth computational knowledge, filtered 3 utr sequences for the genome of interest, or a set of genes acquired through an arbitrary expression cutoff. to this end, we have developed sylarray; a web-based resource designed for the analysis of large-scale expression datasets. it simply requires the user to submit a sorted list of genes from an expression experiment. sylarray utilizes curated sets of 3 utrs to attach sequences to these genes and then applies the sylamer algorithm for detection of mirna or sirna signatures in those sequences. an intuitive system for visualization and interpretation of the small rna signatures is included. availability: sylarray is written in perl-cgi, perl and java and also uses the r statistical package. the source-code, database and web resource are freely available under gnu public license (gpl). the web server is freely accessible atnon-coding rnas can have a profound influence on global mrna expression. small rnas such as small interfering rnas and micrornas bind to 3 utrs of mrnas as a part of the rna-induced silencing complex . this binding event stimulates cleavage or degradation of the target molecule . efficiency of silencing is determined by various factors, the most important one being complementarity to the target mrna 3 utr in a conserved region of 68 nt, also called the seed . analysis of the overrepresentation of particular seeds in 3 utrs across an experimental gene set can be used to detect the influence of specific mirnas and sirnas on an expression profile . recently, the sylamer algorithm was devised to assess significantly over or under-represented words in 3 utr sequences according to a sorted gene list (van). the original algorithm required the user to provide both an ordered to whom correspondence should be addressed. gene list of sufficient size and a matching set of 3 utr sequences. in order to make this approach accessible to non-expert users we have developed sylarray. sylarray combines a curated database of 3 utrs with a userfriendly interface to visualize and detect the influence of mirnas or sirnas on gene expression profiles. several other tools have been published with similar aims, such as diana-mirextra and geneset2mirna . sylarray allows for analysis of larger number of species, containing a premade database of both filtered 3 utrs and coding sequences for seven model organisms. we will continue to update and maintain the sylarray database with new arrays and platforms as they become available.  
