synchronized navigation and comparative analyses across ensembl complete bacterial genomes with insyght motivation: high-throughput sequencing technologies provide access to an increasing number of bacterial genomes. today, many analyses involve the comparison of biological properties among many strains of a given species, or among species of a particular genus. tools that can help the microbiologist with these tasks become increasingly important.faced with an ever-increasing number of sequenced genomes, biologists need efficient and user-friendly tools to assist them in their analyses. in this context, tools that facilitate comparative genomics analyses (i.e. conservation of gene neighborhood, presence/absence of orthologous genes, phylogenetic profiling, etc.) of large amounts of data are needed. we have recently developed insyght, a comparative genomic visualization tool that tightly integrates three complementary views: (i) a table for browsing among homologs, (ii) a comparator of orthologs functional annotations and (iii) a genomic organization view that improve the legibility of genomic rearrangements and distinctive loci. insyght benefits from an easy and smooth navigation between these three views and provides users with a powerful search mechanism. in, we focused mainly on insyght visualization capabilities and functionalities but the underlying database contained, at that time, only 400 complete bacterial genomes. here, we have processed the 2688 complete bacterial genomes available in ensembl bacteria when we started this work (june 2014) to provide a more comprehensive coverage of the microbial diversity. we have also developed a virtual machine that allows users to easily set up their own local insyght server to analyze their genomic data privately.in this note, we report the successful integration and availability of a non-trivial amount of complete genomes in insyght. nevertheless, it will be increasingly difficult for us to process the huge number of newly sequenced genomes, in particular with the advent of 3 rd generation sequencing technologies that are capable of providing completely assembled genomes. to tackle this issue, we provide a customizable version of insyght via the virtual machine described above that will allow the user to import part of our public database and to add a set of private genomes, either complete or in draft. in practice, we plan to restrict the public dataset to a single best representative for each group of closely related genomes and to allow users to extract only species in a particular taxonomic node (of course limiting this possibility to manageable amounts of transferred data).  
