synlinker: an integrated system for designing linkers and synthetic fusion proteins synthetic fusion proteins have shown great potential in various biotechnological and (bio)pharmaceutical applications. they usually contain more than two protein domains joined by a linker peptide sequence which is often selected intuitively or in ad hoc manner. thus, we developed an integrated web-based system, synlinker, to provide appropriate linker candidates for constructing fusion proteins. we compiled a total of 2260 linker sequences comprising of natural linkers extracted from a set of non-redundant multi-domain proteins in protein data bank and artifi-cial/empirical linkers collected from literature and patents. multiple query interface allows users to search for the desired linker candidates based on selection criteria and their preferences. in addition, a selected linker can be combined with two domain structures which are uploaded and appended at its n and c terminals, thereby predicting a de novo structure of the fusion protein. hence, synlinker can serve as a systematic tool for researchers who are interested in designing synthetic fusion proteins. availability and implementation: synlinker is freely available at http://bioinfo.bti.a-star.edu.sg/ synlinker.a synthetic fusion protein is constructed to improve properties or new functionality by synergistically connecting multiple proteins into one single complex via a peptide linker sequence . however, it is not straightforward to identify a suitable linker since its length or amino acid composition may affect the fusion proteins to be misfolded , expressed at low levels and reduce bioactivity . the linker selection is done mostly ad hoc and still based on random test in experiments. thus, two interesting bioinformatics tools have been developed for helping rational design of fusion proteins and selection of their linkers. the first one is linker program, which was an online server for automatically generating linker sequences for fusion proteins . unfortunately, this server website is not accessible any more. the second tool is linkerdb, a database of linkers extracted from natural multi-domain proteins . this database provides linker candidates via user-defined query interface with respect to their protein data bank (pdb) code, sequence, length and secondary structure. however, no further update or improvement has been made ever since it was created although pdb database has expanded tremendously during the last decade. hence, in order to provide most updated linker candidates, we built synlinker for synthetic fusion protein design. for the comparison of linker design tools including synlinker, refer to the supplementary information.  
