systems biology sysbions: nested sampling for systems biology motivation: model selection is a fundamental part of the scientific process in systems biology. given a set of competing hypotheses, we routinely wish to choose the one that best explains the observed data. in the bayesian framework, models are compared via bayes factors (the ratio of evidences), where a models evidence is the support given to the model by the data. a parallel interest is inferring the distribution of the parameters that define a model. nested sampling is a method for the computation of a models evidence and the generation of samples from the posterior parameter distribution. results: we present a c-based, gpu-accelerated implementation of nested sampling that is designed for biological applications. the algorithm follows a standard routine with optional extensions and additional features. we provide a number of methods for sampling from the prior subject to a likelihood constraint. availability and implementation: the software sysbions is available from http://www.theosysbio.bio.ic.ac.uk/resources/sysbions/given a set of models proposed to explain some observation, we seek to rank them according to the extent to which they are supported by some data. likelihood-based approaches find the point at which the likelihood function is maximized, and compare models based on these maxima . bayesian approaches for model selection rest on bayes factors: the ratio of evidences of competing models. a number of methods exist to estimate the evidence , a metric of the support afforded to a model by some data. nested sampling is a bayesian method for evidence estimation and parameter inference for systems where a likelihood function can be defined . as the algorithm progresses, it generates samples from the posterior parameter distribution directly. we present a c-based nested sampling tool for computational biologists. the user supplies a likelihood function, some experimental data and the prior parameter distribution. the program returns a value for the evidence alongside samples from the posterior parameter distribution. there exists a fortran-based nested sampling package, multinest , used in the astrophysics community. our work is aimed specifically at the biological community and includes an sbml (systems biology markup language,) parser so that models can be specified according to current standards. the recent growing use of nested sampling in systems biology invites the release of a tool implementing the method .  
