systems biology systematic analysis of gene properties influencing organ system phenotypes in mammalian perturbations motivation: diseases and adverse drug reactions are frequently caused by disruptions in gene functionality. gaining insight into the global system properties governing the relationships between genotype and phenotype is thus crucial to understand and interfere with perturbations in complex organisms such as diseases states. results: we present a systematic analysis of phenotypic information of 5047 perturbations of single genes in mice, 4766 human diseases and 1666 drugs that examines the relationships between different gene properties and the phenotypic impact at the organ system level in mammalian organisms. we observe that while single gene perturbations and alterations of nonessential, tissue-specific genes or those with low betweenness centrality in proteinprotein interaction networks often show organ-specific effects, multiple gene alterations resulting e.g. from complex disorders and drug treatments have a more widespread impact. interestingly, certain cellular localizations are distinctly associated to systemic effects in monogenic disease genes and mouse gene perturbations, such as the lumen of intracel-lular organelles and transcription factor complexes, respectively. in summary, we show that the broadness of the phenotypic effect is clearly related to certain gene properties and is an indicator of the severity of perturbations. this work contributes to the understanding of gene properties influencing the systemic effects of diseases andphenotypic traits are observable characteristic features of organisms reflecting the architecture of their biological systems. deciphering genetic factors as well as system properties associated to phenotypic traits is still a central problem in biology, and enormous efforts have been devoted to solve it. this knowledge is fundamental for the understanding and interference with a disturbed biological system state such as a disease.the recent explosion of omics data has accelerated the discovery of novel relationships between genotypes and complex phenotypes such as multifactorial disorders and drug-induced perturbations where multiple and often unknown genes and environmental factors are involved. for example, genome-wide association studies in human populations are expanding the repertoire of genes linked to diseases , and the systematic analyses of adverse effects of drugs and their molecular targets are elucidating novel mechanisms of drug action . systematic single gene perturbation screenings in bacteria, yeast and mice have illustrated that the phenotypic responses occurring after single gene perturbations are greatly variable. while perturbations of essential genes cause lethal effects, other gene alterations show undetectable, subtle or environment-dependent phenotypes . despite this observed phenotypic diversity, the majority of system-level analyses of perturbations has centered on gene properties linked to lethal phenotypes. for example, several topological properties of genes in proteinprotein interaction networks such as betweenness centrality (hereafter named betweenness) have been associated with lethality . moreover, tissue gene expression and cellular localization of genes have also been related to lethality of perturbations in multicellular organisms . in particular, genes expressed in multiple tissues tend to be essential both in human and mouse . in contrast, gene products localized in vacuoles have been found enriched among human essential genes whose orthologous genes are not essential in mouse . although the knowledge about the association of gene properties with lethality is relevant to understand severe perturbations such as lethal monogenic disorders, novel conceptual approaches are needed to analyze system properties of non-lethal perturbations frequently observed in humans such as complex disorders or drug treatment. in this regard, the number of side effects of a drug has been used as a measurement of the severity of drug response and has been studied in relation to the number of protein targets and to the essentiality and centrality of drug targets in human proteinprotein interaction networks. however, this measurement does not take into account the diversity of impaired organ systems. for example, a drug exhibiting many side effects related to the same organ system would be considered as being as severe as a drug affecting to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
