sequence analysis systematic comparison of rna-seq normalization methods using measurement error models motivation: further advancement of rna-seq technology and its application call for the development of effective normalization methods for rna-seq data. currently, different normalization methods are compared and validated by their correlations with a certain gold standard. gene expression measurements generated by a different technology or platform such as real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qrtpcr) or microarray are usually used as the gold standard. although the current approach is intuitive and easy to implement , it becomes statistically inadequate when the gold standard is also subject to measurement error (me). furthermore, the current approach is not informative, because the correlation of a normaliza-tion method with a certain gold standard does not provide much information about the exact quality of the normalized rna-seq measurements. results: we propose to use the system of me models based on qrt pcr, microarray and rna-seq gene expression data to compare and validate rna-seq normalization methods. this approach does not assume the existence of a gold standard. the performance of a nor-malization method can be characterized by a group of parameters of the system, which are referred to as the performance parameters, and these performance parameters can be consistently estimated. different normalization methods can thus be compared by comparing their corresponding estimated performance parameters. we applied the proposed approach to compare five existing rna-seq normaliza-tion methods using the gene expression data of two rna samples from the microarray quality control and sequencing quality control projects and gained much insight about the pros and cons of these methods.rna-seq is a recently developed platform for transcriptome study using the next-generation sequencing technology. it offers the possibility to generate quality measurements of transcript/gene expression levels with a whole-genome coverage and single-nucleotide resolution. compared with the other widely used technology microarray, rna-seq is believed to have a lower level background signal and a wider dynamic range of detection . since its advent, rna-seq has been used in many transcriptome studies . although rna-seq is promising, it is known that many factors could introduce variation and bias to rna-seq data, including the random primers , mapping method used in an rna-seq experiment as well as the molecular constitution and secondary structure of the rna sample under study . therefore, proper normalization methods are needed to denoise and normalize the rna-seq data before they are used in downstream analysis such as gene expression level quantification and differential expression detection.proposed to use reads per kilobase of exon model per million mapped reads (rpkm) to normalize rna-seq data. the rpkm method is by far the most widely used rna-seq normalization method. the validity of the rpkm method depends on the assumption that the reads count a gene receives follows a poisson distribution with a constant intensity rate. however, the assumption of a constant intensity rate was found to be invalid in rna-seq data.showed that a poisson distribution with a constant rate cannot explain the non-uniformity of the reads across the same gene or exon, andshowed the existence of overdispersion in rna-seq reads data. a number of methods have been proposed to improve the rpkm method, and they can be grouped into three categories. the first category consists of methods that use more sophisticated distributions to accommodate overdispersion. for example, srivastava and chen (2010) proposed to use a two-parameter generalized poisson model and developed a method called proposed to use poisson mixture models and developed a method called pmseq. the second category includes methods that adjust the expression level measurement of a gene by some identified sources of variation or bias. for example,proposed to use the gc content of a gene to correct its gene expression level measurement; in the rest of the article, we refer to their method as the gcr method. methods in the third category assume that the reads count a nucleotide receives not only depends on the expression level of the transcript, but it also depends on the sequencing preference of its neighborhood. an example of this type of method is the mseq method proposed by, which incorporates local sequencing preferences into the framework of poisson linear models. as new methods continue to appear, it is important to systematically compare different rna-seq normalization methods. to evaluate a normalization method, two aspects of the method are of particular importance. the first aspect is the concordance of the expression level measurements generated by a normalization method with the true expression levels. the second aspect is whether a normalization method would produce consistent measurements when it is applied to rna-seq data of same biological condition generated from different experiments. in previous rna-seq studies, two major criteria are used for assessing a normalization method following the schema proposed by, which are referred to as the precision and accuracy criteria. the precision of a method is defined to be the correlation between measurements from replicated experimental runs, and the accuracy is defined to be the correlation coefficient of the expression level measurements generated by the method with a gold standard. the expression measurements from a different platform are usually used as the gold standard. these two criteria are intuitive and popularly used. the precision criterion can assess the consistency between repeated experimental runs. however, the validity of using the accuracy criterion to evaluate the performance of a rna-seq normalization method depends on how accurate the gold standard is. currently, in the reported comparison studies of rna-seq normalization methods, polymerase chain reaction (pcr)-based technology and microarray are two common choices of the gold standard. microarray is known to suffer from various types of bias and variation. although many normalization methods have been proposed for microarray data, variations and biases in microarray data cannot be completely eliminated. pcr-based technology is well acknowledged to be of high accuracy, but it is still subject to errors. it has been pointed out that there exist a number of factors that contribute variations to pcr data, including primerdimer accumulation, pcr product reannealing and dna polymerase binding to primers . it is known in statistics that when the gold standard is subject to measurement errors (mes), directly using the correlation coefficient with the gold standard to evaluate a normalization method can be inadequate. unfortunately, a gold standard free of mes may never be available due to the complexity involved in transcriptome study. a statistically more appropriate approach to assessing different normalization methods is to directly estimate the bias and variance of the normalized rna-seq measurements using me models. a system of such me models lately was used to calibrate rna-seq and microarray gene expression level measurements with real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qrtpcr) for more accurate transcriptome profiling (z.sun et al., unpublished manuscript). through the system, the biases and variances from qrtpcr, microarray and rna-seq can be estimated. in this article, we further utilize the system to facilitate the comparison of different rna-seq normalization methods. we applied the developed approach to compare five existing rna-seq normalization methods, which are rpkm, gpseq, mseq, gcr and pmseq, using gene expression data of two rna samples from the microarray quality control (maqc) and sequencing quality control (seqc) projects.we applied the system of me models to analyze the five combinations of x, y and z l for l 1,. .. , 5 separately to compare the five rna-seq normalization methods. estimates of the structural parameters were divided into two groups, denoted by b h l and b x l , according to the discussion in section 2. in this section, we first report diagnostic results regarding the assumptions imposed on the mes. second, we examine the coherence of b x l s for different ls. third, we provide detailed comparison of the five rna-seq normalization methods based on b h l : at the end of this section, we show that the comparison between the five normalization methods based on correlation coefficients is insensitive and non-informative.  
