bioimage informatics tactics, an interactive platform for customized high-content bioimaging analysis installation of tactics requires matlab 7.6 (r2008a) with the pres-ence of image processing toolboxtm and statistics toolbox we describe a modular matlab toolbox named tactics for time-lapse image analysis that meets several requirements not generally offered by currently available software packages: (i) the ability to assess quality of extracted imaging information by directly linking data end points to the original position, (ii) massively parallel analysis of each parameter, for flow cytometry-like assessment of possible relationships between parameters within sub-populations of the images, (iii) options for user control of the tracking such as an interface to restrict the analysis region, (iv) manual correction of automated processes and (v) user interfaces for post-tracking analysis that is linked to the original images, including options to view cell pedigrees and normalized polarization ratios based on fluores-cence ratiometric measurements. availability and implementation: we provide tactics source code as well as video tutorials, data sample and comprehensive user guide on the tactics toolbox website (http://www.tactics-toolbox.com).the past decade has seen dramatically increased use of time-lapse microscopy to address how cells communicate and respond to external signals. owing to the volume and complexity of output from time-lapse imaging, biologists require a simple yet high-throughput platform with which to extract meaningful data. herein, we present a generic platform for high content analysis (hca) that is straightforward yet multi-featured and highly adaptable by matlab developers. tactics is structured from several collaborative modules that can be interactively used for extraction, inspection and presentation of timelapse imaging data. this simplifies the analysis scheme, allowing unfamiliar users to use the program intuitively. each tactics module enables user-friendly visualization of the original, filtered and segmented images with optional display of cell index, trajectories and proximity vectors between cells in different channels. the tactics graphical user interface is characterized by selection tools and interactive slider-bars that simplify the optimization of settings for image processing. information about the image-processing procedures and the experimental information is collected and stored. some aspects of the application of tactics to analyse migrating lymphocytes have been illustrated recently , and further features are described below.where visual inspection indicates errors in the automated segmentation or tracking, an interface for manual correction is available. false detections can be removed with a mouse click using the cell tracking module. poorly segmented cells can be either improved or discarded. developers can easily incorporate other tracking algorithms for other types of migration patterns, or cell parameters as presented recently . options for manual correction of the tracks include rejection of invalid track points, definition of a new track point, track splitting (following a cell division) and track flipping. finally, all tracks can be filtered out by optional parameters such as velocity and length. massively parallel analysis. quantitative information about morphological and geometric descriptors of each cell is extracted and logged. next, the measurements module enables visualization and data exploration to quantify the spatiotemporal history of a specific cell, record data on population basis and quantify properties such as asymmetry of fluorescence. tactics can analyse multi-spectral images of multiple labelled cells, enabling quantification of intracellular protein localization by combining one channel for segmentation and tracking, a second channel for alignment and a third channel to quantify the protein of interest. once defined, a customized list of cell features such as morphology, cell migration, fluorescence ratiometric coefficients and protein localization is automatically generated and saved to a selected folder in the multiple-position batch mode to create data libraries. the list is adaptable, and developers can easily add other features by requirement . importantly, these parameters can be displayed and compared on a cell-by-cell basis, and the data can be gated on the basis of individual parameters to determine correlations between different parameters as demonstrated previously . the measurements module allows the combined quantification and visualization from multiple channels, such as the ability to track interactions between cells in different channels. applications include the generation of lineage trees to track cellular behaviours over many generations, and traceable descriptors of immune cell velocity with direction of movement and proximity to other interacting cells. each module in tactics can be re-called repeatedly for each position by using the robust module to automate the extraction of multi-parameter information from many simultaneously imaged individual cells on a population basis. thus, tactics provides high-throughput automation with minimum human intervention, with the capacity to refer back to the original images throughout the process. in summary, tactics provides both ease of use for biologists with limited software expertise, as well as the flexibility for developers to incorporate additional bioinformatic processes for cell segmentation and cell tracking.  
