tadtool: visual parameter identification for tad-calling algorithms eukaryotic genomes are hierarchically organized into topologically associating domains (tads). the computational identification of these domains and their associated properties critically depends on the choice of suitable parameters of tad-calling algorithms. to reduce the element of trial-and-error in parameter selection, we have developed tadtool: an interactive plot to find robust tad-calling parameters with immediate visual feedback. tadtool allows the direct export of tads called with a chosen set of parameters for two of the most common tad calling algorithms: directionality and insulation index. it can be used as an intuitive, standalone application or as a python package for maximum flexibility. availability and implementation: tadtool is available as a python package from github (https:// github.com/vaquerizaslab/tadtool) or can be installed directly via pypi, the python package index (tadtool).chromosome conformation capture (3c) studies , specifically their high-throughput derivative hi-c , have revealed the hierarchical folding of eukaryotic genomes. chromatin has been found to be typically organized into genomic regions with a strong enrichment of intra-chromosomal contacts . these regions, termed self-or topologically-associating domains (tads), can range in size from hundreds to thousands of kilobases with smaller domains often being nested within larger ones . a number of algorithms to identify tads computationally have been developed. among the most popular and intuitive are the directionality index and insulation index . the former calculates upstream and downstream contact biases for each locus along the genome tad boundaries are then generally demarcated by strongly directionally biased loci. the latter uses a rectangular sliding window approach to sum up contacts within a given region surrounding each locus-as tads are regions of increased contacts, they can easily be identified via contact count cutoffs. the properties of identified domains critically depend on the parameter choice of the applied tad-calling algorithms. for the directionality index, the window size around a locus for which biases are computed primarily determines the size of the identifiable tads. the cutoff used for biases strongly influences the sensitivity and specificity of tad identification. changing the window size and contact cutoff in the insulation index algorithm has similar effects. finding suitable, robust parameters for the data set of interest is often a multistep, iterative process of testing and recalculation. to reduce the element of trial-and-error and to facilitate the meaningful identification of self-associating domains, we have developed tadtool: an interactive plot that assists in choosing relevant tadcalling parameters with immediate visual feedback.  
