bioimage informatics tango: a generic tool for high-throughput 3d image analysis for studying nuclear organization motivation: the cell nucleus is a highly organized cellular organelle that contains the genetic material. the study of nuclear architecture has become an important field of cellular biology. extracting quantitative data from 3d fluorescence imaging helps understand the functions of different nuclear compartments. however, such approaches are limited by the requirement for processing and analyzing large sets of images. results: here, we describe tools for analysis of nuclear genome organization (tango), an image analysis tool dedicated to the study of nuclear architecture. tango is a coherent framework allowing biologists to perform the complete analysis process of 3d fluores-cence images by combining two environments: imagej (http://imagej. nih.gov/ij/) for image processing and quantitative analysis and r (http://cran.r-project.org) for statistical processing of measurement results. it includes an intuitive user interface providing the means to precisely build a segmentation procedure and setup analyses, without possessing programming skills. tango is a versatile tool able to process large sets of images, allowing quantitative study of nuclear organization. availability: tango is composed of two programs: (i) an imagej plug-in and (ii) a package (rtango) for r. they are both free and open source, available (http://biophysique.mnhn.fr/tango) for linux, microsoft windows and macintosh osx. distribution is under the gpl v.2 licence.the nucleus is a heterogeneous and compartmentalized organelle. the spatial localization of genes and nuclear compartments within the nucleus affects cellular functions, such as regulation of gene expression, dna replication and repair . the underlying mechanisms are still a matter of extensive investigation. nuclear organization can be studied using several imaging techniques. for example, immunocytochemistry and fluorescence in situ hybridization (fish) allow the selective fluorescent labeling of protein-enriched compartments and chromosomal domains, respectively. though recent microscopes facilitate the acquisition of large sets of 3d images, the automatic processing and analysis of those images remains a difficult task. several software programs have already been developed. cellprofiler , which is one of the most popular, only performs 2d analysis. fishfinder and nemo perform 3d analysis but have limited image processing and analysis capabilities. to overcome these limitations, we have developed tools for analysis of nuclear genome organization (tango), an image analysis framework, which permits biologists to perform the complete analysis process of 3d fluorescence images: image processing, quantitative analysis and statistical processing. a potential application is the study of radial position variations of various structures (such as genes or centromeres) with respect to the nuclear membrane or to nucleoli, throughout the cell cycle.tango is a versatile software, which, owing to a large collection of 3d processing operations and measurements as well as a convenient data visualization and analysis system, allows biologists to obtain quantitative information regarding the organization of the nucleus. we have successfully detected and analyzed various types of fish (e.g. bac probes or chromosome territories) and immunocytochemistry (e.g. centromeres or nucleoli) signals. tango is integrated into imagej and r, both of which are modular open-source software widely used in the scientific community, allowing one to benefit from the rich potential of the two environments when using tango (supplementary).(b). the data browsing tab of the user interface provides access to the different levels of objects: (a) nuclei, (b) structures contained in the selected nuclei (in the present case: centromeres and nucleoli), (c) segmented objects contained in the selected structures. different visualizations of a nucleus:(d) 3d, (e) overlay. contours of selected objects in (c) can be interactively displayed on (e), which is useful to assess quality of segmentation  
