databases and ontologies targethub: a programmable interface for mirna–gene interactions motivation: with the expansion of high-throughput technologies, understanding different kinds of genome-level data is a common task. microrna (mirna) is increasingly profiled using high-throughput technologies (microarrays or next-generation sequencing). the downstream analysis of mirna targets can be difficult. although there are many databases and algorithms to predict mirna targets, there are few tools to integrate mirnagene interaction data into high-through-put genomic analyses. results: we present targethub, a couchdb database of mirnagene interactions. targethub provides a programmer-friendly interface to access mirna targets. the web site provides restful access to mirnagene interactions with an assortment of gene and mirna identifiers. it can be a useful tool to integrate mirna target interaction data directly into high-throughput bioinformatics analyses. availability: targethub is available on the web atunderstanding genome-level data is a recurring task in molecular biology research, made more challenging with the development of numerous high-throughput technologies. one interesting aspect of genome biology involves micrornas (mirnas), which are gaining significant attention for their regulatory roles in human pathologies . mirnas are frequently profiled using high-throughput technologies, such as microarrays or next-generation sequencing . the downstream analysis of mirna data generated from such massive platforms needs efficient bioinformatics methods. mirnas regulate the expression of protein-coding genes by inhibiting translation and, in some cases, by cleaving the associated messenger rna (mrna) . many computational methods predict such regulation based on sequence features, such as complementarity and free energy, of mirna, mrna and their duplex . potential mirna targets are often identified by seeking agreement among multiple prediction methods for a particular interaction. currently, several databases, including tarbase , mirecords , mirgator and mirgen , contain mirna target predictions from multiple methods. the web sites of these databases provide graphical interfaces to manually access and search the data. however, for a complete mirna high-throughput analysis, it is currently necessary to download the complete database of target information and write customized scripts to parse the data, as there is no support for programmatic access to subsets of the mirnagene interaction data. here we present targethub, a new programmer-friendly database of mirnagene interactions. targethub is a schema-free database that can be accessed as a web service from any modern programming language using a simple hypertext transfer protocol (http) call. this interface supports automatic integration of mirna target information into high-throughput mirna data analyses. the targethub web site can also be used to manually access and search the mirnagene interactions with mirna identifiers and an assortment of gene identifiers powered by genesmash .targethub offers a web site and web service to access mirna gene interactions. it is a restful database with a programmerfriendly interface through the api. maintaining a local copy of targethub is hassle-free, due to the built-in support for replication. in summary, targethub can be a useful tool to integrate mirna target information into high-throughput genomic analyses.  
