tarpred: a web application for predicting therapeutic and side effect targets of chemical compounds motivation: discovering the relevant therapeutic targets for drug-like molecules, or their unin-tended off-targets that predict adverse drug reactions, is a daunting task by experimental approaches alone. there is thus a high demand to develop computational methods capable of detecting these potential interacting targets efficiently. results: as biologically annotated chemical data are becoming increasingly available, it becomes feasible to explore such existing knowledge to identify potential ligandtarget interactions. here, we introduce an online implementation of a recently published computational model for target prediction , tarpred, based on a reference library containing 533 individual targets with 179 807 active ligands. tarpred accepts interactive graphical input or input in the chemical file format of smiles. given a query compound structure, it provides the top ranked 30 interacting targets. for each of them, tarpred not only shows the structures of three most similar ligands that are known to interact with the target but also highlights the disease indications associated with the target. this information is useful for understanding the mechanisms of action and toxicities of active compounds and can provide drug repositioning opportunities.an emerging avenue that brings system biology to drug discovery is polypharmacology, which hypothesizes that most drugs exert their effects via multi-target interactions . such drug promiscuity has also led to unwanted and unexplained drug reactions. it is therefore in high demand to develop in silico approaches for identifying potential biological targets for chemical compounds, which can be used to: (i) obtain small molecules with optimum therapeutic effects, (ii) explore ligandtarget interactions and their related biochemical mechanisms and (iii) increase research productivity towards valid drug repositioning. recently, the rapid growth of bioassay data volume has brought new opportunities to in silico target prediction. a plethora of ligand-based target prediction models has been proposed . for example, the) is a featured one among them that quantitatively estimates pharmacological relationships of targets by the set similarities of their respective ligands. these relationships have led to the discovery of many new uses and side effects for drugs. by compiling a large reference library containing 533 drug relevant target families, 179 807 individual ligands and a total of 246 053 binding data between them, we initially developed an efficient and accurate target fishing scheme using k nearest neighbor (knn)-based data fusion with molecular similarity searching . compared with sea, the proposed approach exhibited superior performance on predicting both therapeutic and off targets for the approved drugs from drugbank and therapeutic target database (ttd). it also showed excellent results on other external validations that try to identify newly reported ligandtarget interactions or to predict side effect targets for drugs withdrawn due to human ether-a -go-gorelated gene (herg) toxicity. to bring more benefits of this approach, we here present a user-friendly web application that permits easy and effective drug targets prediction.  
