databases and ontologies tasirnadb: a database of ta-sirna regulatory pathways in plants, many transacting small interfering rna (ta-sirna) regulatory pathways have been identified as significant components of the gene networks involved in development, metabolism, responses to biotic and abiotic stresses and dna methylation at the tas locus. to obtain a more comprehensive understanding on the nature of ta-sirna regulatory pathways, we developed a freely accessible resource, tasirnadb, to serve as a repository for the sequences of ta-sirna regulatory pathway-related micrornas, tass, ta-sirnas and ta-sirna targets, and for the cascading relations among them. with 583 pathways from 18 species, tasirnadb is the largest resource for known ta-sirna regulatory pathways currently available. tasirnadb also provides a tool named tasexpanalysis that was developed to map user-submitted small rna and degra-dome libraries to a stored/input tas and to perform srna phasing analysis and tas cleavage analysis. availability: the database of plant ta-sirna regulatory pathways is available atin plants a classical phase-initiator!tas transcript & ta-sirna!target gene cascade model for the ta-sirna regulatory function has been well determined . briefly, a phase-initiator (usually a mirna, but sometimes a sirna) cleaves the transcript of ta-sirnas-producing locus (tas) by binding argonaute (ago) proteins 1/7. then, rdr6 (rna-dependent rna-polymerase 6)-dependent conversion of the resulting cleaved fragments into dsrna and subsequent cleavage by dicer-like 4 (dcl4) at every $21 nucleotides (nt) relative to the phase-initiator cleavage site generates a tasirna. the ta-sirna further cleaves its target rna to regulate gene expression by binding ago1 proteins. the ta-sirna regulatory pathways have been identified as important elements in the gene networks involved in development, metabolism, response to biotic and abiotic stresses and dna methylation at the tas locus . recently, the cascade system has also been used as a valuable tool in functional genomics studies . until recently, only a few ta-sirna regulatory pathways were characterized; but now, with the development and application of integrative genome-wide approaches, including the genome-wide computational identification of tass and the cleaved validation of mirna/ta-sirna-targeting site based on degradome analysis or 5 0 race, about 600 ta-sirna regulatory pathways have been reported in different plants. however, no comprehensive and integrated ta-sirna-related database is currently available. here, we present a database called tasirnadb of known plant ta-sirna regulatory pathways, which can serve as a repository for the sequences of ta-sirna pathway-related mirnas, tass, ta-sirnas and ta-sirna targets, and for the cascading relation among them. tasirnadb also offers a tool named tasexpanalysis, which has been developed to map user-submitted rna and degradome libraries to a tas and to allow users to perform tas cleavage analysis and srna phasing analysis within tasirnadb.  
