team: efficient two-locus epistasis tests in human genome-wide association study as a promising tool for identifying genetic markers underlying phenotypic differences, genome-wide association study (gwas) has been extensively investigated in recent years. in gwas, detecting epistasis (or genegene interaction) is preferable over single locus study since many diseases are known to be complex traits. a brute force search is infeasible for epistasis detection in the genome-wide scale because of the intensive computational burden. existing epistasis detection algorithms are designed for dataset consisting of homozygous markers and small sample size. in human study, however, the genotype may be heterozygous, and number of individuals can be up to thousands. thus, existing methods are not readily applicable to human datasets. in this article, we propose an efficient algorithm, team, which significantly speeds up epistasis detection for human gwas. our algorithm is exhaustive, i.e. it does not ignore any epistatic interaction. utilizing the minimum spanning tree structure, the algorithm incrementally updates the contingency tables for epistatic tests without scanning all individuals. our algorithm has broader applicability and is more efficient than existing methods for large sample study. it supports any statistical test that is based on contingency tables, and enables both family-wise error rate and false discovery rate controlling. extensive experiments show that our algorithm only needs to examine a small portion of the individuals to update the contingency tables, and it achieves at least an order of magnitude speed up over the brute force approach.genetic association analysis examines the statistical correlation between an organisms genotype with its phenotype. with the development of high-throughput genotyping technologies, genetic variation of human and other model organisms has been measured at genome-wide scale. as the most abundant source of genetic variation, the number of single nucleotide polymorphism (snps) in public databases (dbgap, jax) is up to millions. genome-wide association study (gwas) has been shown to be a promising tool to locate the genetic factors that cause phenotypic differences . epistasis, or genegene interaction detection, has received increasing attention in complex trait analysis. different from singlelocus approach, the goal of two-locus epistasis detection is to identify interacting snp pairs that have strong association with the phenotype. please refer to, hirschhorn and, hoh and ott (2003) andfor reviews of current progress and challenges in epistasis detection in gwas. to whom correspondence should be addressed.there are two grand challenges in epistasis detection. the first is to develop statistical tests that can effectively capture the interaction between snps. various tests have been proposed for two-locus association study, such as the chi-square test, likelihood ratio test and entropy-based test . another crucial challenge in two-locus association study is the intensive computational burden imposed by the enormous search space. suppose that there are n snps for m individuals. the overall search space of pairwise interactions is mn(n 1)/2. the large number of tests also causes the multiple testing problem . controlling the familywise error rate (fwer) and false discovery rate (fdr) are standard ways to control the error rate . in the fwer and fdr controlling, permutation test is preferred over simple bonferroni correction since many snps are correlated . the correlation structure among genotype profiles is preserved across permutations and is incorporated into permutation p-value estimation. the idea of permutation test is to randomly shuffle the phenotype values among the individuals and recalculate the test statistics. the distribution of these test values are used to estimate the null distribution. permutation test dramatically increases the search space. with k permutations, the entire search space of two-locus association mapping is kmn(n 1)/2. consider a moderate gwas setting, in which m = 1000, n = 100 000 and k = 1000. the size of the search space is about 510 15. apparently, a brute force enumeration of the search space is infeasible and thus efficient algorithms are in demand. although the computational challenge of epistasis detection has been well recognized, the algorithmic development is still very limited. for a small number of snps, e.g. from tens to a few hundreds, exhaustive algorithms that explicitly enumerate all possible snp combinations have been developed . these methods are not scalable for genome-wide computing. genetic algorithm has been proposed. this approach is heuristic, which does not guarantee to find the optimal solution. to avoid explicitly exploring the entire search space, a common heuristic used in epistasis detection is a two-step approach . first, a subset of snps are selected according to certain criteria. then the selected snps are used for subsequent epistatic analysis. however, the snp screening process suffers from the same problem as the single-locus approach. snps with strong epistasis but low marginal effects are likely to be filtered out . recently, the approach based on search space pruning has been shown to be able to dramatically speed up the process of epistasis detection without compromising the optimality of the results. fastanova and fastchi are specifically designed for anova test and chi-square test,respectively. the coe algorithm is a more general approach that is applicable to all convex tests. utilizing an upper bound derived for the test being used, these algorithms only need to examine a small number of promising snp pairs and prune the snp pairs that are proven to have no strong association with the phenotype. unlike heuristic approaches, these algorithms are guaranteed to find the optimal solution. although these methods provide promising alternatives for gwas, there are two major drawbacks that limit their applicability. first, they are designed for relatively small sample size and only consider homozygous markers (i.e. each snp can be represented as a 0,1 binary variable). in human study, however, the sample size is usually large and most snps contain heterozygous genotypes and are coded using 0,1,2. these make existing methods intractable. second, although the fwer and the fdr are both widely used for error controlling, existing methods are designed only to control the fwer. from a computational point of view, the difference in the fwer and the fdr controlling is that, to estimate fwer, for each permutation, only the maximum two-locus test value is needed. to estimate the fdr, on the other hand, for each permutation, all two-locus test values must be computed. further details of the fwer and the fdr controlling are described in section 2. in this article, we propose an exhaustive algorithm, team (tree-based epistasis association mapping), for efficient epistasis detection in human gwas. team has several advantages over previous methods. @bullet it supports to both homozygous and heterozygous data.@bullet by exhaustively computing all two-locus test values in permutation test, it enables both fwer and fdr controlling.@bullet it is applicable to all statistics based on the contingency table. previous methods are either designed for specific tests or require the test statistics to satisfy certain property. @bullet experimental results demonstrate that team is more efficient than existing methods for large sample study. team incorporates permutation test for proper error controlling. the key idea is to incrementally update the contingency tables of two-locus tests. we show that only four of the 18 observed frequencies in the contingency table need to be updated to compute the test value. in the algorithm, we build a minimum spanning tree on the snps. the nodes of the tree are snps. each edge represents the genotype difference between the two connected snps. this tree structure can be utilized to speed up updating process for the contingency tables. a majority of the individuals are pruned and only a small portion are scanned to update the contingency tables. this is advantageous in human study, which usually involves thousands of individuals. extensive experimental results demonstrate the efficiency of the team algorithm.  
