techniques to cope with missing data in host–pathogen protein interaction prediction motivation: approaches that use supervised machine learning techniques for proteinprotein interaction (ppi) prediction typically use features obtained by integrating several sources of data. often certain attributes of the data are not available, resulting in missing values. in particular, our hostpathogen ppi datasets have a large fraction, in the range of 5885 of missing values, which makes it challenging to apply machine learning algorithms. results: we show that specialized techniques for missing value imputation can improve the performance of the models significantly. we use cross species information in combination with machine learning techniques like group lasso with 1 / 2 regularization. we demonstrate the benefits of our approach on two ppi prediction problems. in our first example of salmonellahuman ppi prediction, we are able to obtain high prediction accuracies with 77.6 precision and 84 recall. comparison with various other techniques shows an improvement of 9 in f1 score over the next best technique. we also apply our method to yersiniahuman ppi prediction successfully, demonstrating the generality of our approach. availability: predicted interactions, datasets, features are available atidentification of proteinprotein interactions (ppis) between a pathogen and its hosts will not only give us insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying pathogenisis but also provide us with potential targets aiding in the development of pathogen-specific therapeutics. computational methods complement experimental methods in studying ppis by predicting highly probable interactions, which are used by experimentalists to filter out unlikely interactions from the prohibitively large set of potential interactions that need to be tested. in particular, supervised machine learning methods use the existing known interactions as training data and formulate the interaction prediction problem in a classification setting, with target classes: interacting or non-interacting. features are derived on the data by integrating various attributes of proteins, which include protein sequences from uniprot , protein family from pfam , protein structure from pdb, gene ontology (go) from the go database , gene expression from geo , interactions to whom correspondence should be addressed. between protein families from ipfam , protein domain interactions from 3did , to name a few. although these attributes are available for some proteins, many of them remain unknown for various reasons: they are a part of ongoing experimental studies, difficulty of experimentation due to the nature of the protein, lack of efficient high-throughput techniques, limited pace of manual curation from published literature, etc. such unavailable information results in missing values in the dataset. missing values make the application of any machine learning algorithm and data analysis technique difficult, as most approaches were designed to work on complete or nearly complete data. imputation of missing values involves exploiting available information about the data in order to best estimate the missing entries. thus, the choice of an appropriate missing value imputation method is very important in order to build good predictive models. here, we develop methods to deal with missing values for host pathogen ppi prediction. prior work on ppi prediction within the supervised learning framework deals with missing values in one of the following ways. eliminate all data with missing values. and use a random forest (rf) classifier-induced imputation originally introduced by , which uses mean values of features in combination with proximity to other instances. the abstaining variant of adaboost originally introduced by has been applied by . the work by adds one extra binary indicator feature for every existing feature to indicate its availability. limit the data sources used to generate features so as to exclude the possibility of any missing values. as the main application of our techniques, we consider salmonellahuman ppi prediction, which is an important step towards developing our understanding of salmonello-sis, a disease that causes millions of infections and thousands of deaths every year world-wide . the bacterium salmonella has 4533 protein sequences in the reference proteome set in uniprot database, known molecular functions for 1058 proteins in go, protein structures for 592 proteins in pdb and protein family information for 2978 proteins in pfam database. approaches that construct features integrating data from these databases will thus have many missing values since not all attributes are available for all proteins across all databases. in the example dataset of salmonella human ppi that has 62 known interactions, with our feature set we find that 58 of the interactions have at least one feature with missing values. to cope with missing values, we can apply standard statistical imputation methods or develop application-specific methods that take advantage of the particular properties of the data being imputed. our work falls in the second category and is novel in its use of the author(s) 2012. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.the method we present is general and can be used whenever there is available data from a related distribution. the proposed use of abundantly available cross-species data is analogous to sampling the missing values of a feature from another related feature distribution. we demonstrate the generality of our approach by successfully extending our modelling efforts to predict ppis in yersinia pestis.we presented an imputation technique for dealing with missing values that arise in ppi prediction tasks. the improvements we obtain on both hostpathogen ppi datasets over prior approaches that use generic imputation methods clearly show the superiority of our method. we further observe that the importance of the imputed features in the learned classifiers is significant, implying that their imputation is important for prediction. although our current work shows improvements in accuracy, we believe that the resulting models which are based on the mar missingness assumption are less biased by the imputation technique as compared to the other commonly used methods. characterizing and measuring such model bias as a consequence of imputation will be an interesting direction for future study, as it will make model selection more principled. funding: in part, richard king mellon foundation, erasysbio+ from the european union and bmbf to shiprec, nih (p50gm082251 and 2ro1lm007994-05), and nsf (ccf1144281).  
