systems biology tefma: computing thermodynamically feasible elementary flux modes in metabolic networks elementary flux modes (efms) are important structural tools for the analysis of metabolic networks. it is known that many topologically feasible efms are biologically irrelevant. therefore, tools are needed to find the relevant ones. we present thermodynamic tefm analysis (tefma) which uses the cellular metabolome to avoid the enumeration of thermodynamically infeasible efms. specifically, given a metabolic network and a not necessarily complete metabo-lome, tefma efficiently returns the full set of thermodynamically feasible efms consistent with the metabolome. compared with standard approaches, tefma strongly reduces the memory consumption and the overall runtime. thus tefma provides a new way to analyze unbiasedly hitherto inaccessible large-scale metabolic networks. availability and implementation: https://an elementary flux mode (efm) is a steady-state pathway that consists of an indivisible set of reactions . efms permit a system wide analysis of metabolism and can be used to identify engineering targets . different approaches were published to calculate efms in large metabolic models. for instance,split a metabolic network into subnetworks and calculated the efms for each subnetwork in parallel. others only enumerated the set of the shortest efms or randomly sampled the full set of efms . a complete efm analysis for large genomescale models is still out of reach as the number of efms increases dramatically with the size of the metabolic network requiring inhibitingly large computing resources. to tackle this problem the biological relevance of efms needs to be taken into account as only a small set of efms are biologically relevant . therefore, tools are necessary to find those subsets of (biologically) relevant efms.enumerated only those efms that were consistent with a given transcriptional regulatory network. here, we use a network-embedded thermodynamic (net) analysis to detect and remove thermodynamically infeasible efms already during their enumeration. thermodynamic efm analysis (tefma) applies the net principle and uses metabolite concentrations and the compounds gibbs energy of formation to determine the energy surface of an efm. at a constant pressure a biochemical reaction only proceeds spontaneously if its gibbs free energy of reaction is negative . if the thermodynamic information is available for a reaction, it can be tested for its thermodynamic feasibility. tefma does not only analyze the feasibility of an isolated reaction, but considers the gibbs free energy of reaction for all reactions contributing to an efm. tefma is computationally much more efficient than a sequential approach, where an ordinary efm analysis is followed by a net analysis . the reason for this is that tefma checks the feasibility of (intermediate) efms continuously and eliminates infeasible ones during the enumeration process. this reduces the computational costs significantly.by integrating the metabolite concentrations into the efm enumeration we killed two birds with one stone. first, we strongly reduced the memory usage and the runtime of the efm enumeration. second, we got a step further to only calculate the set of biological relevant efms. both points are essential to reach the final goal of calculating efms in large, genome-scale models. we stress that tefma greatly reduces the computational costs. thus an efm analysis of medium-scale models become possible already on current high-end personal computers and no longer requires a dedicated high performance computing environment.numbers in brackets list the percentage compared to efma.  
