gene expression temporal waves of coherent gene expression during drosophila embryogenesis motivation: animal development depends on localized patterns of gene expression. whole-genome methods permit the global identification of differential expression patterns. however, most gene-expression-clustering methods focus on the analysis of entire expression profiles, rather than temporal segments or time windows. results: in the current study, local clustering of temporal time windows was applied to developing embryos of the fruitfly, drosophila melanogaster. large-scale developmental events, involving temporal activation of hundreds of genes, were identified as discrete gene clusters. the time-duration analysis revealed six temporal waves of coherent gene expression during drosophila embryogenesis. the most powerful expression waves preceded major morphogenetic movements, such as germ band elongation and dorsal closure. these waves of gene expression coincide with the inhibition of maternal transcripts during early development, the specification of ectoderm, differentiation of the nervous system, differentiation of the digestive tract, deposition of the larval cuticle and the reorganization of the cytoskeleton during global morphogenetic events. we discuss the implications of these findings with respect to the gene regulatory networks governing drosophila development. availability: data and software are available from the uc berkeley web resourcedrosophila embryogenesis has been divided into 17 separate stages, each stage marked by global changes of embryo morphology, such as cellularization, gastrulation, germ band elongation (gbe), germ band retraction (gbr) or dorsal closure (dc). different parts of an embryo might undergo simultaneous morphological changes. parallel developmental events, such as dc and head involution, might begin at the same time (stages 1415), but terminate at different stages. based on the time and the duration parameters, to whom correspondence should be addressed. the parallel events can be mapped to a 2d parameter space and separated. thus, parallel and temporally overlapping events can be separated and analyzed (locally) with respect to distinct time and duration parameters. these parameters are convenient for the classification of peaks of gene expression observed in the global time series data. presence of temporal peaks of expression with similar time/duration properties might indicate a functional link between genes, even if the genes expression profiles are not similar. complete expression data have been obtained for the entire developmental time course of drosophila melanogaster using both expression and tiling microarrays . previous analyses of these datasets have shown that the vast majority of genes exhibit at least 4-fold expression changes during embryogenesis and most genes have two or more major temporal peaks of expression during the life cycle. such reengagement of genes and gene networks has recently been demonstrated during the development of the mosquito embryo, anopheles gambiae (d.papatsenko, m.levine and u.goltsev, personal communication). these studies suggest that morphologically distinct and temporally separated developmental events, such as formation of the serosa and cuticle, depend on the deployment of coherent gene batteries. a recent study by hooper and co-workers (2007) identified a number of time points during fly development when clusters of genes coherently change their expression levels. using an approach initially introduced for the analysis of development in dictyostelium , hooper and co-workers have identified several coherently switching classes of genes in drosophila, including maternal (off switch), activated (on switch) and transient (peak) expression types. this clustering strategy relies on local similarities (coherent on/off switches) in the global expression data. the time-duration analysis of fly development described in this study represents an unsupervised learning algorithm [a supervised method was introduced earlier (, similar to the temporal-clustering method implemented by hooper and co-workers (2007). technically, the method can be classified as a query-driven, local clustering of time series expression data . in this study, the search patterns (queries) were temporal sequences corresponding to two major types of gene activity: peak (transient type) and switch (activated type). the search patterns were matched to the expression profiles locally (time windows), in orderpage: 2732 27312736  
