teqc: an r package for quality control in target capture experiments teqc is an r/bioconductor package for quality assessment of target enrichment experiments. quality measures comprise specificity and sensitivity of the capture, enrichment, per-target read coverage and its relation to hybridization probe characteristics, coverage uniformity and reproducibility, and read duplicate analysis. several diagnostic plots allow visual inspection of the data quality. availability and implementation: teqc is implemented in the r language (version 2.12.0) and is available as a bioconductor package for linux, windows and macos from www.bioconductor .org.next-generation sequencing technologies have made it possible to sequence efficiently a whole genome. however, in population studies, the current cost for sequencing entire human genomes at sufficient read coverage is still prohibitively expensive. alternatively, targeted sequencing is a promising approach to identify variants in large numbers of individuals focusing on specific regions of interest (e.g. linkage regions or the complete exome) that are selected and enriched previous to deep sequencing. a frequently used application for the enrichment of the target sequences is based on hybridization with pre-designed probes, either on microarrays or in solution. the hybridized molecules are captured (i.e. eluted from the microarrays or pulled-down from the solution, respectively), and are then amplified and sequenced . many tools exist to check the quality of the sequenced data . quality criteria can be sequencing error rates, per-base phred scores, total number of sequenced reads, and fraction of reads aligning to the respective reference genome. however, in target enrichment experiments, it is additionally crucial to assess whether the capture of the targeted regions was successful. here, we have developed teqc, an r/bioconductor package that enables users to leverage a multitude of methods to monitor the target enrichment process. our tool allows to answer specific technical questions, among others whether most of the sequenced reads actually fall on the target and whether most of the targeted bases reach sufficient to whom correspondence should be addressed. coverage for follow-up analyses like variant detection. moreover, teqc allows to evaluate the amount of read duplication and its effect on target coverage, as well as the relation between gc content of the capture hybridization probes and coverage for the respective bases.  
