tess: an r package for efficiently simulating phylogenetic trees and performing bayesian inference of lineage diversification rates many fundamental questions in evolutionary biology entail estimating rates of lineage diversification (speciationextinction) that are modeled using birthdeath branching processes. we leverage recent advances in branching-process theory to develop a flexible bayesian framework for specifying diversification modelswhere rates are constant, vary continuously, or change episodic-ally through timeand implement numerical methods to estimate parameters of these models from molecular phylogenies, even when species sampling is incomplete. we enable both statistical inference and efficient simulation under these models. we also provide robust methods for comparing the relative and absolute fit of competing branching-process models to a given tree, thereby providing rigorous tests of biological hypotheses regarding patterns and processes of lineage diversification. availability and implementation: the source code for tess is freely available at http://cran.r-pro ject.org/web/packages/tess/.stochastic-branching process models (e.g. birthdeath models) describe the process of diversification that gave rise to a given study tree, and include parameters such as the rate of speciation and extinction. statistical analysis of lineage diversification rates involves: (i) simulating trees under null and alternative hypotheses; (ii) estimating parameters in, e.g. a bayesian framework, and; (iii) evaluating the relative and absolute fit of candidate models. these considerations motivated our development of tess, an r package for statistical inference of lineage diversification rates that allows researchers to address three fundamental questions: (i) what are the rates of the process that gave rise to my study tree? (ii) have diversification rates changed through time in my study tree? (iii) is there evidence that my study tree experienced mass extinction? we compare tess to other software in the accompanying vignette (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/tess/).  
