bioimage informatics testing for presence of known and unknown molecules in imaging mass spectrometry motivation: imaging mass spectrometry has emerged in the past decade as a label-free, spatially resolved and multipurpose bioana-lytical technique for direct analysis of biological samples. however, solving two everyday data analysis problems still requires expert judgment: (i) the detection of unknown molecules and (ii) the testing for presence of known molecules. results: we developed a measure of spatial chaos of a molecular image corresponding to a mass-to-charge value, which is a proxy for the molecular presence, and developed methods solving considered problems. the statistical evaluation was performed on a data-set from a rat brain section with test sets of molecular images selected by an expert. the measure of spatial chaos has shown high agreement with expert judges. the method for detection of unknown molecules allowed us to find structured molecular images corresponding to spectral peaks of any low intensity. the test for presence applied to a list of endogenous peptides ranked them according to the proposed measure of their presence in the sample. availability: the source code and test sets of mass-to-charge images are available atimaging mass spectrometry (ims) is a label-free technique for spatially resolved chemical analysis by acquiring mass spectra across the sample surface. a tremendous development of ims and considerable increase of applications in biology and medicine have been observed over the past decade . various types of ims were developed for diverse sample types ranging from biological and plant tissues to bio and polymer thin films . in this article, we consider the matrixassisted laser desorption/ionization ims (maldi-ims) , which plays the leading role in the rapidly developing field of ims-based metabolomics, lipidomics and proteomics. maldiims is used for imaging of drugs and their metabolites , histopathological analysis of biopsy sections and discovery of new biomarkers and drugs . given a sample, usually a tissue section, maldi-ims acquires mass spectra at discrete spatial points across the sample surface, providing a so-called datacube or hyperspectral image, with a mass spectrum measured at each pixel . a mass spectrum represents the relative abundances of ionizable molecules with various mass-tocharge ratios (m/z), ranging for maldi-ims from several hundred up to a few tens of thousands m/z. a channel of a maldi datacube corresponding to an m/z-value is called an m/z-or molecular image and expresses the relative spatial abundances of a molecular ion with this m/z-value. maldi-ims data are large with a typical dataset comprising 500050 000 spectra where each spectrum has a length of 1000 50 000 m/z-bins. in current practice, such datasets are analyzed either manually or using data-mining methods. manual analysis requires an expert to go over all m/z-values, plot their m/z-images and examine them visually. if there is any prior knowledge about the sample [a histological annotation or pre-specified regions of interest (, then the visual analysis aims to correlate the intensity patterns visible in m/z-images with the region of interest. usually, one is interested in m/zimages showing high intensities in the region of interest and low intensities in the rest of the sample. however, often there is no prior knowledge given or it does not describe the spatial localization of molecules of interest completely. for example, detection of drug metabolites cannot be done by specifying the region, as these metabolites will not necessarily all localize in the drug target area . in the case of no prior knowledge on localization of molecules of interest, the visual analysis aims at finding m/z-images, which exhibit spatially structured intensity patterns (so-called spatially structured m/zimages) as opposed to those which exhibit just noise (so-called spatially unstructured m/z-images). we refer to this problem as to the detection of unknown molecules in maldi-ims data. in this article, we propose an automatic method that solves this to whom correspondence should be addressed. problem without specifying a region of interest a priori and without visual examination. another unsolved problem of maldi-ims data analysis is the test for presence of known molecules when their localization is unknown. for example, given a list of possible drug metabolites or proteins, one needs to test for their presence in the tissue section. with only few molecules to be tested, one can visually examine m/z-images of these molecules and judge whether they are spatially structured. however, the visual analysis in not feasible for a large number of molecules and cannot be exploited in automatic pipelines. we propose an automatic method solving this problem. in this article, we present a new approach to analysis of maldi-ims data, which resembles the visual analysis described earlier in the text but selects spatially structured m/z-images automatically. the core of this approach is the ranking of m/z-images by their level of spatial structure, similarly to how it can be done by the naked eye. the ranking is based on the original measure of spatial chaos, does not have parameters and can be used in a completely unsupervised manner. the spatial chaos is defined as a lack of spatial pattern in the pixels intensities; the proposed measure of spatial chaos is low for an image exhibiting spatially structured intensity pattern and is high for an image with spatially chaotic pixels intensities. the problem of estimating a measure of spatial chaos of an image is almost not addressed in the literature. most publications on structure detection deal with finding structured patterns either of a given shape or based on edge detection , but not with estimating the level of structure. to the best of our knowledge, there is only one publication considering a similar problem , which presents a statistical method for testing the null hypothesis that an image is devoid of structure. thus, defining a measure of chaos of an m/z-image is new, challenging and certainly requires an evaluation. we propose and apply a statistical evaluation approach by using a well-studied maldi-ims dataset from a rat brain section . based on the ranking of m/z-images by their measure of spatial chaos, we propose solutions to the two described problems. first, we will show how to detect unknown molecules by calculating the measure of chaos of all m/z-images and selecting least chaotic m/z-images. this can be used, in particular, for highly sensitive peak picking by selecting a peak of any intensity if its m/z-image exhibits any spatial structure, whereas all established peak picking methods at least partially rely on intensity and suffer from low sensitivity. second, we will show how to test for the presence of known molecules by calculating the measure of chaos for their m/z-images and taking least chaotic m/z-images. this can be used for searching for drug metabolites of unknown localization. we propose how the test for presence can improve current maldiims-based protein identification approaches.our motivation to exploit a measure of spatial chaos to detect unknown molecules and to test for presence of known molecules is as follows. selecting structured m/z-images after visual examination of m/z-images is the well-accepted approach of manual analysis maldi-ims data and is a part of everyday work of an imaging mass spectrometrist. assuming any spatial differentiation of the sample, one is normally interested in molecules whose spatial distribution across the sample is not homogeneous. normally, only molecules corresponding to baseline signals (e.g. matrix) have homogeneous distribution. in maldi-ims, the baseline signals can have non-zero intensities. owing to the strong pixel-to-pixel variation, which is inherent to maldiims, their m/z-images exhibit noise and look unstructured.  
