genetics and population analysis testing multiple gene interactions by the ordered combinatorial partitioning method in case–control studies motivation: the multifactor-dimensionality reduction (mdr) method has been widely used in multi-locus interaction analysis. it reduces dimensionality by partitioning the multi-locus genotypes into a high-risk group and a low-risk group according to whether the genotype-specific risk ratio exceeds a fixed threshold or not. alternatively, one can maximize the 2 value exhaustively over all possible ways of partitioning the multi-locus genotypes into two groups, and we aim to show that this is computationally feasible. methods: we advocate finding the optimal mdr (omdr) that would have resulted from an exhaustive search over all possible ways of partitioning the multi-locus genotypes into two groups. it is shown that this optimal mdr can be obtained efficiently using an ordered combinatorial partitioning (ocp) method, which differs from the existing mdr method in the use of a data-driven rather than fixed threshold. the generalized extreme value distribution (gevd) theory is applied to find the optimal order of gene combination and assess statistical significance of interactions. results: the computational complexity of ocp strategy is linear in the number of multi-locus genotypes in contrast with an exponential order for the naive exhaustive search strategy. simulation studies show that omdr can be more powerful than mdr with substantial power gain possible when the partitioning of omdr is different from that of mdr. the analysis results of a breast cancer dataset show that the use of gevd accelerates the determination of interaction order and reduces the time cost for p-value calculation by more than 10-fold. availability: c++ program is available atanalysis of genegene interaction is of great concern in modern genetic studies . with a large number of genes, classical statistical methods such as the logistic regression and pearsons 2 test may not be appropriate due to high degree of to whom correspondence should be addressed. freedom involved . methods that can detect multi-locus interacting genes that may have been overlooked by a single-locus analysis are of central importance in genetic association studies. multifactor-dimensionality reduction (mdr) is a non-parametric and model-free method that was developed for detecting highorder genegene interaction in the absence of marginal effects . operationally, the mdr method divides the multi-loci genotype combinations into high-and lowrisk groups according to whether the ratio of cases to controls exceeds a fixed threshold or not. as noted by, this is a constructive induction method that changes the representation space of the data by reducing/recoding the single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) combinations to a single binary attribute. this results in a 2 2 contingency table and the sparsity and the high-dimensionality problems are greatly alleviated. the pearsons 2 statistic is calculated but with p-value determined using a permutation procedure rather than from a 2 distribution with one degree of freedom (df). empirical studies show that the mdr method is a useful tool for testing high-order genegene interaction . since it was proposed, the mdr method has been widely applied to multi-locus association studies . many efforts have been made to improve the power of mdr, such as the extended mdr (emdr) of, modified mdr methods based on balanced accuracy , likelihood ratio and normalized mutual information or other evaluation measures . some other extensions of mdr such as the odds ratio-based mdr (or-mdr;), model-based mdr (mb-mdr;), log-linear model-based mdr (lm-mdr;) and generalized mdr (gmdr;) were also developed. these extensions make the mdr more flexible in applications . in recent years, many other data mining algorithms for detecting high-order genetic interactions such as classification trees, random forests and multivariate adaptive regression splines (mars) have been proposed .developed a powerful multi-locus parametric test based on tukeys 1-df model of interaction.proposed the focused interaction testing framework (fitf). the performance of neural networks evolved from genetic programming is studied bycompared the performances of six methods for testing main effects and interactions. the six methodspage: 1872 18711878in this section, we first show some simulation results, then we apply our method to a real dataset.mdr is a powerful non-parametric method in genetic interaction studies. many empirical computer studies and real data analyses have demonstrated the impressive capability of mdr in detecting high-order interactions. the key idea of mdr is the pooling of high-dimensional predictors into two distinct groups, which reduces dimensionality and alleviates the sparsity problem. we observe that the power can be further improved by introducing the exhaustive search strategy. in this study, an ocp-based search strategy is proposed for finding the optimal contingency table with largest 2 statistic, which has computational complexity that is dramatically lower than that of the exhaustive search method. the gevd theory is employed to further reduce computational cost. both simulation studies and real data analysis show that the gevd approximation is rather accurate and much more computationally efficient than using the permutation distribution. simulation studies inshow that the mdr method performs robustly in the presence of noise due to genotype error and missing data, but may lose power substantially in the presence of phenocopy.proposed a genegene interaction detection approach based on the support vector machine and demonstrate several advantages of their machine learning method by simulation studies, especially the strong ability (e.g. power and model stability) to handle sample noise. since the omdr method always leads to higher drs than mdr, it is conceivable that our omdr method can deal properly with this noise while mdr does not. the performance of omdr in the presence of these sources of noise will be explored in future studies and compared withmethod. another important issue is the class-imbalance problem in gene gene interaction detection. the generalization ability of many classification methods such as logistic regression will be weakened by extremely imbalanced datasets. in balanced casecontrol design, the threshold used by mdr is 1 which can be naturally adjusted by the ratio of cases to controls when the design is unbalanced.proposes the balanced accuracy function defined as the arithmetic mean of sensitivity and specificity to substitute the accuracy function such as cross-validation consistency and prediction error used in previous literature . simulation shows that the power of the mdr method using this balanced accuracy function with the adjusted threshold can be elevated efficiently. since the variable threshold used in omdr is data-driven, our omdr method can also be applied without modification to detect genegene interactions in unbalanced casecontrol studies.  
