tfbstools: an r/bioconductor package for transcription factor binding site analysis the ability to efficiently investigate transcription factor binding sites (tfbss) genome-wide is central to computational studies of gene regulation. tfbstools is an r/bioconductor package for the analysis and manipulation of tfbss and their associated transcription factor profile matrices. tfbstools provides a toolkit for handling tfbs profile matrices, scanning sequences and alignments including whole genomes, and querying the jaspar database. the functionality of the package can be easily extended to include advanced statistical analysis, data visualization and data integration. availability and implementation: the package is implemented in r and available under gpl-2 license from the bioconductor websitetranscription factor binding sites (tfbss) on dna play a central role in gene regulation via their sequence-specific interaction with transcription factor (tf) proteins . most individual tfbss are 430 base-pairs (bp) wide, but are generally located in larger cis-regulatory regions of 50200 bp. analysis and identification of tfbss is crucial for understanding the regulatory mechanisms of gene regulation. at present, the tfbs analysis functionality in r/bioconductor is limited and scattered across multiple packages. here we introduce an r package tfbstools, which provides a unified and efficiently implemented suite of tfbs analysis tools. the package provides a number of functions for manipulating tfbs profile matrices and searching dna sequence and pairwise alignments using them. we have ported all of the functionality of our popular tfbs perl modules , retaining the equivalent class structure where possible, and expanded the functionality to provide efficient genome-wide analysis of tfbss. our implementation is tightly integrated with the existing bioconductor core packages, enabling high-performance sequence and interval manipulation. a database interface for jaspar2014 , jaspar2016 and wrapper function for de novo motif discovery software are also provided.  
