structural bioinformatics the binding site distance test score: a robust method for the assessment of predicted protein binding sites motivation: we propose a novel method for scoring the accuracy of protein binding site predictionsthe binding-site distance test (bdt) score. recently, the matthews correlation coefficient (mcc) has been used to evaluate binding site predictions, both by developers of new methods and by the assessors for the community-wide prediction experimentcasp8. while being a rigorous scoring method, the mcc does not take into account the actual 3d location of the predicted residues from the observed binding site. thus, an incorrectly predicted site that is nevertheless close to the observed binding site will obtain an identical score to the same number of non-binding residues predicted at random. the mcc is somewhat affected by the subjectivity of determining observed binding residues and the ambiguity of choosing distance cutoffs. by contrast the bdt method produces continuous scores ranging between 0 and 1, relating to the distance between the predicted and observed residues. residues predicted close to the binding site will score higher than those more distant, providing a better reflection of the true accuracy of predictions. the casp8 function predictions were evaluated using both the mcc and bdt methods and the scores were compared. the bdt was found to strongly correlate with the mcc scores while also being less susceptible to the subjectivity of defining binding residues. we therefore suggest that this new simple score is a potentially more robust method for future evaluations of proteinligand binding site predictions.the prediction of a proteins ligand binding site location and potential interacting residues is important in the elucidation of protein function, de novo drug design, mutagenesis studies and ligand binding specificity . the casp experiment included a function prediction category for the first time in casp6 , where the aim was to predict the enzyme commission number (ec) and gene ontology (go) terms. due to the difficulty in assessing these terms, the casp7 assessors decided that casp was not the best place for this format of function prediction. to whom correspondence should be addressed.thus, for casp8, function prediction was included in a different format, with the assessment of observed ligand binding site residues, as many casp targets were shown to crystallize with biologically interesting ligands . in casp8, function predictions were assessed using the matthews correlation coefficient (mcc) . the mcc is a statistical metric that utilizes the number of true positive, false positive, false negative and true negative residues, giving a score between 1 and 1. a score of 1 indicates a prefect prediction and a score close to 0 indicates a random prediction. the mcc provides a good assessment statistic, because it heavily penalizes both over and under predictions and is appropriate for biased datasets, such as binding versus non-binding residues . in order to assess binding residue prediction accuracy, the observed binding site residues must be defined. however, defining which residues are in contact with a ligand can often be subjective, particularly if we consider the inherent flexibility of protein backbones, side chains and many large ligands. the distances used to define residueligand contacts can be adjusted; nevertheless, once a cutoff has been set all non-binding residues are treated as incorrect by the mcc score, regardless of their distance from the site. the top methods in the function prediction category of casp8 were methods by the lee group and the sternberg group . both groups assessed their own predictions by two additional metrics: accuracy and coverage. however, these metrics also penalize close predictions to a similar extent as the mcc statistic . in this article we are proposing a simple new metric, the bindingsite distance test (bdt) score, which addresses the problems associated with the mcc while maintaining the advantages. the score is highly correlated with the mcc, and it appropriately penalizes both under and over predictions, while also considering the distance of predicted residues from the observed binding site.  
