the biological connection markup language: a sbgn-compliant format for visualization, filtering and analysis of biological pathways motivation: many models and analysis of signaling pathways have been proposed. however, neither of them takes into account that a biological pathway is not a fixed system, but instead it depends on the organism, tissue and cell type as well as on physiological, pathological and experimental conditions. results: the biological connection markup language (bcml) is a format to describe, annotate and visualize pathways. bcml is able to store multiple information, permitting a selective view of the pathway as it exists and/or behave in specific organisms, tissues and cells. furthermore, bcml can be automatically converted into data formats suitable for analysis and into a fully sbgn-compliant graphical representation, making it an important tool that can be used by both computational biologists and wet lab scientists. availability and implementation: the xml schema and the bcml software suite are freely available under the lgpl for download at http://bcml.dc-atlas.net. they are implemented in java and supported on ms windows, linux and os x. contact:in a famous commentary regarding systems biology , yury lazebnik, using the analogy between biological pathways and electronic circuits, proposed the use of standard procedures through which even a biologistwithout any specific knowledgecould fix a radio. one of the most challenging goals of modern biology is to decipher and describe the complexity of cell systems, and what lazebnik pointed out is that without the integration of knowledge coming from different fields of science, the efforts of reverse engineering the cell are destined to fail. recently, research on system biology has been characterized by an increasing number of efforts to define common languages for sharing information in multidisciplinary areas with the aim to develop tools to describe accurate models, run effective simulations, visualize, analyze and integrate high-throughput data. networks defined on studies about the interactions occurring within cell macromolecules are key elements for this research. existing biological networks can be classified into four categories, depending on the nature of their nodes and their interactions: metabolic pathways, molecular interactions, gene regulatory networks and signaling pathways . there are many public resources which store and share representations of these networks including kegg , reactome , biocarta (www.biocarta.org), pathway commons (www.pathwaycommons.org) and wikipathways , yet currently there is no gold standard on how biological pathways should be represented. this shortcoming affects particularly signaling pathways: without solid, consistent and unambiguous representations, hypotheses and analyses based on them are affected by an inability to do any proper computational analysis in the worst case, and a loss of power, in the best case. furthermore, a proper representation of a pathway is important to enable efficient knowledge management and integration of data coming from multiple sources. recent efforts on the representation of pathways have followed two main trends: a proper graphical representation and a machine-readable format. on the basis of the existence and the use of graphical and machinereadable formats, pathway representations can be classified into three categories : static, providing a non-modifiable graphical representation; semi-dynamic, representing information not only as a graphical map, but also using a corresponding machinereadable format, which is not, however, strongly interconnected with the graph; dynamic, where the graphical representation format depends directly on the underlying data model, and thus any modification in the latter can be immediately translated to the former. at the time of writing, all pathway representations stored in public databases are either static or semi-dynamic. the most recent example of a pure graphical representation is the system biology graphical notation (sbgn)page: 2128 21272133  
