genome analysis the biological reference repository (bior): a rapid and flexible system for genomics annotation motivation: the biological reference repository (bior) is a toolkit for annotating variants. bior stores public and user-specific annotation sources in indexed json-encoded flat files (catalogs). the bior toolkit provides the functionality to combine and retrieve annotation from these catalogs via the command-line interface. several catalogs from commonly used annotation sources and instructions for creating user-specific catalogs are provided. commands from the toolkit can be combined with other unix commands for advanced annotation processing. we also provide instructions for the development of custom annotation pipelines. availability and implementation: the package is implemented in java and makes use of external tools written in java and perl. the toolkit can be executed on mac os xnext-generation sequencing (ngs) technology platforms are providing unprecedented opportunities to study genomic variants that are associated with clinical conditions and drug response. using ngs technologies, researchers can identify mutations associated with rare diseases, characterize somatic variants in tumor for diagnostic or prognostic purpose or guide therapeutic treatment. although the large amount of data produced by ngs platforms and the time to process them are largely being addressed by expanding the it infrastructure, high-performance computing and code optimization, the annotation process needed to interpret the thousands of variants found in individual genomes is still a challenging task. the annotation process requires extracting and combining information from disparate external and in-house annotation sources, or even command-line tools. several applications such as annovar , gemini and treat have recently been developed to automate the annotation and filtering of genomics variants. however, these systems are restrictive, as expansion and maintenance of annotation depends on the authors availability/willingness, and annotation and filtering are often combined, making integration with other tools challenging. other approaches such as bio2rdf (propose the conversion of annotation sources into resource description framework (rdf) format that can be loaded into a triple store database for querying. this approach, although flexible because it allows independent integration of new annotation sources, presents scalability limitations and does not integrate well with existing command-line tools. under production loads, the number of searches to annotate variants can become extremely large. for instance, the annotation of 30 million variants from 10 whole genome sequencing runs per day, with annotation extracted from 10 data sources would involve 4300 million queries. in this article, we present the biological reference repository (bior), a flexible and scalable infrastructure for the specific purpose of gene and variant annotation. bior is built around a slightly modified version of the json format (http://www.json. org/), referred in this article as tjson. to facilitate usability, bior provides a toolkit (bior toolkit) that includes a set of unix command-line functions to facilitate catalog management and annotation extraction. the bior toolkit is engineered to work in high-performance computing environments and scale to multiple simultaneous instances.bior is an open annotation tool. it includes a toolkit with a base set of commands needed to build and index catalogs and retrieve annotations. annotations can be retrieved based on location (genomic coordinates) or identifiers. the tjson format is used for catalogs and as input/output for most of the toolkit functions facilitating the assembly of complex pipelines. because the tjson format is readable, users can design their own scripts to extract annotation from catalogs. scripts can also be intermixed with toolkit commands as long as the tsjon format is maintained. this stream-based approach on which bior is based significantly reduces memory footprint. in addition, the bior toolkit is inherently parallel and can be configured to take advantage of computers with multi-core architectures. bior catalogs can easily be combined into new catalogs to decrease retrieval time by avoiding multiple crosscatalog queries. in conclusion, bior is a rapid and flexible system for annotating high-throughput genomics experiments.  
