data and text mining the ccpn metabolomics project: a fast protocol for metabolite identification by 2d-nmr we present here the freely available metabolomics project resource specifically designed to work under the ccpnmr analysis program produced by ccpn (collaborative computing project for nmr) (vranken et al., 2005, the ccpn data model for nmr spectroscopy: development of a software pipeline. proteins, 59, 687696). the project consists of a database of assigned 1d and 2d spectra of many common metabolites. the project aims to help the user to analyze and assign 1d and 2d nmr spectra of unknown metabolite mixtures. spectra of unknown mixtures can be easily superimposed and compared with the database spectra, thus facilitating their assignment and identification. availability: the ccpn metabolomics project, together with an annotated example dataset, is freely available via:metabolomics is a newly emerging field of omics research aiming to give an analytical description of the metabolites in complex biological samples and to describe the global, dynamic metabolic response of living systems to biological stimuli or genetic manipulation . nmr spectroscopy is making significant contributions in this burgeoning area: it is successfully being used to identify biomarkers in biofluids for various diseases, to analyze drug toxicity and to determine drugs in vivo efficacy and selectivity . its potential ability to handle complex mixtures of metabolites makes it a primary tool in both identification and quantification of the multitude of different molecules that constitute unprocessed biological mixtures. 1d 1 h nmr spectra of biological mixtures are characterized by extensive peak overlap or spectral congestion , therefore acquisition of 2d nmr spectra (e.g. 1 h-13 c hsqc, hmbc and 1 h-1 h tocsy) is a prerequisite for compound to whom correspondence should be addressed. identification. however, the paucity of metabolomics software with dedicated 2d metabolite spectrum resources and coupled analysis capabilities often makes assignment of metabolite resonances a challenging task. we present here the metabolomics project dataset based on ccpnmr analysis software, consisting of a series of 1d and 2d nmr spectra of 76 standard compounds whose resonances ( 1 h and 13 c) have been fully assigned and annotated. this repository can be efficiently applied to the rapid identification of the metabolic components of unknown mixtures (supplementary tables s1s3).  
