databases and ontologies the cell behavior ontology: describing the intrinsic biological behaviors of real and model cells seen as active agents motivation: currently, there are no ontologies capable of describing both the spatial organization of groups of cells and the behaviors of those cells. the lack of a formalized method for describing the spati-ality and intrinsic biological behaviors of cells makes it difficult to adequately describe cells, tissues and organs as spatial objects in living tissues, in vitro assays and in computational models of tissues. results: we have developed an owl-2 ontology to describe the intrinsic physical and biological characteristics of cells and tissues. the cell behavior ontology (cbo) provides a basis for describing the spatial and observable behaviors of cells and extracellular components suitable for describing in vivo, in vitro and in silico multicell systems. using the cbo, a modeler can create a meta-model of a simulation of a biological model and link that meta-model to experiment or simulation results. annotation of a multicell model and its computational representation, using the cbo, makes the statement of the underlying biology explicit. the formal representation of such biological abstraction facilitates the validation, falsification, discovery, sharing and reuse of both models and experimental data. availability and implementation: the cbo, developed using prot eg e 4, is available atalthough all biological research requires the use of abstract models, currently no standard method exists for describing the biological content of microscope images of tissues, in vitro experiments or in silico simulations of the tissue dynamics of multicellular systems. in the in silico modeling domain, each modeling tool, e.g. compucell3d , chaste and openalea , uses its own model-description language. (we include a glossary of terms, with hyperlinks, in the supplementary material.) these model-description languages focus on representing the computational implementations (simulations) of mathematical multicell models and depend on the specific computational methodologies the modeling tools use to implement objects and their dynamic processes. as a result, these languages do not adequately document the biology that the computational model seeks to describe, i.e. you cannot recreate the biological model from the simulation code. publications of computational models usually include a prose description of the biological model in the body of the paper, with tables listing key biological components and processes.shows such a table from a publication describing a computational model of vascular growth during tumorigenesis . this ad hoc approach to biological model description and distribution has several drawbacks. first, the entity names (cells, molecules) and process names (oxygen consumption, cell proliferation) are not standardized, which impedes retrieval of the model in a search, and perhaps, the understanding and correct reuse of model components once found (not portable, consistent, retrievable or reusable). for example, the use of the word proliferate to describe cell growth and division inmeans that searches using mitosis as a query would not locate the model or the publication (not retrievable). in addition, some journals reproduce tables in papers as images, preventing a search engine from indexing the words within the table. second, the human-readable description of the model in the publication resides separately from its computational instantiation rather than within the executable code that the authors ran to generate their results (not retrievable). frequently, labels in the executable code such as cell-type names are inconsistent with those in the text of the publication (not consistent). physical separation and inconsistencies both obscure the relationship between the underlying biological model that the authors intended to represent and the computational methods they used to instantiate the model. this article presents ontological techniques to reduce these difficulties in the description of multicellular experiments and biological models. these tools allow developers of biological models to directly embed, or link to, a semantic description of the biologic model based on a new multicell-specific ontology. when used in conjunction with existing reference (naming authority) ontologies, such as the gene ontology (go), chebi, foundational model of anatomy (fma), developers can create fully specified biological models, which will greatly enhance others ability to locate, understand, validate and redeploy these biological models. to whom correspondence should be addressed.this initial release of the cbo provides a framework for describing the objects, processes and object-to-processes links typical of multicell experiments, models and simulations. auxiliary vtk files provide a convenient standard description of the spatiotemporal aspects of the biological model. in future work, we will extend the cbo to serve as the basis for a model-description language that can describe both the modeled biology and the computational methods a particular computational implementation uses to model that biology. this model-description language may be a markup language based on the cbo, similar to the sbo and sbml pair, or we may use the cbo in owl-2 in conjunction with appropriate ontologies, such as the opb, as both the ontological basis language and the executable markup language. we hope that the cbo will lead to the creation of repositories of multicell spatiotemporal models similar to, or extending, the biomodels repository. the creation of such repositories of shareable models will facilitate the creation of new validated computational multicell models. in addition, annotating a models source code using the cbo (and other bio-ontologies) and storing it as plain text files in a publicly accessible directory on the world wide web would allow the file to be located using standard web search engines, reducing the need for a central model repository.  
