the chemical component dictionary: complete descriptions of constituent molecules in experimentally determined 3d macromolecules in the protein data bank the chemical component dictionary (ccd) is a chemical reference data resource that describes all residue and small molecule components found in protein data bank (pdb) entries. the ccd contains detailed chemical descriptions for standard and modified amino acids/ nucleotides, small molecule ligands and solvent molecules. each chemical definition includes descriptions of chemical properties such as stereochemical assignments, chemical descriptors, systematic chemical names and idealized coordinates. the content, preparation, validation and distribution of this ccd chemical reference dataset are described. availability and implementation: the ccd is updated regularly in conjunction with the scheduled weekly release of new pdb structure data. the ccd and amino acid variant reference datasets are hosted in the public pdb ftp repository at ftpthe protein data bank (pdb) is the single worldwide repository of information about the 3d structures of biological macromolecules . pdb structures of macromolecules and macromolecularligand complexes provide direct experimental insights into protein function. these structures provide essential information for the understanding of biochemical processes and are critical data for structure-based drug design studies. pdb structure data are also central to the understanding the energetics of intermolecular interactions among proteins and nucleic acids, structure classification and structure prediction. the knowledge obtained through the study of 3d structure data is key to deducing the role of a protein or nucleic acid in human health and disease. to enable this rich interpretation of structural data requires accurate and consistent annotation of the chemical identities and nomenclatures for all of the constituent molecules in the pdb archive. the individual monomers within a polymer, individual ligands and solvent molecules form the principal building blocks or chemical components within a pdb entry. these chemical components form the basis for the high-level macromolecular descriptions of, which consists of organizations that act as deposition, data processing and distribution centers for pdb data. the wwpdb partners are the rcsb pdb ; pdb in europe, pdbe ; pdb in japan, pdbj and biomagresbank, bmrb .  
