the cyni framework for network inference in cytoscape motivation: research on methods for the inference of networks from biological data is making significant advances, but the adoption of network inference in biomedical research practice is lagging behind. here, we present cyni, an open-source fill-in-the-algorithm framework that provides common network inference functionality and user interface elements. cyni allows the rapid transformation of java-based network inference prototypes into apps of the popular open-source cytoscape network analysis and visualization ecosystem. merely placing the resulting app in the cytoscape app store makes the method accessible to a worldwide community of biomedical researchers by mouse click. in a case study, we illustrate the transformation of an aracne implementation into a cytoscape app. availability and implementation: cyni, its apps, user guides, documentation and sample code are available from the cytoscape app storethe availability of large-scale experimental technologies has enabled the routine measurement of global abundances and states of molecular components in cellular systems. in contrast, the experimental measurement of component interactionsimportant for analyses in a network contextis still far more difficult. perhaps for this reason the development of methods that infer networks from transcriptomics or other global molecular measurements has recently received much attention . however, the use and adoption of these methods in biomedical research has been slow. to stimulate the exchange between the network inference and biomedical research communities, we have developed the opensource computational framework cyni that allows to rapidly transform java-based network inference core code into interactive components (apps) of the cytoscape visualization and analysis platform , and thereby to rapidly make novel methods accessible to a large community of biomedical researchers. here, we describe the structure of cyni, and illustrate the implementation of the aracne network inference method , which has confirmed myc as a major regulatory hub in human b cells, and identified a number of new myc targets .  
