the discordant method: a novel approach for differential correlation motivation: current differential correlation methods are designed to determine molecular feature pairs that have the largest magnitude of difference between correlation coefficients. these methods do not easily capture molecular feature pairs that experience no correlation in one group but correlation in another, which may reflect certain types of biological interactions. we have developed a tool, the discordant method, which categorizes the correlation types for each group to make this possible. results: we compare the discordant method to existing approaches using simulations and two biological datasets with different types of omics data. in contrast to other methods, discordant identifies phenotype-related features at a similar or higher rate while maintaining reasonable computational tractability and usability. availability and implementation: r code and sample data are available at https://github.com/siskac/many strategies exist for analyzing high-throughput omics data in order to explore the complexity that differentiates biological groups. the most common analysis is differential expression, which is defined by molecular features that experience large changes in expression or abundance between groups . in addition to differential variance (i.e. groups may not have different mean levels but dissimilar variance) , another analysis that may be relevant is differential correlation or coexpression (dc), which is the change of association of molecular feature pairs between groups (e.g. healthy and disease). these differential associations may indicate molecular interactions that characterize or reflect biological or disease state. examples of dc can be found in both low-and high-throughput studies. for instance, one study using chromatin immunoprecipitation determined the effect of mutant p53 on wild-type p53 in the cell. mutated p53 reduces the binding of wild-type p53 to the p53 response element of p21, mdm2 and pig3, causing dc of p53 and these targets between samples with wild-type p53 and mutant p53 . another study using elisa and a lymphoproliferation assay determined that patients with treated paracoccidioidomycosis had correlation between interleukins and tumor necrosis factor, but there was no correlation in untreated patients . larger-scale studies have identified dc to study how transcription factors can influence the expression of a transcript. in a myeloma study, transcription factor coexpression with genes in pathways was found to be different between the two major subtypes of myeloma . another transcriptomic study that examined expression differences between lean and obese siblings found that negr1 is a central hub in obesity-related dc networks . dc has been investigated with a myriad of approaches. these methods have been reviewed recently . the classical method by fisher transforms the correlation coefficients into z scores and then determines the statistical dissimilarity between the two groups . linear models have been shown to be effective, however, there are deficiencies when there is large differences in variability between groups, which may be relevant when examining omics data from different types of platforms and/ or data from humans or non-experimental model systems. it has been shown that large variability results in incorrect slope estimates . furthermore, slope estimates can be different depending on what feature is considered the dependent or independent variable in the linear model. alternative methods use bayesian models (;). for example, bradley et al. uses pathway information as a prior, which can be beneficial for identification, but pathway knowledge can also be incomplete. very few pathway databases combine interactions between multiple types of molecular features except for kegg (kanehisa, 2000). dawson et al. implemented ebcoexpress, which uses empirical bayes estimation and returns a posterior probability of differential coexpression for each pair of molecular features. another statistical method to determine dc is the expected conditional f-statistic, which modifies the f-statistic from analysis of variance for multiple groups . the f-statistic was adapted to determine molecular feature pairs that share the least variance instead of single features that share dissimilar mean across groups. other methods use partial correlations, hierarchical clustering, principal component analysis and other models to determine dc modules rather than individual pairs . although these types of analyses are informative, they only describe the average behavior of molecular features instead of specific pairs. missing from all of these methods is categorizing the different types of dc scenarios, commonly referred to as binning, where each pair is categorized into all possible paired correlation scenarios. the following are different examples: (i) group 1: , group 2: , (ii) group 1: , group 2: 0, (iii) group 1: , group 2: . example 1 is an extreme version of dc, where the correlation is in opposite directions between groups. example 2 also illustrates dc, except that in group 2 the correlation is zero. finally, example 3 is where there is no dc because the correlation is in the same direction for both groups. most methods are well suited to detect molecular feature pairs with a pattern similar to example 1 (i.e. cross), but are less likely to identify dc molecular feature pairs with a pattern similar to example 2 (i.e. disrupted). molecular feature pairs in example 2 could be biologically relevant since they indicate an interaction in one group that is disrupted in the other group. in this work, we develop a method that uses binning to not only improve the identification of molecular feature pairs that exhibit more significant cross dc as in example 1, but also disrupted dc as in example 2. our method is based on a mixture model originally developed to assess whether microarray experiments could be combined . we have altered the application of this method to determine dc of molecular feature pairs between groups and have named it the discordant method. using the em algorithm , the discordant method estimates a posterior probability for each possible paired correlation scenario to achieve binning. binning increases power since it identifies all possible dc pairs rather than the most extreme. other advantages of the discordant method are computational tractability and ease in choosing initial parameters. we compare our method to fishers method, linear interaction models and ebcoexpress (with simulations to assess specificity and sensitivity for all three methods. we also use the cancer genome atlas (tcga) glioblastoma mirna and transcriptomic data and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) metabolomic and transcriptomic data as a biological validation of the methods.we applied dc analysis to simulations and biological data to identify the ability for each method to determine true positives defined by the simulations and identify pairs that have been previously validated in the respective phenotype. p-values and posterior probabilities are not directly comparable, therefore, molecular feature pairs were ranked by statistical significance for comparison by the respective value depending on the method and ranked lists , i.e. in order of increasing p-values and decreasing posterior probabilities.we have presented the discordant method for identifying dc pairs. discordant categorizes the paired coexpression scenarios by binning, enabling it to determine more dc pairs than the other methods and improves power of detecting disrupted interactions. binning not only improves performance for the discordant method but also facilitates biological interpretation of results. as seen in, discordant identifies more disrupted dc pairs than ebcoexpress and fisher, a trend also found in the simulations (supplementary). discordant also identifies more significant phenotype-related feature pairs in general for both gbm and copd. the gbm dataset produced more significant dc results for phenotype-related features than the copd dataset. the gbm validation set is well curated because there are experimentally validated mirnas involved in gbm, whereas for copd there is less known about the molecular pathways. the sphingolipid-related genes and metabolites were determined by annotation for being in sphingolipid pathways, because there is limited experimental data for specific genes and metabolites. despite the challenges of the copd dataset, we did observe that sphingolipid metabolite-gene pairs were identified earlier in discordant than ebcoexpress and fisher and that there were more sphingolipid metabolite-gene pairs in the top 100 000 pairs in discordant than ebcoexpress and fisher . both gbm and copd have promising results of known and novel targets from discordant. this confirms discordants ability to identify phenotype-related biological processes and indicates the potential that discordant can produce further testable hypotheses. a similar method is to apply linear models with interaction terms. one of the benefits of linear models is that it assumes conditional normality instead of joint normality, meaning that the dependent variable can be non-normal. linear models identified gbm-related mirna pairs in earlier ranks than discordant in the gbm data, but linear models can be difficult to use since it is unclear what should be the dependent and independent variable. we explored this by switching mirna and transcript as the dependent and independent variable and we found it changed the results. we also found that the ranks of unique gbm-related mirna pairs were different between the two analyses. it is highly suggested to only use linear models if it is known what is the independent and dependent variable, such as mirna and transcript, respectively. in terms of run-time, fisher is notably faster than the rest of the methods, ebcoexpress is the slowest and linear and discordant only differ slightly (supplementary). the big o notation for fisher is linear, o(n), where n is the number of feature pairs. for the linear interaction model and discordant it is polynomial, o(n 2 ) and o(2n 3n 2 ). the big o notation for ebcoexpress is not as simple to identify since there are nested em algorithms. ebcoexpress runs about 3-fold longer than discordant in the gbm and copd datasets and it also requires a grid approach to determine hyperparameters. although discordant does not run faster than fisher and its run-time is comparable to linear interaction models, it still performs either equally or better with consistent results. there are some limitations to discordant. we assume independence between pairs, which is not true since features show up in multiple pairs. this assumption is critical to reducing computational complexity, and has been made by others . appropriate sample size is necessary for discordant or any other dc method to work effectively to accurately estimate r between two features. finally, the model assumes there are three gaussian components in the mixture model. to explore the gaussian assumption, we suggest that users apply the r package mixtools or lcmix, which can assess alternative or non-parametric densities . assuming the gaussian case, we then recommend users to first run a mixture model fitting method (such as mclust) on each group to check that there is more than one mixture component (k 1) by comparing the bayesian information content (bic) for different values of k. for the simulations and gbm, we found evidence of k 1, while for copd there was less evidence (data not shown) which is not unexpected considering the more challenging nature of that dataset. future directions for the discordant method is to add more classes ( and ) that would contain correlation coefficients that were highly negative and highly positive to identify cases where there is a stronger linear association in one group versus the other. a challenge with adding these extra classes is that increasing the number of classes and parameters also increases complexity, which means longer run-time. we also want to investigate using discrete data, such as counts from rna-seq experiments. overall, when investigating dc pairs, discordant performs well with respect to usability and accuracy. ebcoexpress, the most analogous method to discordant, was not originally developed to investigate large omics datasets, so it is possible that it could be optimized for that purpose. the fisher method has short run-time but does not perform as well as similar methods. linear interactions terms are effective, but should only be used when the dependent and independent variable are known when used to integrate different types of omics data. the discordant method fills in the drawbacks to all of these methods, in addition to providing a binning of results for easier interpretation.  
