genome analysis accurate computational prediction of the transcribed strand of crispr non-coding rnas motivation: crispr rnas (crrnas) are a type of small non-coding rna that form a key part of an acquired immune system in prokary-otes. specific prediction methods find crrna-encoding loci in nearly half of sequenced bacterial, and three quarters of archaeal, species. these clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crispr) arrays consist of repeat elements alternating with specific spacers. generally one strand is transcribed, producing long pre-crrnas, which are processed to short crrnas that base pair with invading nucleic acids to facilitate their destruction. no current software for the discovery of crispr loci predicts the direction of crrna transcription. results: we have developed an algorithm that accurately predicts the strand of the resulting crrnas. the method uses as input crispr repeat predictions. crisprdirection uses parameters that are calculated from the crispr repeat predictions and flanking sequences, which are combined by weighted voting. the prediction may use prior coding sequence annotation but this is not required. crisprdirection correctly predicted the orientation of 94 of a reference set of arrays. availability and implementation: the perl source code is freely available from http://bioanalysis.otago.ac.nz/crisprdirection.many bacteria and archaea have defense systems that target incoming nucleic acids, termed crispr-cas (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeatscrispr-associated proteins) systems. recent studies have shown that these rnamediated systems are a major antiviral mechanism in prokaryotes . in bacterial genomic sequences, crisprs are characterized by repeated elements (repeats) interspersed with unique spacers. in most systems, rna polymerase transcribes the crispr array in one direction to produce the pre-crispr rna (pre-crrna), which is processed to provide separate small rna effectors (crrnas) that target foreign genetic elements . the mechanism of targeting requires a number of cas (crispr-associated proteins) that are typically encoded nearby to the crispr arrays. most crispr-cas systems target dna from bacteriophages, plasmids and mobile elements in bacterial chromosomes ; however, some crispr-cas systems target rna . the direction of transcription is unknown for most crispr arrays, and current algorithms do not predict direction. normally, only one strand is transcribed and processed into small crrnas, which determines base pairing target specificity. the crrnas provide target specificity through base pairing for the crispr-cas system. therefore, target prediction algorithms permit both potential crrnas to be analyzed, as the correct strand is often unknown . there are several crispr discovery programs available to find these repeat arrays in genomic or metagenomic sequences . the most cited of these (crisprfinder) locates crispr arrays in 46 (1080 in 2355) of the complete genomes of bacteria and in 84 (126 in 150) of archaea. as crt and piler-cr are better suited to automation, they are used in bacterial genome annotation pipelines . recent crispr-cas classifications include three types (iiii) and at least ten subtypes . these are based on multiple criteria, including the presence of specific cas proteins. for those type iii-b systems that target singlestranded rna, appropriate assignment of the direction of crispr expression is essential to accurately identify rna targets and avoid false target predictions. whereas for type i and ii, additional short specific sequences are associated 5 0 or 3 0 of true targets and function in different steps of the crispr-cas process. these sequences are termed protospacer adjacent motifs , and recent work has suggested that these can be further discriminated into target interference motifs and spacer acquisition motifs that function at the different stages . the identification of these additional determinants requires knowledge of the transcribed strand . the ability to accurately identify the target strand would also be useful to determine if during conjugation the single strand initially transferred into the recipient is preferentially targeted . repeats may be dissimilar between the same types in different species, and the relationship between sequence and type is complex, i.e. near identical repeats in the same species can be to whom correspondence should be addressed. associated with different types, e.g. i-b and iii-b , and multiple types commonly exist with a species . however, repeats can independently be clustered and grouped into sequence or structural classes . the most recent analysis puts 3527 repeats into 33 structural motif classes, 40 sequence family classes and 6 superclasses. some of these classes are preferentially associated with specific crispr subtypes . in some types (i and ii), the repeat rna has a stable stem loop, typically with 46 bases in the stem . pre-crrna processing occurs within the repeat, resulting in 5 0 and 3 0 handles derived from the repeats and attached to the spacer . this repeat structure within the pre-crrna is required for processing in type i-f systems . in some systems, the 5 0 crrna handle is uaagaaa derived from the 3 0 end of the repeat . in addition, it has recently been shown that for a few species using type ii systems, crrna transcription can occur from multiple promoter sequences (tanaat 10 like) within the 3 0 end of the repeat . crispr arrays expand by acquiring specific sequences from invading nucleic acids. although it is not completely understood, this adaptation typically involves addition of new spacers at the 5 0 end of the array . however, there is evidence of some systems acquiring new spacers at positions internal to the crispr array . spacers and repeats may subsequently degenerate, then be lost by successive point mutations, deletions or recombination . however, as clear targets of most crrnas are not present in sequence databases, it is difficult to determine if mutations have occurred in spacers. in addition, it is likely that both target nucleic acids and host crrnas are accumulating mutations after the initial contact and spacer acquisition . for example, phages can escape crispr-cas interference via the acquisition of point mutations in their target sequences, and old spacers might accumulate mutations when there is no longer a selective advantage (i.e. in the absence of the target phage/plasmid) . the leader is the sequence that precedes the array and contains both the promoter and 5 0 region before the first repeat . in some characterized systems, there is clear accumulation of point mutations in the repeats (and spacers) at the 3 0 end of the array (leader-distal end). consistent with this observation, current data indicate that new spacers are acquired at the 5 0 (leader) end of the crispr array, and older spacers and repeats decay at the 3 0 end (trailer end spacers) . previous studies have predicted the direction of repeats as parts of larger studies. it has been observed that repeats in archaea are a-rich and this has been used to determine direction in that domain . recently,used a-richness, and the presence of attgaaa(c/g) at the 3 0 end of repeats, to determine the direction of repeats . in this article, we aimed to use information within, and nearby, predicted crispr arrays to determine the direction of transcription. prediction was performed as much as possible independently of the use of biological knowledge (e.g. repeat class), as this is not known for many sequences. the algorithm is described and available as a perl module for a gene prediction and annotation pipeline. this crisprdirection algorithm predicts with490 accuracy the direction of transcription and thus the correct sequences of the crrnas that target foreign nucleic acids. crisprdirection will be useful for more accurate prediction of crispr arrays, and subsequent prediction of their types and targets, such as via crisprtarget .we aimed to develop an algorithm to detect the direction of crispr transcription. this would, as much as possible, be independent of specific biological knowledge for known types of arrays, as often this is neither known nor predicted. such a method could be applied within a pipeline to new instances and potentially new classes of arrays. the predictive methods adopted were (i) searching for attgaaa-like sequence motifs in the repeats, (ii) finding biased nucleotide composition (relative at richness) in the leader and trailer regions of the arrays, (iii) analysis of mutation(s) in the repeats (array degeneracy), (iv) analysis of rna secondary structure in the repeats, (v) finding the longer distance to the next coding gene at the 5 0 and 3 0 ends and (vi) greater number a compared with t in the repeat. these methods are depicted in. a reference set of known direction was assembled by using a set of 26 repeats of experimentally determined orientation in 135 unique arrays. this was extend to 460 repeats by allowing up to three mismatches (see section 2.1).the algorithm described works surprisingly well using a set of relatively easily calculable parameters. at the default level of accuracy, it correctly predicts 94 of reference arrays. higher levels of accuracy (e.g. ppv 0.95 and np 26) are possible by changing some of the parameters. this method can be built into a generic prokaryotic prediction pipeline, without a requirement of knowledge whether the sequence is from bacteria or archaea and without the need to define the type, subtype, class or superclass of the array or repeat. however, it is also possible for users analyzing specific genomes to incorporate biological knowledge, e.g. specific motifs or presence of rna structure into the prediction.  
