structural bioinformatics the labelhash server and tools for substructure-based functional annotation the labelhash server and tools are designed for large-scale substructure comparison. the main use is to predict the function of unknown proteins. given a set of (putative) functional residues, labelhash finds all occurrences of matching substructures in the entire protein data bank, along with a statistical significance estimate and known functional annotations for each match. the results can be downloaded for further analysis in any molecular viewer. for chimera, there is a plugin to facilitate this process. availability: the web site is free and open to all users with no login requirements at http://the function of many proteins is still poorly understood. for proteins with low sequence identity to any other proteins, structural comparison can be used to identify distant homologs. both the number and diversity of structures is rapidly increasing. this helps make the results of a structural approach to functional annotation more informative, but at the same time also computationally more challenging. the function of a protein can often be characterized by a structural motif : a representative substructure formed by functional residues. the function of an unknown protein can therefore be inferred from high similarity of a substructure in this protein to a motif with known function. a variety of methods have been proposed that compute matches to a motif in a collection of structures, some of which are also accessible through a web server or as downloadable program . they differ significantly in one or more of the following aspects: representation of a motif, matching algorithm, statistical model and the set of targets a motif can be matched against. the underlying algorithm for the labelhash web server makes it possible to match motifs against the entire protein databank with minimal restrictions and still obtain results within a matter of minutes. to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
