gene expression the most informative spacing test effectively discovers biologically relevant outliers or multiple modes in expression several outlier and subgroup identification statistics (oasis) have been proposed to discover transcriptomic features with outliers or multiple modes in expression that are indicative of distinct biological processes or subgroups. here, we borrow ideas from the oasis methods in the bioinformatics and statistics literature to develop the most informative spacing test (mist) for unsupervised detection of such transcriptomic features. in an example application involving 14 cases of pediatric acute megakaryoblastic leukemia, mist more robustly identified features that perfectly discriminate subjects according to gender or the presence of a prognostically relevant fusion-gene than did seven other oasis methods in the analysis of rna-seq exon expression, rna-seq exon junction expression and micorarray exon expression data. mist was also effective at identifying features related to gender or molecular subtype in an example application involving 157 adult cases of acute myeloid leukemia. availability: mist will be freely available in the oasis r package atmicroarrays and next-generation sequencing technology can comprehensively profile the transcriptomes and/or genomes of multiple tissue samples in timely and affordable manner. these technologies allow researchers to identify genomic or transcriptomic features that correlate with biologically or clinically important traits. in this way, these technologies have greatly accelerated the discovery of biologically and clinically important genes. it is also possible to discover new biological processes by identifying transcriptomic features that have outliers or multiple modes in their expression distributions. outliers or multiple modes in the data may indicate the presence of distinct biological processes that define clinically meaningful subgroups. thus, several methods that compute outlier and subgroup identification statistics (oasis) have been proposed and used for this purpose. the statistics and bioinformatics literature proposes several oasis methods. for example, nord et al. (2011) use a leaveone-out (loo) procedure to detect rare copy-number variants. given a set of data values for one variable, loo procedures leave out one data value, compute the mean and standard deviation of the remaining data values and then compare the left-out data value to those summary statistics.notes that loo is an effective method not only for detection of single outliers, but also shows that loo is not an effective method for detection of multiple outliers.proposes least median squares (lms) as a robust method to detect multiple outliers. lms first identifies the narrowest interval that includes at least 50 of the data values and then uses the center and width of this interval that captures the bulk of the data to determine whether other data values are outliers.shows that lms effectively identifies outliers even when up to 50 of the observations are outliers. unfortunately, lms is not widely used as an oasis method in the genomics and bioinformatics literature. thus, given the success of lms in other settings, there is a strong motivation to develop lms as an oasis method for analysis of transcriptomic expression data. the dip test (dt) developed byis another potentially robust oasis method that is not widely used in the bioinformatics and genomics literature. the dt evaluates the null hypothesis that a set of data values is unimodal. the dip statistic is the largest difference between the empirical distribution function (edf) and the unimodal distribution function (udf) that minimizes the maximum difference from the edf. thus, a significant dip statistic indicates compelling evidence that a particular set of data values has multiple modes. furthermore, hartigan and hartigan (1985) mathematically proved that the dt has several desirable statistical properties. therefore, there is a compelling reason to consider using the dt as an oasis method for the analysis of transcriptomic expression data.used model based clustering to develop the systematic identification of bimodally expressed regions (siber) method that identifies bimodally expressed features in rnaseq data. siber finds maximum likelihood estimates (mles) for a two-component mixture model and then computes a bimodality index (bi) from those mles. the bi increases with the difference between the two mles for subgroup center, increases with the product of the mles for subgroup size and decreases with the sum of the two mles for variance.showed that siber identified bimodally expressed features equally or more effectively than several other methods proposed in the bioinformatics literature . intuitively, the differences between consecutive ordered data values are very informative regarding the existence of outliers or multiple modes. pyke (1965) called these differences spacings and derived their theoretical properties under many statistical models. pounds (2001) successfully used pykes work to accurately estimate the fraction of clonable dna. therefore, we use pykes theory to develop two novel oasis methods for analysis of transcriptomic expression data.we evaluate the methods described above by their performance on the rna-seq and exon microarray data for pediatric acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (amkl) ofand on the rna-seq data for acute myeloid leukemia (aml) in the cancer genome atlas (https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov).expression features with multimodal distributions or outliers may indicate modification of biological processes that impact disease pathogenesis or prognosis. oasis can be useful tools to discover these expression features. here, we adapted rousseeuws (1984) lms outlier detection algorithm, the dt of hartigan and hartigan (1985) and pykes (1965) theory of spacings into oasis analysis methods. we also compared the performance of these methods to that of the widely used loo procedure and the recently proposed siber method in two example applications. in our first example involving a cohort of 14 cases of pediatric amkl, six of the eight oasis methods successfully identified glis2 as statistically significant at the p 0:01 level in at least one of the four datasets . lms, dip and siber successfully identified glis2 as significant at the p 0:01 level in all four datasets. furthermore, several of the methods placed hundreds of features that perfectly discriminated subjects according to glis2 status or gender among their 1000 most significant findings. included in the glis2 discriminatory features is a novel putative non-coding rna molecule that was not picked up by standard gene expression analysis (data not shown). this molecule has been validated in the laboratory, and the functional consequences of the transcript are being interrogated. this indicates that these oasis methods can successfully discover features with expression values that are indicative of important biological processes. the results from the pediatric amkl cohort also illustrate the strengths and limitations of the oasis methods described in section 2.8. mist and mast failed to identify glis2 as significant in the analysis of the microarray gene expression data because they do not attempt to compute and use estimates of intra-group variability. by computing and using scale estimates, siber, lms and dt successfully identified glis2 as significant at the p 0:01 level. however, for features with adjacent point masses, siber obtained very small-scale estimates and assigned a very high level of significance . these features typically have no mapped reads in most subjects and a very small number of mapped reads (5 or 6) in a few subjects. intuitively, such data are not compelling evidence of potent biological differences. our dataset included many features with adjacent point masses of low expression that were among sibers 1000 most significant results. loo assigns the greatest significance to features with one very extreme outlier . all of the 1000 most significant features by loo showed the same pattern as. one extreme outlier may indicate a biologically relevant feature such as a rare fusion gene; however, an isolated event is not as interesting as a highly prevalent and potent aberration from a population perspective. thus, in practice, the choice of oasis method should be guided by the objective of the investigation, the properties of the dataset, and the strengths and limitations of the various oasis methods. we also evaluated the methods in a cohort of 157 adult cases of aml. in this cohort, mist most effectively identified genderrelated features and lmssst most effectively identified tsg features. the term ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ini n1 2 q enables mist to most effectively identify features with large spacings that divide the cohort into subgroups of roughly equal size, such as gender-related features. however, the term is not as beneficial in identifying features that define subgroups that are less equally balanced in terms of their size. thus, lmssst more effectively identified features that define the multiple subgroups (each comprising a relatively small proportion of the entire cohort) of aml. this suggests that future research should explore the use of other functions to incorporate information about subgroup size into spacingsbased analysis. our results suggest that genomic research may benefit from more rapidly considering and adopting statistical theory and methods that were developed and established before the advent of microarray and next-generation sequencing technologies.show that the performance of siber is comparable to or superior to that of many methods proposed after the advent of modern high-throughput technologies. interestingly, siber is a straightforward extension of modelbased clustering which was developed by . in our example, the performance of other statistical methods was comparable or superior to that of siber. thus, it appears that several of the oasis methods proposed in recent years have only produced a mirage of innovation. this observation supports the recommendation that research in computational biology should shift some emphasis from development of methods to evaluation of existing methods . existing statistical theory and methods are a valuable and a largely underappreciated resource for computational biology and genomics research. oasis methods may prove useful for other applications in computational biology and genomics research. reference alignment profoundly improves the accuracy of genomic copynumber analysis of tumors . however, reference alignment has not yet been used in the analysis of gene expression data because there is not a method to reliably identify reference genes . also, oasis methods may be used to select features for class discovery analysis. future research should explore the utility of oasis methods for these purposes.  
