the mrna landscape at yeast translation initiation sites although translation initiation has been well studied, many questions remain in elucidating its mechanisms. an ongoing challenge is to understand how ribosomes choose a translation initiation site (tis). to gain new insights, we analyzed large sets of tiss with the aim of identifying common characteristics that are potentially of functional importance. nucleotide sequence context has previously been demonstrated to play an important role in the ribosomes selection of a tis, and mrna secondary structure is also emerging as a contributing factor. here, we analyze mrna secondary structure using the folding predictions of the rnafold algorithm. we present a method for analyzing these results using a rank-ordering approach to assess the overall degree of predicted secondary structure in a given region of mrna. in addition, we used a modified version of the algorithm that makes use of only a subset of the standard versions output to incorporate base-pairing polarity constraints suggested by the ribosome scanning process. these methods were employed to study the tiss of 1735 genes in saccharomyces cerevisiae. trends in base composition and base-pairing probabilities suggest that efficient translation initiation and high protein expression are aided by reduced secondary structure upstream and downstream of the tis. however, the downstream reduction is not observed for sets of tiss with nucleotide sequence contexts unfavorable for translation initiation, consistent with previous suggestions that secondary structure downstream of the ribosome can facilitate tis recognition.in the scanning model of translation initiation , a small ribosomal subunit binds at the m7g cap of an mrna transcript and scans in the 3 direction until it reaches the first aug codon in an appropriate sequence context. the small subunit then assembles with the large ribosomal subunit and initiates translation of the open reading frame, terminating upon reaching the first in-frame stop codon. however, some instances of non-standard translational events such as leaky scanning (leaky initiation), alternative translation initiation and initiation at non-canonical to whom correspondence should be addressed.(i.e. non-aug) start codons fall outside the original model . the recognition/initiation event depends partially on the nucleotide sequence context flanking the initiation codon. it has been noted previously that positions 3 and +4 relative to the initiation codon provide particularly strong cues . information-based measures of context based on sequence conservation surrounding aligned tiss suggest that other nucleotide positions also contribute to recognition. the translation relative individual information (trii) score (supplementary material 1.1; m.weir and m.rice, submitted for publication) is a convenient and sensitive measure of sequence conservation in sets of aligned sequences. the trii score of each sequence is the same as its individual information but incorporates background nucleotide frequencies. by taking into account the relative frequencies of all four nucleotides at each position in an alignment of high-confidence functional start sites, trii scores quantify an individual sequences conformance to characteristic nucleotide preferences in the vicinity of the tis. it has been shown that mrna secondary structure can influence scanning and translating ribosomes. in various viruses, escherichia coli and saccharomyces cerevisiae, pseudoknot secondary structures have been associated with frameshifting of translating ribosomes and stop codon readthrough . secondary structure, including pseudoknots, can also influence the selection of a translation initiation site (tis). examples include functioning of viral internal ribosome entry sites (ires) and modulation through riboswitches characterized in prokaryotes; it is speculated that future studies may uncover analogous riboswitch regulation in eukaryotes . moreover, a hairpin positioned downstream of a tis can increase the probability of initiation when the initiation codon is in an otherwise unfavorable nucleotide sequence context. it has been proposed that the effect of this hairpin is to slow the scanning ribosomal subunit, increasing the interaction between the initiation codon and the ribosomal machinery . conversely, a sufficiently stable hairpin upstream of a tis can completely abolish initiation at that site, perhaps by interfering with the small ribosomal subunit before it reaches the tis . to evaluate further these roles of rna secondary structure in tis recognition, we applied the rna folding algorithm rnafold to subsets of mrnas selected based on trii scores, proteome-scale protein expression studies and ribosome-profiling studies . predicted rna structures of tiss with high trii scores (trii high ) were compared with those of tiss with low trii scores (trii low ). similarly, we compared rna structures for tiss with higher and lower ribosome density (ribosome high and ribosome low , respectively) and genes with higher and lower protein expression. the trends revealed by these comparisons suggest how rna secondary structure can influence both positively and negatively the functioning of the translation machinery.  
