data and text mining the necessity of adjusting tests of protein category enrichment in discovery proteomics motivation: enrichment tests are used in high-throughput experimentation to measure the association between gene or protein expression and membership in groups or pathways. the fishers exact test is commonly used. we specifically examined the associations produced by the fisher test between protein identification by mass spectrometry discovery proteomics, and their gene ontology (go) term assignments in a large yeast dataset. we found that direct application of the fisher test is misleading in proteomics due to the bias in mass spectrometry to preferentially identify proteins based on their biochemical properties. false inference about associations can be made if this bias is not corrected. our method adjusts fisher tests for these biases and produces associations more directly attributable to protein expression rather than experimental bias. results: using logistic regression, we modeled the association between protein identification and go term assignments while adjusting for identification bias in mass spectrometry. the model accounts for five biochemical properties of peptides: (i) hydrophobicity, (ii) molecular weight, (iii) transfer energy, (iv) beta turn frequency and (v) isoelectric point. the model was fit on 181 060 peptides from 2678 proteins identified in 24 yeast proteomics datasets with a 1 false discovery rate. in analyzing the association between protein identification and their go term assignments, we found that 25 (134 out of 544) of fisher tests that showed significant association (q-value 0.05) were non-significant after adjustment using our model. simulations generating yeast protein sets enriched for identification propensity show that unadjusted enrichment tests were biased while our approach worked well.enrichment tests are commonly performed in high-throughput discovery research such as mass spectrometry-based proteomics. they are used, for instance, to determine the association between to whom correspondence should be addressed.whether a protein is expressed in a particular condition and membership in a particular biologically relevant category such as gene ontology (go) term assignment. discovery of significant associations, such as go terms with over-or underrepresentation of expressed proteins, then provide new hypotheses and directions for further research. these enrichment tests are commonly carried out by using fishers exact or chi-square tests . these are the most basic of the enrichment tests; others have been proposed such as gene set enrichment analysis . however, given their clear-cut nature fishers exact tests are still often applied and are considered robust enough to be used as a guide or ranking mechanism for biological categories of proteins in discovery research. mass spectrometry has now become the standard tool in high-throughput discovery proteomics. it enables measurement of expressed proteins (as opposed to gene sequences) that control and enable most biological processes . research studies will often compare the distribution of expressed proteins in a given set of conditions or between organisms . the problem with analyzing proteomics data, however, is the bias in how proteins are identified; which is a function of their biochemical properties . these biases can affect tests of enrichment for expressed proteins within proteins sets and produce misleading biological conclusions in discovery proteomics studies if they are not accounted for. to address this, we demonstrate an approach to adjust fishers exact tests specifically for protein identification bias. our approach is similar to propensity scores, developed for observational studies in epidemiology, to adjust comparisons due to confounding variables possibly associated with grouping and outcome variables . this helps avoid finding spurious relationships between study groups. propensity scores are used by building a model to predict the probability that an object has a given outcome based on potentially confounding variables (covariates). they are then used to create strata that are balanced by their covariates. in our case, the study groups are the protein categories (go terms) and the response variable is protein identification by mass spectrometry. we used logistic regression to model the relationship between protein identification, protein go term assignment and propensity scores of proteins assigned to the go term (see section 2). our method is different from those which adjust enrichment p-values by accounting for the hierarchical relationships between go terms and not for protein propensities. when we analyzed a large yeast proteomics dataset, we found that many significant associations between go terms and protein identifications found using the fishers exact test were actually not significant by our method. in addition, some non-significant fishers exact tests became significant by our method, but the number was smaller. given these results we believe that our method produces associations which are more directly attributable to true differences in protein expression between categories rather than the inherent experimental bias in discovery proteomics.the peptide model developed on the training set indicated that mass spectrometry indeed preferentially identifies peptides with particular properties, with molecular weight and hydrophobicity having the largest influence. model selection on the test dataset indicated that a model with quadratic terms (with the exception of hydrophobicity) provided superior performance over a model with linear terms by receiver operator characteristic (roc) curve analysis (supplementary material). this is to be expected given the relationship between many of the peptide properties and the probability of peptide identification . as a validity check of our peptide model, predicted probabilities from our model were compared with a model using a random forest approach, the enhanced signature peptide predictor (esp) . roc curve analysis indicated that our logistic model outperformed the random forest model (area under the curve 76.5 versus 66.9). possible explanations could be overfitting or high correlation between peptide properties, indicating non-independence between variables. also, the esp model was not developed specifically for shotgun proteomics and is possibly inappropriate in our scenario. developing and training our own model was therefore a logical choice. another advantage of our logistic model it that it is easier to deduce that molecular weight and hydrophobicity have by far the most influence on the probability of peptide identification by mass spectrometry. for protein propensity scores, the propensity for each protein was determined by aggregating the predicted probabilities of its trypticwe introduce here a discovery proteomics data analysis method for performing accurate tests of enrichment for expressed proteins by adjusting for the bias in mass spectrometry to identify proteins with particular biochemical properties. the fact that mass spectrometry instruments preferentially identify proteins has been studied previously . to our knowledge, however, no one before has used this information to adjust enrichment tests to more accurately determine which categories of proteins are significantly associated with over-or underrepresentation of expressed proteins. our approach theoretically works on any type of protein category: go terms, kegg pathways or otherwise. it is certainly logical from a biological standpoint that proteins with similar biochemical properties associate in similar categories. very hydrophobic proteins for example often tend to be associated with cell membranes (e.g. go:0015075 in). it is these biochemical properties that translate into varying propensities for identification in mass spectrometry and make adjusting enrichment tests necessary to avoid incorrect conclusions of biological significance in discovery proteomics experiments. we emphasize again that previous methods to adjust the significance of enrichment tests on go terms do so in an entirely different manner than our approach. these other methods work by de-correlating related go terms in various ways by accounting for the relationships between go terms . unlike their approach, we adjust for the nature of the data itself by considering the propensity of some proteins to be preferentially identified in mass-spectrometry. also, the functionality of these previous methods is largely confined to the go (or produces trivial results on non-hierarchical categories), whereas our method is category independent. for instance, it works on kegg pathways that are not hierarchically structured. although a caveat with our method may be that it is specifically designed for mass spectrometry data, mass spectrometry has basically become the standard method in discovery proteomics. also, despite the fact that we have applied our method to protein identification, it is relevant for comparing quantitative expression. this is due to the fact that the inherent bias in how proteins are identified remains true in how they are quantified (e.g. using spectral counts or total ion current for determining their concentrations). adjusting for identification bias is obviously less relevant for relative expression since comparisons are made between identical sequences across conditions. however, adjustment for identification bias may improve precision in measurements of protein expression by more optimally weighting individual peptides thereby improving the power of tests for relative expression. so, it is apparent that nave application of enrichment tests is problematic. enrichment tests are intended to measure the true difference in expression between protein sets not bias in how proteins are measured. we would like to state here that assessing the areas of possible variation and biases in data is an important analytical exercise. transparent statistical models in research such as the logistic model that we have employed herein can more clearly illuminate areas of variability and possible bias . also, all instrumentation methods certainly contain biases in measurement; therefore, adaptations of our approach could be applied to other high-throughput analysis approaches. our intent is to open the door to the possibilities of adjusting enrichment tests for other sorts of data gathered by a myriad of various means.  
