the qdrec web server: determining dose–response characteristics of complex macroparasites in phenotypic drug screens neglected tropical diseases (ntds) caused by helminths constitute some of the most common infections of the worlds poorest people. the etiological agents are complex and recalci-trant to standard techniques of molecular biology. drug screening against helminths has often been phenotypic and typically involves manual description of drug effect and efficacy. a key challenge is to develop automated, quantitative approaches to drug screening against helminth diseases. the quantal doseresponse calculator (qdrec) constitutes a significant step in this direction. it can be used to automatically determine quantitative doseresponse characteristics and half-maximal effective concentration (ec 50) values using image-based readouts from phenotypic screens, thereby allowing rigorous comparisons of the efficacies of drug compounds. qdrec has been developed and validated in the context of drug screening for schistosomiasis, one of the most important ntds. however, it is equally applicable to general phenotypic screening involving helminths and other complex parasites. availability and implementation: qdrec is publically available at:neglected tropical diseases caused by helminths, such as schistosomiasis, lymphatic filariasis and onchocerciasis, constitute some of the most common infections of the worlds poorest people. schistosomiasis in particular has been identified as the second most socioeconomically devastating illness after malaria. it afflicts over 200 million people worldwide, and its severe symptoms have been implicated as prime factors depriving the affected populations of their health and economic potential. few drugs are available for treatment of helminth diseases. for instance, just one, praziquantel, is available for treatment of schistosomiasis. emergence of drug resistance is therefore a concern, and there is an urgent need for discovery of new therapies against helminthic illnesses . drug screening against helminths poses unique challenges: unlike model organisms like caenorhabditis elegans, clones or lines of worms are not available, the parasites tend to be non-amenable to target identification using gene knockouts or rnai, and fewmolecular mechanisms of hostparasite interactions are well elucidated. consequently, lead identification typically involves phenotypic screening, where the parasites are exposed to compounds and leads identified by analyzing the ensuing effects. such analysis is non-trivial; drug action typically elicits multiple complex phenotypes that can overlap and vary over both time and concentration (see). therefore, analysis of phenotypic screening has tended to employ manual examination, making the process lowthroughput, subjective and non-quantitative.  
