structural bioinformatics a quantitative model for oxygen uptake and release in a family of hemeproteins motivation: hemeproteins have many diverse functions that largely depend on the rate at which they uptake or release small ligands, like oxygen. these proteins have been extensively studied using either simulations or experiments, albeit only qualitatively and one or two proteins at a time. results: we present a physicalchemical model, which uses data obtained exclusively from computer simulations, to describe the uptake and release of oxygen in a family of hemeproteins, called truncated hemoglobins (trhbs). through a rigorous statistical analysis we demonstrate that our model successfully recaptures all the reported experimental oxygen association and dissociation kinetic rate constants, thus allowing us to establish the key factors that determine the rates at which these hemeproteins uptake and release oxygen. we found that internal tunnels as well as the distal site water molecules control ligand uptake, whereas oxygen stabilization by distal site residues controls ligand release. because these rates largely determine the functions of these hemeproteins, these approaches will also be important tools in characterizing the trhbs members with unknown functions.the combination of computer simulations and biochemical experiments has become a reliable strategy to describe the underlying molecular details of observed differences in the activity of proteins. with an increasing amount of data on individual proteins, the construction of mathematical models that permit a more generalized understanding of these molecular details has become a challenge of interest to many groups around the world . the truncated hemoglobins (trhbs) are a family of hemeproteins that share a conserved three-dimensional structure as well as the structural positions of their active site residues . their diverse functions are related to their ability to uptake and release ligands with a wide range of entry and exit rates. because the ligands bind to the heme group, which is buried in the protein, the ligand entry and exit rates depend to a great extent on the ligands ability to migrate to and from the active site via three potential tunnels in the protein matrix , as shown in. each protein may present one or two open tunnels, lined by particular residues defining its topology. protein cavities have been identified several decades ago through experiments in a xe atmosphere, whereprotein sites with retained xe atoms were identified. in the case of myoglobin, for example, several studies had demonstrated the importance of internal cavities as ligand hosts as well as part of migratory tunnels . crystallographic studies of trhbs from mycobacterium tuberculosis, chlamydomonas eugametos and paramecium caudatum also highlight the importance of these cavities in the trhb protein family . several studies have shown that in addition to the presence and nature of these migratory tunnels, certain active site residues can also modulate ligand entry and exit, in particular, delaying ligand entry by stabilizing water molecules that block accessibility to the heme , or by delaying ligand exit by stabilizing the ligand itself . experimentally, it is possible to characterize ligand entry and exit by measuring the ligand association (k on ) and dissociation (k off ) kinetic rate constants, respectively. specifically, k on determines the rate at which the ligand reaches the protein heme iron from outside the protein, and k off determines the rate at which the ligand is released once it is bound to the iron. both k on and k off have been reported for a number of members of the trhb family . though the trhb family (with $1100 members) has only recently been identified, a subset of $10 members and several mutants have been characterized extensively by both biochemical experiments and computer simulations . in this study, we utilize data from single-molecule computer simulations of these hemeproteins to build a theoretical model that is in statistical agreement with all the oxygen k on and k off values reported in the literature. namely, all variables involved in the model are relevant (corresponding coefficients are statistically significant), model assumptions for quantifications are not violated and the model achieves a high predictive ability. considering the accuracy of this model we are able to confirm the main factors that control both ligand entry and exit for all the members studied and, further, propose two quantitative approaches for predicting the oxygen association and dissociation rate constants for the rest of the family members. because these rates largely determine the functions of these hemeproteins, these approaches will be important tools in characterizing trhb members with unknown functions. based on our model, we propose strategies for predicting both the oxygen association and dissociation rate constants for the rest of the family members, which allows the development of whole family evolutionary and functional studies, as shown in bustamante et al. (2016).the predictive capacity of our models, together with the statistical evaluation of the individual components included in each model, provides a quantitative context in which we can understand the main factors controlling ligand uptake and release in the trhb family. whereas internal tunnels and water molecules in the active site modulate ligand entry, the nature of the active site residues controls the kinetics of oxygen release . the coordination process (k bond ) accounts for the o 2 feii binding process once oxygen is already in the active site with no surrounding water molecules. considering that we use the same ligand in any case and taking into account that this process was shown to occur very fast, it was not considered in our model (depicted in red in) . in the same line, our statistical analysis shows that o 2 migration to the solvent after the o 2 feii bond breaking (dg out ) is not relevant to explain k off . in this sense, the results along the variability of the active site show a high correlation, where the more stabilized the o 2 , the lower the k off measured. for example, in the case of the wt form of mttrhbn, the key structural position at the active site labeled as b10, occupied by a tyr, is one of the major responsible residues for its k off ; when this amino acid is mutated to ala, the k off increases substantially, because the coordinated oxygen is strongly destabilized. the same trend can be observed for many cases of key amino acids, including wt mb versus its mutant form where the well-known hise7 is mutated to gly, going from a k off value of 151600 s 1. for a deeper analysis of the conservation and variability of the active sites along the trhb family members, see bustamante et al. (2016). regarding the role of the internal tunnels, a clear example can be observed comparing the wt and a single mutant form of mt-trhbn, where the mutation of a val to a phe at the structural position g8 promotes a 10 times decrease in k on. it is important to note that these two proteins have the same active site amino acids, except for the g8 position that does not alter the water molecules, so the only difference accounting for the k on is the internal tunnel contribution. in this case, the o 2 needs to overcome a higher barrier along the tunnel to reach the active site, mainly due to the size increase of the g8 amino acid, which is reflected in a higher dg in and consecutively in a lower k on. for a comparison of all herein cases, see supplementary tables s1 and s2. overall, the varying capacity of main factors to modulate ligand entry and escape translates to diverse biological functions for these hemeproteins. for example, hemeproteins with fast oxygen uptake (high k on ) and fast release (high k off ) are generally oxygen transporters (e.g. hb and mb); whereas those with fast uptake (high k on ) and slow release (low k off ) generally undergo multiple ligand reactivity, since oxygen has to enter quickly and stays inside until the second ligand enters to react (e.g. trhbn from m. tuberculosis). it is interesting to note that both entry and exit processes depend on active site interactions, amino acids with positive charge density regions in the active site can both delay oxygen entry by retaining water molecules, and also delay oxygen exit by stabilizing the coordinated oxygen. our models suggest therefore, that the only way a protein can control ligand entry without modifying ligand exit is by modifying heme accessibility through tunnels or gates. note that our model for k on does not account for internal hexacoordination phenomena, which involves an active site amino acid occupying the sixth coordination position of the iron center. hence, our model describes the k on of pentacoordinated trhbs or the k on of the pentacoordinated state of a hexacoordinated trhb. notice that the error values, i, in models (5), (7) and(8) include the error inherent in the model as well as in the experimental measurements. for both k on (model (5)) and k off (models (7) and(8)), the error was of the same order of magnitude as the variance among the experimental rate constants reported independently in the literature by different groups and techniques. this result strongly supports the absence of any significant theoretical misconceptions in the construction of the models themselves. a special consideration should be given to the r 2 value, which, although is a good indicator of the goodness of fit of the corresponding model, it does not suffice to judge its accuracy. a clear examplequantitative model for oxygen uptake and release  
