the role of mirnas in complex formation and control microribonucleic acid (mirnas) are small regulatory molecules that act by mrna degradation or via translational repression. although many mirnas are ubiquitously expressed, a small subset have differential expression patterns that may give rise to tissue-specific complexes. motivation: this work studies gene targeting patterns amongst mirnas with differential expression profiles, and links this to control and regulation of protein complexes. results: we find that, when a pair of mirnas are not expressed in the same tissues, there is a higher tendency for them to target the direct partners of the same hub proteins. at the same time, they also avoid targeting the same set of hub-spokes. moreover, the complexes corresponding to these hub-spokes tend to be specific and nonoverlapping. this suggests that the effect of mirnas on the formation of complexes is specific.microribonucleic acid (mirnas) are small non-coding regulatory molecules that act by downregulating gene expression at the posttranscriptional and pre-translational stage. they have an extensive array of functions and are implicated in diverse processes such as growth, development and differentiation. they also play important roles in diseases such as cancer and heart disease (van). mirnas are known to play roles in regulating the protein interaction network. showed that mirnas tend to target hubs in a network. moreover, this regulation is more important for intermodular hubs than intramodular ones. further built upon this and discovered that while proteins directly regulated by mirnas might not form a network module themselves, the mirna-target genes and their interacting neighbors jointly showed significantly higher modularity. this is an early indication that mirnas target select components of complexes. however, it is not until recently whenconfirmed that individual mirnas or co-expressed mirnas frequently target several components of protein complexes, indicating a coordinate post-transcriptional regulation of protein complexes by mirnas. in the human protein interaction network, several large hubs are often observed , usually corresponding to critical gene or biological process regulators . the partners (hub-spokes) are functional units controlled by the hub, and can be considered as part of a functional unit such as a complex. given that different tissues utilize their gene repertoire differently, it is inconceivable that interactions between hubs and all adjoining hub-spokes exist simultaneously since there are limitations in physical binding area, and so on. one possible mode of control is via expressional suppression, thereby giving rise to different or subforms of complexes. sinceshowed that coexpressing mirnas have a propensity to target complexes, we extend this by suggesting that anti-coexpressing mirnas can effect the formation of different protein complexes by suppressing gene expression. that is, mirnas with widely different expression profiles can control mutually exclusive or tissue-specific biological processes by impacting on the formation of different complexes.we have shown how mirna expression patterns could impact the formation of complexes. first, anti-coexpressed mirnas tend to regulate hub-spokes significantly. second, anti-coexpressed mirnas affect different spokes corresponding to different complexes. the activity of anti-coexpressed mirnas is also specific in that targeted complexes tend not to have components common to other complexes, thereby limiting collateral or non-specific effects. mirs-29b and 140-5p are ubiquitously expressed but not in heart tissue and are anti-coexpressed to mir-499-5p. furthermore, the targets of mirs-29b and 140-5p are enriched for heart-related functions. this reinforces the notion that anti-coexpressed mirnas are involved in the acquisition of tissue-specific functions. in vpa-treated mice, it appears that mirnas play a role in the complex formation. the increase in precursor baf complexes due to mirnas targeting specific components of the mature form may have a significant effect in the psychoactive effects of vpa, e.g. by allowing reversion to a higher level of brain plasticity.  
