the role of proteosome-mediated proteolysis in modulating potentially harmful transcription factor activity in saccharomyces cerevisiae motivation: the appropriate modulation of the stress response to variable environmental conditions is necessary to maintain sustained viability in saccharomyces cerevisiae. particularly, controlling the abundance of proteins that may have detrimental effects on cell growth is crucial for rapid recovery from stress-induced quiescence. results: prompted by qualitative modeling of the nutrient starvation response in yeast, we investigated in vivo the effect of proteolysis after nutrient starvation showing that, for the gis1 transcription factor at least, proteasome-mediated control is crucial for a rapid return to growth. additional bioinformatics analyses show that potentially toxic transcriptional regulators have a significantly lower protein half-life, a higher fraction of unstructured regions and more potential pest motifs than the non-detrimental ones. furthermore, inhibiting proteasome activity tends to increase the expression of genes induced during the environmental stress response more than those in the rest of the genome. our combined results suggest that proteasome-mediated proteolysis of potentially toxic transcription factors tightly modulates the stress response in yeast.a prompt and appropriate response to abrupt fluctuations in external conditions is crucial to survive stressful environmental changes, especially in unicellular organisms such as the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae. during the nutrient starvation, in order to ensure extended survival, s.cerevisiae cells exit the cell cycle at g 1 and enter the quiescent state (called g 0 ), but rapidly resume growth and proliferation when nutrient conditions turn favorable. two conserved signaling pathways ras/camp and tor are known to coordinate the entry into and exit from the quiescent phase . these two pathways regulate the entry into the stationary phase, converging on the protein kinase rim15 and downstream transcriptional activators, including the stress response (stre) transcription factors (tfs) msn2/msn4 and to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as joint second authors. the post-diauxic shift (pds) transcription factor gis1 . the nutrient starvation response is an intensively studied process, but the exact molecular mechanisms involved have not yet been fully elucidated. on the one hand, the scarcity of quantitative data pose a problem for the construction of quantitative models; on the other hand, the current understanding of the causal regulatory wiring encourages the use of qualitative computational models to gain new insights. executable biology (; fisher and) is an evolving paradigm that focuses on the design of executable computer algorithms that mimic biological phenomena through the use of formal methods from engineering and computer science. biological knowledge can be captured in mathematically sound formalisms, and then easily translated into executable algorithms for dynamical analysis and automatic reasoning. here, we show that formalizing the available knowledge on the nutrient starvation response as a qualitative model highlighted the different modulation of gis1 availability, encouraging further in vivo investigations on the role of proteosome-mediated proteolysis. proteasome-mediated proteolysis is essential for many cellular processes in yeast and other eukaryotes, including regulation of protein concentrations and degradation of misfolded proteins. integrating our computational insights and the in vivo experiments with genome-wide bioinformatics analyses lead us to suggest that proteasome-mediated proteolysis of potentially toxic transcription factors tightly modulates the stress response in yeast.  
