aracne-ap: gene network reverse engineering through adaptive partitioning inference of mutual information the accurate reconstruction of gene regulatory networks from large scale molecular profile datasets represents one of the grand challenges of systems biology. the algorithm for the reconstruction of accurate cellular networks (aracne) represents one of the most effective tools to accomplish this goal. however, the initial fixed bandwidth (fb) implementation is both inefficient and unable to deal with sample sets providing largely uneven coverage of the probability density space. here, we present a completely new implementation of the algorithm, based on an adaptive partitioning strategy (ap) for estimating the mutual information. the new ap implementation (aracne-ap) achieves a dramatic improvement in computational performance (200 on average) over the previous methodology, while preserving the mutual information estimator and the network inference accuracy of the original algorithm. given that the previous version of aracne is extremely demanding, the new version of the algorithm will allow even researchers with modest computational resources to build complex regulatory networks from hundreds of gene expression profiles. availability and implementation: a java cross-platform command line executable of aracne, together with all source code and a detailed usage guide are freely available on sourceforge (http:// sourceforge.net/projects/aracne-ap). java version 8 or higher is required.we and others have shown that the accurate and systematic dissection of tissue gene regulatory networks (reverse engineering) represents a crucial step in the elucidation of drivers and mechanisms presiding over both physiologic and pathologic phenotypes. many computational approaches have been proposed for the reverse engineering of gene regulatory networks from large-scale gene expression profile data. most of these require estimating pairwise gene functions, such as pearson/spearman correlation , mutual information (mi,) and linear/lasso regression amongst others. aracne represents one of the most widely used reverse engineering algorithms by the scientific community and has been extensively experimentally validated. aracne uses an information theoretic framework, based on the data processing inequality theorem, to infer direct regulatory relationships between transcriptional regulator proteins and target genes. aracne has been shown to be useful in the reconstruction of context-specific transcriptional networks in multiple tissue types . several additional algorithms have emerged, which rely on v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.  
