the sufficient minimal set of mirna seed types motivation: pairing between the target sequence and the 68 nt long seed sequence of the mirna presents the most important feature for mirna target site prediction. novel high-throughput technologies such as argonaute hits-clip afford meanwhile a detailed study of mirna:mrna duplices. these interaction maps enable a first discrimination between functional and non-functional target sites in a bulky fashion. prediction algorithms apply different seed paradigms to identify mirna target sites. therefore, a quantitative assessment of mirna target site prediction is of major interest. results: we identified a set of canonical seed types based on a transcriptome wide analysis of experimentally verified functional target sites. we confirmed the specificity of long seeds but we found that the majority of functional target sites are formed by less specific seeds of only 6 nt indicating a crucial role of this type. a substantial fraction of genuine target sites are non-conserved. moreover, the majority of functional sites remain uncovered by common prediction methods.the relation between mirnas and their targets in higher eukaryotes is part of the highly complex gene regulation network. to unravel the functional specific interactions, the available information on the interaction of the short rnas as presented by the risc complex and their mrna counterparts is insufficient to reliably predict all functional pairs modulating translation and mrna decay . the basic prerequisite for mirna targeting in metazoans is a short perfect match complemented by imperfect matches in close vicinity. this region is called the seed sequence and is considered to be a 68 nt long substring within the first 8 nt at the 5-end of the mirna . it is regarded to be the most important feature for target recognition by mirnas in mammalians . to whom correspondence should be addressed.naturally, merely seeking for short sequence matches yields a plethora of putative target sites with a large fraction of false positives. to dodge a priori the majority of false positives in silico mirna target site prediction approaches concentrate on the subset of target sites equipped with long perfect seed matches. in addition, several mirna targeting determinants beyond the seed have been proposed to extract authentic target sites from the set of seed matches. a common strategy to increase specificity is to require conservation of the seed match. but there is evidence that non-conserved mirna targeting is even more widespread . to date the effect of different types of seed matches has been assessed by means of signal-to-noise ratio , degree of mrna or protein repression . based on that, a set of canonical seed types that differ in abundance and intensity of the regulatory effect has been defined . recent experimental approaches allow for the identification of argonaute (ago)-mirna:mrna ternary complexes using an in vivo cross-linking protocol and subsequent high-throughput sequencing .analyzed mirna:mrna interactions in mus musculus neocortex tissue samples and published an interaction map containing a set of verified target sites in the transcriptome of the murine brain. complementing previous studies, we determined seed types using functional target sites of the interaction map. we identified a minimal and sufficient set of six seed types. the precise mapping of ago footprints allowed us to distinguish between mirna:target and higher resolved mirna:target site interaction. we quantified the impact of individual seed types on recall and specificity. additional target site conservation analyses revealed short seeds to be less conserved than long seeds.provided a mirna:mrna interaction map that contains the absolute chromosomal positions of sites full complementary to mirna seeds (murine genome assembly of 2006). these sites are located almost at the center of an average ago-mrna footprint. this is a defined region of mrna complexed with ago determined by ago-mrna clusters, where ago bound within 62 nt of cluster peaks 95 of the time. for each chromosomal coordinate, we determined the longest protein-coding mature mrna transcript and its corresponding relative position by means of the ncbi reference sequence database . sites that were located within an intron (4) or upstream of the 3 utr (45) werepage: 1347 13461350in this study, we present an analysis of the most important feature for mirna target recognition, the so-called mirna seed, using a large-scale dataset of functional target sites. based on the ago hitsclip and par-clip mirna:mrna interaction maps,we analyzed seeds properties and their influences on mirna target site prediction methods. due to the definite specification of ago binding sites, we were able to classify mirna recognition elements contained in the mrna 3 utr as either functional or non-functional. we defined a minimal set of seed types that is sufficient for accurate mirna target site predictions. the final data pool allows for enhanced analysis of mirna target prediction algorithms compared to earlier studies that were restricted by experimental constraints . we found that most conserved mirnas interact predominantly with target sites endowed with short seed matches; 67 of functional sites are based on 6mer seeds. in contrast, common prediction algorithms focus mainly on seeds of length seven or eight. at present, prediction algorithms have to accept severe deficiencies of recall to ensure high specificity that is naturally considered to be more important. moreover, the preferential search for long seeds lifts the proportion of conserved sites. but we found that a substantial fraction (40) of all functional target sites is not conserved. target sites including 6mer seeds are enriched among these. concluding, the problem of recall can be easily translated to the problem of precision. however, this strongly intensifies the need for features beyond seed pairing that realistically describe mirna targeting, in particular non-conserved target sites. it may also raise the basic question for the potential of seed-based approaches in discriminating between functional and non-functional sites.  
