bioinformatics discovery note sequence analysis aragonite-associated biomineralization proteins are disordered and contain interactive motifs motivation: the formation of aragonite mineral in the mollusk shell or pearl nacre requires the participation of a diverse set of proteins that form the mineralized extracellular matrix. although self-assembly processes have been identified for several nacre proteins, these proteins do not contain known globular proteinprotein binding domains. thus, we hypothesize that other sequence features are responsible for nacre matrix proteinprotein assembly processes and ultimately aragonite biosynthesis. results: of 39 mollusk aragonite-associated protein sequences, 100 contain at least one region of intrinsic disorder or unfolding, with the highest percentages found in framework and pearl-associated proteins relative to the intracrystalline proteins. in some instances, these intrinsically disordered regions were identified as bind/fold sequences, and a limited number correlate with known biomineral-relevant sequences. interestingly, 95 of the aragonite-associated protein sequences were found to contain at least one occurrence of amyloid-like or cross-strand aggregation-prone supersecondary motifs, and this correlates with known aggregation and aragonite formation functions in three experimentally tested protein sequences. collectively, our findings indicate that aragonite-associated proteins have evolved signature sequence traits of intrinsic disorder and aggregation-prone regions that are important for their role(s) in matrix assembly and mineralization.the nacre layer of the mollusk shell and pearl deposit are both high-performance composites consisting of the calcium carbonate polymorph, aragonite and polysaccharides and proteins . the protein and polysaccharide macromolecular components form a 3d lamellar network around each single-crystal aragonite tablet that contributes to the architecture, organization and molecular properties of the nacre layer . although we are still in the early stages of understanding the role(s) that proteins play in nacre construction, it is clear that some proteins are self-associative and participate in the formation and stabilization of fracture-resistant single-crystal aragonite , whereas other proteins have different responsibilities, such as enzyme catalysis , protease activities and cell receptor binding . thus far, three different classes of nacre-associated proteins have been identified in mollusks. the framework or interlamellar protein family is associated with the-chitin polysaccharide-containing water-insoluble tri-layer matrix that surrounds each aragonite tablet . in contrast, the intracrystalline protein family is extracted as a water-soluble fraction and is intercalated or found in organic inclusions within aragonite . lastly, there is a family of proteins associated with the formation of the nacre pearl deposit . collectively, few of these nacre proteins possess known globular binding domains that are typically associated with protein assembly . hence, there must be other sequence features that drive nacre protein matrix assembly, which, in turn, drives aragonite formation. recent bioinformatics studies revealed that intrinsically disordered and aggregation-prone domains exist within the diverse set of human extracellular matrix protein (hecmp) sequences . these domains are believed to be responsible for observed matrix assembly and hierarchal ordering of the hecm. we hypothesize that similar sequence features must be at work in the aragonite extracellular matrix protein (aecmp) scenario as well. with this in mind, we initiated a bioinformatics study of 39 aecmp sequences arising from seven different molluscan species (supplementary). these sequences were analyzed at the global level for intrinsic disorder and aggregation propensities. our study indicates that all aecmp sequences possess one or more disordered sequence regions, with 51 predicted to possess one or more bind/fold recognition regions. interestingly, 95 of the aecmps were found to possess aggregation-prone, amyloid-or prion-like cross-strand supersecondary motifs. we conclude that, as per the human ecm, intrinsically disordered and aggregation-prone sequences are key molecular features that contribute to the formation and function of mollusk nacre. to whom correspondence should be addressed.in this study, we confirm that 100 of the 39 studied nacre proteins contain one or more regions of intrinsic disorder (supplementary), and 95 of these same proteins possess one or more interactive regions, such as bind/fold or amyloid-like motifs . hence, we conclude that, like their hecmp counterparts, the aecmps have evolved signature molecular traits of intrinsically disordered and aggregation-prone interactive sequences that enable matrix assembly . as expected, each nacre protein class possesses distinguishing features. framework and pearl-associated classes possess the highest percentages of intrinsic disorder, bind/fold regions and amyloid-like sequences (and 2, supplementary). conversely, the intracrystalline class possesses lower percentages of intrinsic disorder (supplementary) and fewer bind/fold and aggregation-prone sites (figs 1 and 2). thus, proteins with higher percentages of interactive regions, such as the framework or pearl subclasses, may be involved with multiple targets (e.g. silk-like fibroin proteins,-chitin polysaccharide and other framework proteins) and thus require longer length and/or more numerous interactive regions to participate in intermolecular interactions with diverse targets. conversely, the intracrystalline proteins may be designed for a limited number of protein matrix interactions within organic inclusions and hence require fewer interactive regions to achieve this. we believe that the presence and extent of intrinsic disorder and interactive sites in a given aecmp are related to (i) the functional attributes of a given protein and (ii) the number and nature of potential matrix targets that a given protein interacts with. the most unexpected finding was the presence of amyloid-like cross-strand supersecondary motifs , a class of aggregation-prone sequences that have been linked with the evolutionary development of protein folding and assembly.. hypothetical scheme for aecmp self-assembly via aggregationprone and intrinsically disordered domain interactions. we assume that there are complementary domain pairings and that both types of domains are simultaneously active during assembly, but this may not be universally true similar to what we observed for intrinsically disordered regions, the occurrence of tango-identified aggregation-prone regions (i.e. average number of motifs) follows the relationship frame4pearl intra . we conclude that although amyloid-like motifs are important for the function of all aemcps, they appear to be critical for the framework-specific lamellar layer, possibly playing major roles in proteinpolysaccharide recognition, proteinprotein assembly and elastomeric behavior under force . in conclusion, we believe that the sequence location and number of intrinsically disordered and amyloid-like supersecondary motifs may be important for aggregation , protein orientation and assembly stability, and may also play a role in the recognition and interaction of a given protein with other specific matrix component(s) during the nacre biomineralization process. these sequence features will now become the subject of experiments aimed at confirming their functional roles in nacre assembly.  
