the transcriptome analysis and comparison explorer—t-ace: a platform-independent, graphical tool to process large rnaseq datasets of non-model organisms motivation: next generation sequencing (ngs) technologies allow a rapid and cost-effective compilation of large rna sequence datasets in model and non-model organisms. however, the storage and analysis of transcriptome information from different ngs platforms is still a significant bottleneck, leading to a delay in data dissemination and subsequent biological understanding. especially database interfaces with transcriptome analysis modules going beyond mere read counts are missing. here, we present the transcriptome analysis and comparison explorer (t-ace), a tool designed for the organization and analysis of large sequence datasets, and especially suited for transcriptome projects of non-model organisms with little or no a priori sequence information. t-ace offers a tcl-based interface, which accesses a postgresql database via a php-script. within t-ace, information belonging to single sequences or contigs, such as annotation or read coverage, is linked to the respective sequence and immediately accessible. sequences and assigned information can be searched via keyword-or blast-search. additionally, t-ace provides within and between transcriptome analysis modules on the level of expression, go terms, kegg pathways and protein domains. results are visualized and can be easily exported for external analysis. we developed t-ace for laboratory environments, which have only a limited amount of bioinformatics support, and for collaborative projects in which different partners work on the same dataset from different locations or platforms (windows/linux/macos). for laboratories with some experience in bioinformatics and programming, the low complexity of the database structure and open-source code provides a framework that can be customized according to the different needs of the user and transcriptome project. contact:recent advances in sequencing technology have led to an increasing accumulation of transcriptomic (rnaseq) data. although most of the data has been generated in model organisms for which a high number of annotated sequences and complete genomes are available, increasing transcriptomic sequence data for nonmodel organisms are generated, for which only little or no a priori sequence information exists. the analysis of the obtained sequences and/or contigs, therefore, relies on comparative analysis with annotated genes or protein domains of other organisms. a multimodal comparison with a high number of sequences from different organisms and databases, e.g. ncbi, uniprotkb, gene ontology (go), kegg , should be pursued to gain a wider picture of the putative biological role of a specific sequence. this approach, however, increases the quantity of information per sequence and adds to the already large amount of data. not only bioinformatic processing of sequences (i.e. cleaning, assembly and annotation) is still a bottleneck in rnaseq, but so is the subsequent analysis of annotated sequences. the analyzing scientist is faced with the problem of organizing the manifold blast hits, protein domains, go terms and kegg pathway information assigned to ten thousands of individual sequences, together with the mere sequence information such as nucleotide and translated protein sequence, protein domain organization or, in case of assembled contigs, read coverage. to date a number of software solutions exist for the assembly and annotation of transcriptomes. major efforts have been put into the development of reference-guided and de novo assembly tools. several assemblers such as mira , newbler (roche/454 life sciences), cap3 , velvet and others were developed by researchers together with software and sequencing companies, of which some are especially designed for different ngs applications e.g. 454, illumina or solid. it must be noted, that de novo rna sequence assembly is a particularly difficult bioinformatic problem, as e.g. the existence of transcript isoforms usually results in many different contigs that cannot be merged in a simple fashion (for review see). beyond the mere sequence assembly, a suite of software solutions for clustering (partigen), protein prediction (prot4est) and go,  
