the variant call format and vcftools the variant call format (vcf) is a generic format for storing dna polymorphism data such as snps, insertions, deletions and structural variants, together with rich annotations. vcf is usually stored in a compressed manner and can be indexed for fast data retrieval of variants from a range of positions on the reference genome. the format was developed for the 1000 genomes project, and has also been adopted by other projects such as uk10k, dbsnp and the nhlbi exome project. vcftools is a software suite that implements various utilities for processing vcf files, including validation, merging, comparing and also provides a general perl api. availability:one of the main uses of next-generation sequencing is to discover variation among large populations of related samples. recently, a format for storing next-generation read alignments has been standardized by the sam/bam file format specification . this has significantly improved the interoperability of nextgeneration tools for alignment, visualization and variant calling. we propose the variant call format (vcf) as a standardized format for storing the most prevalent types of sequence variation, including snps, indels and larger structural variants, together with rich annotations. the format was developed with the primary intention to represent human genetic variation, but its use is not restricted to diploid genomes and can be used in different contexts as well. its flexibility and user extensibility allows representation of a wide variety of genomic variation with respect to a single reference sequence. although generic feature format (gff) has recently been extended to standardize storage of variant information in genome variant format (gvf) , this is not tailored for storing information across many samples. we have designed the vcf format to be scalable so as to encompass millions of sites with genotype data and annotations from thousands of samples. we have adopted a textual encoding, with complementary indexing, to allow easy generation of the files while maintaining fast data access. in this article, we present an overview of the vcf and briefly introduce the companion vcftools software package. a detailed format specification and the complete documentation of vcftools are available at the vcftools web site.  
