systems biology a rank-based statistical test for measuring synergistic effects between two gene sets motivation: due to recent advances in high-throughput technologies , data on various types of genomic annotation have accumulated. these data will be crucially helpful for elucidating the combinatorial logic of transcription. although several approaches have been proposed for inferring cooperativity among multiple factors, most approaches are haunted by the issues of normalization and threshold values. results: in this article, we propose a rank-based non-parametric statistical test for measuring the effects between two gene sets. this method is free from the issues of normalization and threshold value determination for gene expression values. furthermore, we have proposed an efficient markov chain monte carlo method for calculating an approximate significance value of synergy. we have applied this approach for detecting synergistic combinations of transcription factor binding motifs and histone modifications. availability: c implementation of the method is available fromone of the important goals of genome biology is to unravel the transcriptional regulatory mechanism. among various statistical approaches, one common approach is to check non-random association between gene expression patterns and the presence of various factors close to the transcription start sites of genes. although studies have mostly been performed on the relationships between expression patterns and transcription factor binding motifs, recent advances in high-throughput technologies have made it possible to consider other genome annotations such as in vivo transcription factor binding sites [e.g. (, histone modification [e.g. (, nucleosome positioning [e.g. (and open chromatin regions [e.g. (. among the statistical methods used for testing relationships between functional genome elements and gene expression, gene to whom correspondence should be addressed. set enrichment analysis [gsea; (has several merits over other statistical approaches such as the chi-squared test and fishers exact test. because gsea measures the significance of the gene set on the basis of the rank of the expression level, threshold values do not need to be set in advance for determining upregulated and downregulated genes. as discussed in, this threshold-independent property is crucially helpful because variations in expression caused by changes in the biological environment are often modest, and the list of statistically significant genes is usually difficult to reproduce if the experiments are performed in different laboratories. in addition, because gsea has a non-parametric framework, the validity of probabilistic assumptions such as the normality of noises need not be considered. however, gsea has one limitation. gsea in its present form cannot be directly used to infer the combinatorial logic of multiple factors. many biological studies have shown that gene expression in some cases is induced only when multiple factors come in place, and many pairs of transcription factors that work in synergy have been identified, such as e2f and nf-y, tata and creband estrogen receptor and foxa1. because of the accumulation of various types of genome annotation data, statistical methods for detecting combinations of multiple factors functioning in synergy for transcription are becoming increasingly important. several approaches for identifying cooperativity among transcription factors have been proposed. one popular approach [e.g. (] is to screen synergistic pairs of two transcription factor binding motifs on the basis of expression coherence. if genes with both the motifs have expression patterns that are significantly coherent than those of genes with only one motif, then we can conclude that these two factors work in synergy. this approach was successfully used to identify many cooperative combinations of motifs, especially those related to cell cycle. however, it requires many types of samples for determining coherence among genes, which is not the case in general problems. furthermore, the choice of threshold for coherence is another difficult issue. another approach [e.g. ] is to treat the subject as a predicting problem of gene expression from sequence motifs, and examine whether the interaction term of two factors is important. however, these approaches usually make several assumptions on probabilistic models such as the linearity of the effects of relevant factors and their interaction terms, and the validityfirst, using the method described in section 2, we extracted the 42 gene sets whose enrichment score was positive (supplementary). after filtering the pairs whose common sets include 20 genes (q 1 q 2 20) for a robust inference, we measured the synergistic effect of each combination of these gene sets by using the proposed method. then, to account for multiple hypothesis testing, false discovery rate (fdr) q-values are calculated (supplementary material for the detailed procedure). the significant synergistic combinations are listed in. e2f and nf-y, whose cooperativity have been verified in many published studies, are reported to be highly synergistic. although the single effects of these motifs are already significant, their cooperativity provides additional benefits . furthermore, the motifs for e2f and nf-y were also enriched in upregulated genes in tumor samples from patients with breast cancer . these observations confirms that the combinatorial functions of these two transcription factors are closely related to transcription mechanism in breast cancer.in this article, we proposed a novel non-parametric framework for measuring the synergy between two gene sets. the choice of normalization method and threshold values are issues that need not be considered for this approach. application to sequence motifs and histone modifications data implies that our method is helpful for unraveling the gene expression mechanisms. however, our approach still has several limitations. first, we did not take into account the positional relationships between two factors in this study. several studies have reported the importance of positional relationships [e.g. ], therefore, methods that can use this information should be devised. second, although this is not just confined to our approach, identifying gene sets itself is a very difficult problem. the members of gene sets  
