bioimage informatics thunderstorm: a comprehensive imagej plug-in for palm and storm data analysis and super-resolution imaging thunderstorm is an open-source, interactive and modular plug-in for imagej designed for automated processing, analysis and visualization of data acquired by single-molecule localization mi-croscopy methods such as photo-activated localization microscopy and stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy. thunderstorm offers an extensive collection of processing and post-processing methods so that users can easily adapt the process of analysis to their data. thunderstorm also offers a set of tools for creation of simulated data and quantitative performance evaluation of localization algorithms using monte carlo simulations. availability and implementation: thunderstorm and the online documentation are both freely accessible at https://code.google. comsingle-molecule localization microscopy (smlm) methods such as stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (storm;) and photo-activated localization microscopy (palm;) have recently emerged to overcome the diffraction barrier, offering 10 times higher lateral resolution and the possibility of 3d imaging by various approaches. in smlm, a super-resolution image is reconstructed from a sequence of diffraction-limited images of sparsely distributed single photoswitchable molecules. as the sequence is usually long (thousands of images) and the positions of the molecules have to be estimated systematically with sub-diffraction precision, it is crucial to use specialized software for processing the data. we present thunderstorm, an open-source, interactive, modular and platform-independent software, which provides a complete set of tools for automated processing, analysis and visualization of data acquired by smlm methods. our philosophy in developing thunderstorm has been to offer an extensive collection of processing and post-processing methods, which were developed based on extensive testing with both real and simulated data. we also provide a detailed description of the implemented methods and algorithms (supplementary note), as well as a users guide.  
