bioinformatics discovery note genome analysis thymine distribution in genes provides novel insight into the functional significance of the proteome of the malaria parasite plasmodium falciparum 3d7 plasmodium falciparum (pf)-mediated malaria is one of the most devastating diseases in the world, and the search for suitable antimalarial drugs remains an extraordinary challenge for scientists working in this area. novel unconventional approaches could reveal new potential targets that may be useful for the treatment of malaria. we used a bioinformatics approach to analyze the entire genome of the pf3d7 strain. because the carbon (c-) content is a pivotal parameter that determines the hydrophobicity of a protein, which in turn controls protein folding and function, we analyzed the entire pf3d7 proteome based on the genes thymine (t)-controlled amino acid expression. our data disclose a total of 14 proteins encoded by chromosome-4 and chromosome-9 that have an outstanding t-encoded and c-controlled hydrophobic character. the identification of these proteins could open new pivotal drug-targeting avenues.the most prevalent and lethal malaria parasite that infects humans, plasmodium falciparum (pf), may have recently undergone host switching to become a plasmodia adaptation that is specific for humans . p.falciparum is the most deadly of the five plasmodium species that cause human malaria, which is the worlds second largest cause of death after tuberculosis . thus we have chosen to analyze the completely sequenced and annotated pf3d7 strain. the pf3d7 nuclear genome is composed of 22.8 megabases, which are distributed among 14 chromosomes (chrs) . despite the completion of the pf3d7 genome and comparative proteomics studies , we are far from a strategy for curing this disease because there are still too many uncharacterized proteins to obtain a reasonable understanding of the disease-causing activity of p.falciparum.the base thymine (t) defines the stability of an organism at the nucleotide level and, in turn, also controls the proteins carbon (c-) content and thus hydrophobicity for stability and activity. hydrophobic residues are important for dictating topological features of proteins because hydrophobic interactions are the dominant force in proper protein folding and in organizing the self-assembly of water-soluble globular proteins . in the current study, we analyzed the entire pf3d7 genome with regard to the t-content to identify potential novel proteins that could have pivotal significance in pf3d7-mediated malaria.  
