bioinformatics discovery note sequence analysis tiki, at the head of a new superfamily of enzymes tiki proteins appear to antagonize wnt signalling pathway by acting as wnt proteases, thereby affecting wnt solubility by its amino-terminal cleavage. tiki1 protease activity was shown to be metal ion-dependent and was inhibited by chelating agents and thus was tentatively proposed to be a metalloprotease. nevertheless, tiki proteins exhibit no detectable sequence similarity to previously described metalloproteases, but instead have been reported as being homologues of trab proteins (pfam id: pf01963), a widely distributed family of unknown function and structure. here, we show that tiki proteins are members of a new superfamily of domains contained not just in trab proteins, but also in erythromycin esterase (pfam id: pf05139), duf399 (domain of unknown function 399; pfam id: pf04187) and martx toxins that contribute to host invasion and pathogenesis by bacteria. we establish the core fold of this enzymatic domain and its catalytic residues.wnt signalling is a key developmental pathway controlling both embryonic development and tissue maintenance by regulation of stem cell proliferation in adults. aberrant activation of the wnt signalling pathway can lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation. wnt-related diseases are extensive in number and include neurodegenerative disease, inflammatory bowel disease, cleft lip/palate disorders and various cancers . the first wnt gene was discovered 430 years ago, and despite extensive research into this signalling pathway, it has remained unclear how wnt morphogen levels and activities are regulated. in large part, this is because of the vast numbers of wnt isoforms, receptors, co-receptors and different secreted antagonists encoded in animal genomes . our understanding of wnt signalling has recently been advanced substantially by the characterization of tiki1, a gene which when over-expressed in xenopus embryos results in head enlargement; tiki refers to large-headed humanoid carvings in polynesian cultures. tiki1, and its paralogue tiki2, antagonize wnt activity upstream of its receptors .  
