databases and ontologies arapath: a knowledgebase for pathway analysis in arabidopsis studying plants using high-throughput genomics technologies is becoming routine, but interpretation of genome-wide expression data in terms of biological pathways remains a challenge, partly due to the lack of pathway databases. to create a knowledgebase for plant pathway analysis, we collected 1683 lists of differentially expressed genes from 397 gene-expression studies, which constitute a molecular signature database of various genetic and environmental perturbations of arabidopsis. in addition, we extracted 1909 gene sets from various sources such as gene ontology, kegg, aracyc, plant ontology, predicted target genes of micrornas and transcription factors , and computational gene clusters defined by meta-analysis. with this knowledgebase, we applied gene set enrichment analysis to an expression profile of cold acclimation and identified expected functional categories and pathways. our results suggest that the arapath database can be used to generate specific, testable hypotheses regarding plant molecular pathways from gene expression data.the coverage and quality of gene set databases are critical to the effectiveness of all pathway analysis programs. the molecular signatures database (msigdb) is a collection of gene sets for pathway analysis in mammals using gene set enrichment analysis (gsea;) or other similar methods. the most recent version (3.0) of msigdb contains 6769 sets of genes from various sources. in addition to existing annotation databases such as gene ontology and kegg , lists of differentially expressed genes were manually collected from hundreds of published gene expression studies of genetic and chemical perturbations. inclusion of these gene sets in the database enables the detection of co-regulation of genes similar to those induced by chemical and genetic perturbations reported in the literature. this will be useful in identifying shared regulatory mechanisms , complementing existing tools such as atcast , hormonometer and sample angler (bar.utoronto.ca). to facilitate pathway analysis for plant genomics, we sought to construct a database similar to the msigdb, so that the various pathway analysis programs could be easily used to analyze plant genomic data. recently, extracted gene sets from several sources including go, kegg, traspath and trasfac, so that they could use gsea within the genetrail software. in this study, we compiled a large, publically available gene sets database by extracting information from existing databases and by collecting gene expression signatures from the literature. we focused on arabidopsis thaliana, a widely studied plant model organism with large amounts of genetic, biochemical, physiological and genomic data available. this resource will form the basis for making similar resources for other plants and even more distant species such as plasmodium falciparum (malaria parasite).  
