timma-r: an r package for predicting synergistic multi-targeted drug combinations in cancer cell lines or patient-derived samples network pharmacology-based prediction of multi-targeted drug combinations is becoming a promising strategy to improve anticancer efficacy and safety. we developed a logic-based network algorithm, called target inhibition interaction using maximization and minimization averaging (timma), which predicts the effects of drug combinations based on their binary drug-target interactions and single-drug sensitivity profiles in a given cancer sample. here, we report the r implementation of the algorithm (timma-r), which is much faster than the original matlab code. the major extensions include modeling of multiclass drug-target profiles and network visual-ization. we also show that the timma-r predictions are robust to the intrinsic noise in the experimental data, thus making it a promising high-throughput tool to prioritize drug combinations in various cancer types for follow-up experimentation or clinical applications. availability and implementation: timma-r source code is freely available at http://cran.r-project. org/web/packages/timma/.recently, a network pharmacology paradigm for anticancer drug discovery has been proposed, with an aim of developing multi-targeted drug combinations that consist of distinct chemical agents as a promising strategy to improve treatment efficacy and safety . most mathematical models for predicting the effects of drug combinations relies on empirical cellular dynamic models, such as those based on signaling pathways or metabolic networks. these types of methods are hardly applicable for predicting cancer-selective drug combinations due to lack of accurate kinetic parameters for each cancer type . other methods use the transcriptional responses of drugs, i.e. gene expression profiles before and after drug treatments, to predict drug combinations . however, such drug-induced transcriptional phenotypes are not routinely profiled in a typical high-throughput drug screen, and thus provide limited translation potential in the clinical settings. we have developed a logic-based network pharmacology approach target inhibition interaction using maximization and minimization averaging (timma) for predicting the effects of drug combinations in a given cancer cell sample . timma combines drug-target interaction networks with singledrug sensitivity profiles, derived either from individual cell line models or from patient-derived cell samples . the network algorithm starts by searching a set of combinatorial targets that are most predictive of the singledrug sensitivities. a drug combination is then treated as a combination of target inhibitions, the effect of which can be estimated based on the set relationships with the target profiles of the drugs. the outcome of the timma model provides a list of predictedthe timma-r package will facilitate effective integration of drug-target and drug sensitivity profiles which are becoming increasingly available for the anticancer research. the package does not only offer an efficient prioritization tool for selecting the most promising drug combinations for further experimental testing, but also produces data-driven hypotheses for their target interactions. such networkcentric investigation of the underlying mechanisms of action in the given cellular context will greatly improve our knowledge about the functional cross-talks between parallel cancer signaling pathways to be utilized in anticancer treatment applications.  
