databases and ontologies tisged: a database for tissue-specific genes the tissue-specific genes are a group of genes whose function and expression are preferred in one or several tissues/cell types. identification of these genes helps better understanding of tissuegene relationship, etiology and discovery of novel tissue-specific drug targets. in this study, a statistical method is introduced to detect tissue-specific genes from more than 123 125 gene expression profiles over 107 human tissues, 67 mouse tissues and 30 rat tissues. as a result, a novel subject-specialized repository, namely the tissue-specific genes database (tisged), is developed to represent the analyzed results. auxiliary information of tissue-specific genes was also collected from biomedical literatures.the spatial and temporal variation in gene expression carries crucial information of what the gene does . thanks to the emergence of high-throughput technologies like microarray, the expressions of thousands of genes in multiple tissues can be now monitored simultaneously. databases were thus constructed for storing, representing and retrieving the information. upon these databases, a series of effective analysis tools were developed as well to explore and interpret the massive amounts of data in the context of existing knowledge. these include some sophisticated algorithms that are able to align or cluster the gene expression profiles so as to identify those non-trivial patterns such as correlated expression, differential expression and specific expression . some even mapped the gene expression profiles onto the regulatory, metabolic and cellular pathways . nowadays, there exist a lot of databases containing tissue-specific expression information. some databases like geo and arrayexpress generally deposit microarray datasets produced by various experiments. some databases like tiger , bodymap , biogps and tissuedistributiondbs, however, mainly collect datasets of tissue-specific expressions. many of these databases enable users to visualize and statistically analyze gene expression profiles. some further provide special tools to facilitate to whom correspondence should be addressed. the detection of non-trivial patterns . in this study, we introduce a novel subject-specialized database, namely the tissue-specific genes database (tisged), which particularly provides information of tissue-specific genes derived from literature and data mining of gene expression profiles.  
