data and text mining tissue-aware data integration approach for the inference of pathway interactions in metazoan organisms motivation: leveraging the large compendium of genomic data to predict biomedical pathways and specific mechanisms of protein interactions genome-wide in metazoan organisms has been challenging. in contrast to unicellular organisms, biological and technical variation originating from diverse tissues and cell-lineages is often the largest source of variation in metazoan data com-pendia. therefore, a new computational strategy accounting for the tissue heterogeneity in the functional genomic data is needed to accurately translate the vast amount of human genomic data into specific interaction-level hypotheses. results: we developed an integrated, scalable strategy for inferring multiple human gene interaction types that takes advantage of data from diverse tissue and cell-lineage origins. our approach specifically predicts both the presence of a functional association and also the most likely interaction type among human genes or its protein products on a whole-genome scale. we demonstrate that directly incorporating tissue contextual information improves the accuracy of our predictions , and further, that such genome-wide results can be used to significantly refine regulatory interactions from primary experimental datasets (e.g. chip-seq, mass spectrometry). availability and implementation: an interactive website hosting all of our interaction predictions is publically available at http://pathwaynet.princeton.edu. software was implemented using the open-source sleipnir library, which is available for download at https://bitbucket.org/libsleipnir/libthe molecular activity in a cellular system is maintained by a complex interplay between genes, gene products, metabolites and the environment . in particular, intricate biomolecular pathways are formed by a combination of diverse types of mechanistic pairwise interactions, including physical binding in proteinprotein complexes , small-moleculebased modifications and regulatory actions by activators and repressors . mapping out these cellular pathways at a whole-genome level is a crucial step forthe advancement of human systems biology, aiding at every level from deciphering cellular function to understanding the molecular cause of many complex human diseases. functional genomic datasets such as gene expression, cellular localization and dna/protein binding assays each captures distinct aspects of the cellular activity across multiple cell types and perturbations. however, turning these different instances or views of a complex system into an understanding of pathways has proven to be a challenging undertaking. especially in complex metazoan organisms, such as humans, tissue and cell type-specific expression underlie cellular development, function, and homeostasis . consequently, much of the biological and technical variation of the functional genomic data is driven by tissue and cell-lineage heterogeneity. translating the vast amount of genomic data into specific pathway-level hypotheses thus requires development of algorithmic and statistical approaches that satisfy three requirements: (i) inferring specific individual types of gene interactions, (ii) being scalable to the whole genome and (iii) robust in leveraging biological data from any of the diverse tissue contexts (i.e. experimental results drawn from differing tissues and potentially mixed samples or samples from tissue-culture experiments). in this work, we developed a tissue-context aggregation-based approach for predicting and studying multiple types of pathwaylevel gene interactions for metazoan mammalian organisms, specifically applying this approach to the human data compendium. for our approach, we first built a catalog of tissue and interaction-type specific gold standards (e.g. phosphorylation (kinase-substrate) interactions among brain expressed proteins) restricted to gene pairs coexpressed in any of 77 tissues based on curated pathway databases and gene-to-tissue expression profiling. we then utilize a support vector machine (svm) to generate initial predictions of multiple gene interaction types independently in the context of each tissue (i.e. utilizing the tissue-specific gold standard) by integrating $1600 heterogeneous human experimental datasets [e.g. mrna expression, transcription factor (tf) and kinase motifs and post-translational modifications (. finally, we aggregate the tissue-context based predictions to obtain the most probable set of interaction labels or each gene pair across the set of pathway-level interaction types (in this study we predict transcriptional regulation, co-complex, phosphorylation and the more general post-translational regulation). our methodology uniquely allows us to harness the wealth of information in high-throughput genomic data collections by simultaneously separating the heterogeneity originating from diverse tissues to improve signals for predicting different individual interaction types. to our knowledge, prediction of such genome-wide pathwaylevel interaction networks in metazoans is an open problem. many recent studies have begun to address the challenges by inferring or experimentally capturing physical interaction networks , genetic interaction networks , bayesian integration for functional association networks or predicting regulatory networks from specific primary datasets . however, most previous efforts for predicting pathway interactions have been focused on unicellular model organisms (e.g. escherichia. coli) , while genome-wide integrated analysis in mammalian organisms have been focused on cross-species integration for inferring multiple types of functional couplings [e.g co-membership to metabolic pathways, signaling pathways or proteinprotein interactions (ppi)] . no prior integrative method to our knowledge utilizes one of the most significant and important sources of biological variation in human datasets: tissue context. although several tissue-specific datasets have been generated and analyzed in previous work , we demonstrate that methodological development is required in addition to the inclusion of tissue-specific data to improve the prediction accuracy of integrated interaction predictions in metazoans. our work extends the methodological advancements achieved studying pathway interactions among a focused subset of genes or in unicellular model organisms and provides a platform for applying such methods to human data by addressing the challenge of tissue heterogeneity. ultimately, we envision that our genome-wide interaction networks cannot only be useful to biology researchers investigating a specific protein or interactions of interest, but also be leveraged to increase the interpretability of new high-throughput studies (chip-seq, proteomics, disease samples, etc.) that capture conditionspecific cellular states. as a proof of concept, we demonstrate the utility of our networks by overlaying our interaction networks to identify potential regulatory targets of tfs on 690 chip-seq experimental datasets generated by the encode project . in addition, we generated the first in vivo derived binding/ recognition motifs for cancer-associated tank-binding kinase 1 (tbk1) by integrating our predicted phosphorylation network with a recent tbk1 knockdown phospho-proteomics study . finally, we provide a web-based interface for exploring all our interaction networks and integrative analysis of user data at http://pathwaynet.princeton.edu.we demonstrate the advantage of incorporating tissue context for predicting multiple pathway-level interaction types (transcriptional regulation, co-complex, phosphorylation and the more general posttranslational regulation). specifically, we compare our tissue-aware learning approach with a simpler version that does not use information about tissue heterogeneity among human protein coding genes (i.e. tissue-unaware learning). in total, we apply our tissue-aware learning methodology integrating $50 000 genome-scale experiments to generate whole-genome networks prioritizing gene/protein interactions with strong supporting evidence for each of the predicted pathway-level interaction types (prediction schematic shown in). we demonstrate the utility of our interaction networks in robustly retrieving pathway members across 447 expert-curated pathways. in addition, we show our interaction networks can be used to accurately identify false positive regulatory targets in primary user datasets generated by chip-seq and mass spectrometry based phospho-proteomics.  
