tissue-specific subnetworks and characteristics of publicly available human protein interaction databases motivation: protein-protein interaction (ppi) databases are widely used tools to study cellular pathways and networks; however, there are several databases available that still do not account for cell type-specific differences. here, we evaluated the characteristics of six interaction databases, incorporated tissue-specific gene expression information and finally, investigated if the most popular proteins of scientific literature are involved in good quality interactions. results: we found that the evaluated databases are comparable in terms of node connectivity (i.e. proteins with few interaction partners also have few interaction partners in other databases), but may differ in the identity of interaction partners. we also observed that the incorporation of tissue-specific expression information significantly altered the interaction landscape and finally, we demonstrated that many of the most intensively studied proteins are engaged in interactions associated with low confidence scores. in summary, interaction databases are valuable research tools but may lead to different predictions on interactions or pathways. the accuracy of predictions can be improved by incorporating datasets on organ-and cell type-specific gene expression, and by obtaining additional interaction evidence for the most popular proteins.traditionally, studies that assess the cellular metabolism, disease and cancer development, pathogens infections or drugprotein interaction have focused on single genes or proteins. while such studies have created large amounts of data, they typically do not account for the multiple interactions that regulate cellular networks. to whom correspondence should be addressed. recently, high-throughput approaches including yeast two-hybrid screens , immunoprecipitation studies followed by mass spectrometry analysis , transcriptomics and metabolomics studies have become important research tools to identify protein protein interaction (ppi) partners or cellular factors that are up-or downregulated in response to specific stimuli . with the availability of the resulting large datasets, the challenge now lies in the generation of comprehensive and robust interactome maps, ideally capturing all ppis within a cell and between cells at any given moment in time. the human proteome is estimated to encompass 130 000650 000 ppis . of those, only a subset has been described at this point, establishing ppi databases that provide valuable information about the reactions occurring at the proteome level. previous studies analyzed and compared some of these databases ; however, these analyses were based on the significantly smaller datasets available at the time of the analysis, and included only subsets of currently popular ppi databases. therefore, we analyzed the following four popular ppi databases : hprd [human protein reference database (; mint [molecular interaction ]; intact and biogrid [biological general repository for interaction datasets (. in addition, we also included in the comparison a recently published database named hippie (human integrated protein protein interaction reference, http://cbdm.mdc-berlin.de/tools/hippie/) (m.submitted for publication). it is assembled through the compilation of several ppi sources, including the previously mentioned databases. lastly, for the sections of this study not involving network topological characteristics, we also included the string database (search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes/proteins) , a popular resource that in addition to protein interactions, also contains protein associations from several pathway databases. mint, hprd, biogrid andintact are manually curated and have thousands of interactions submitted by the community; thus, since they offer original interactions used by other databases, we refer to these four databases as primary resources. hippie and string are composed of interactions taken from primary databases and other sources; hence, we refer to hippie and string as derived databases. in addition, for the purpose of this study we removed all predicted functional associations present in string. here, we focused on the human subset of interaction databases, and as an improvement over most current analyses, we demonstrated the usefulness of organ or cell type-specific subnetworks. we analyzed these databases for their basic features including protein coverage, number of interactions and neighborhood characteristics (i.e. we compared the number and identity of interactions partners, and asked whether proteins that are a hub in one database occupy a similar position in other databases). finally, using three databases that assign confidence scores to its interactions, we demonstrated that there is a lack of interaction data with high confidence scores for many intensively studied proteins. additional experimental evidence for those interactions, either confirming or refuting, would significantly increase the robustness of current ppi databases.  
