sequence analysis tmbb-db: a transmembrane b-barrel proteome database motivation: we previously reported the development of a highly accurate statistical algorithm for identifying-barrel outer membrane proteins or transmembrane-barrels (tmbbs), from genomic sequence data of gram-negative bacteria (freeman,t.c. and wimley,w.c. (2010) bioinformatics, 26, 19651974). we have now applied this identification algorithm to all available gram-negative bacterial genomes (over 600 chromosomes) and have constructed a publicly available, searchable, up-to-date, database of all proteins in these genomes. results: for each protein in the database, there is information on (i)-barrel membrane protein probability for identification of-barrels, (ii)-strand and-hairpin propensity for structure and topology prediction , (iii) signal sequence score because most tmbbs are secreted through the inner membrane translocon and, thus, have a signal sequence, and (iv) transmembrane-helix predictions, for reducing false positive predictions. this information is sufficient for the accurate identification of most-barrel membrane proteins in these genomes. in the database there are nearly 50 000 predicted tmbbs (out of 1.9 million total putative proteins). of those, more than 15 000 are hypothetical or putative proteins, not previously identified as tmbbs. this wealth of genomic information is not available anywhere else. availability: the tmbb genomic database is available at http://betathe transmembrane-barrel (tmbb) is the dominant architecture of the membrane-spanning proteins found in the outer membranes of gram-negative bacteria . although it has been estimated that approximately 3 of the proteins in gram-negative organisms encode tmbbs (freeman,), fewer than 100 unique structures have been determined experimentally . the relatively slow progress in tmbb structural characterization is partially a consequence of the hydrophobic nature of membrane proteins, which makes standard techniques for purification and crystallization, or structure determination by nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr), more difficult. while structural information is scarce, genome sequencing is advancing (and accelerating) rapidly. thus, computational approaches that can utilize the available structural data to predict and identify tmbbs, even in the absence of efficient structure determination, are needed. the complete genomic sequences of thousands of organisms have become available in recent years, and a variety of computational tools have been developed to sift through the abundance of genomic data toward the goal of identifying the structures and functions of the genes that are expressed as proteins. since this process relies strongly on homology to known structures, the resultant genomic database annotations for tmbbs are noticeably sparse. in the last decade, many computational prediction tools have proven at least partially successful in using the information from the limited examples of tmbbs to distinguish between tmbbs and non-tmbbs or to predict the structure and topology of tmbbs . among the various approaches are statistical models, neural networks, hidden markov models, k-nearest neighbor, and support vector machines. we recently published a prediction method (freeman,) based on the statistical prevalence of the amino acids in the transmembrane segments of known structures, which was shown to accurately discriminate tmbbs from non-tmbbs. here, we describe a comprehensive bioinformatics database (tmbb-db: the transmembrane beta barrel database: http:// beta-barrel.tulane.edu) generated by using the freeman wimley prediction method (freeman,) to analyze the protein-coding sequences of all bacterial chromosomes belonging to gram-negative bacteria (currently over 600). for each of the 1.9 million proteins in the database, we provide an overall-barrel score that can be used to predict if a sequence is likely to encode a tmbb. we also provide the freemanwimley-strand and-hairpin score profiles, which are useful for structure and topology prediction. furthermore, the sequences were analyzed for the presence of an n-terminal signal sequence because most known tmbb precursors encode export signals at the n-terminus that allow translocon-dependent transport across the inner membrane . finally, we have also included a prediction for transmembrane-helices. this helps to eliminate false positives because tmbbs generally do not also have tm helices. the information in the database is sufficient for accurate identification of most-barrel membrane proteins in known gram-negative genomes. there are to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2012. published by oxford university press. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions.com more than 15 000 hypothetical or putative proteins in the database which are almost certainly-barrel membrane proteins. this wealth of genomic information is not available anywhere else.  
