gene expression tmle.npvi: targeted, integrative search of associations between dna copy number and gene expression, accounting for dna methylation we describe the implementation of the method introduced by chambaz et al. in 2012. we also demonstrate its genome-wide application to the integrative search of new regions with strong association between dna copy number and gene expression accounting for dna methyla-tion in breast cancers. availability and implementation: an open-source r package tmle.npvi is available from cran (http://cran.r-project.org/).looking for genes whose dna copy number is associated with their expression level in a cancer study can help pinpoint candidates implied in the disease and enhance our understanding of its molecular bases. genomic covariates may play an important role in the biological process and should therefore be taken into account. for instance, dna methylation is known to regulate gene expression. to quantify the association between dna copy number and expression, accounting for such relevant genomic covariates,have crafted a new parameter and built a method to infer it upon the targeted minimum loss-based inference principle (tmle). coined by van der, tmle has been applied in a variety of contexts (van der). in this note, we describe the implementation of this method and its genome-wide, integrative application. considering associations between dna copy numbers and expression levels in genes is not new . in contrast to these earlier contributions, ours does explicitly exploit that dna copy number measurements feature both a reference level and a continuum of other levels, instead of discretizing them or considering them as purely continuous. moreover, we naturally handle multidimensional, continuous covariates without discretization. we do not need to assume that they are normally distributed, nor that their true effect on dna copy number and gene expression is linear.we have described the implementation of the method introduced by. we have also demonstrated its genome-wide application to the integrative search of new regions with strong association between dna copy number and gene expression accounting for dna methylation in breast cancers. the interest of the parameter w goes beyond the specific genomic context of this note, as it is designed to quantify the effect of any continuous exposure x with a reference value x 0 on any continuous outcome y accounting for possibly multi-dimensional, relevant covariates w., gene by gene, the proportions of the 463 samples for which x 0 (gray), x 0 (light gray) and x 0 (white)  
