topdom: database of conservatively located domains and motifs in proteins the topdom databaseoriginally created as a collection of domains and motifs located consistently on the same side of the membranes in a-helical transmembrane proteinshas been updated and extended by taking into consideration consistently localized domains and motifs in globular proteins, too. by taking advantage of the recently developed cctop algorithm to determine the type of a protein and predict topology in case of transmembrane proteins, and by applying a thorough search for domains and motifs as well as utilizing the most up-to-date version of all source databases, we managed to reach a 6-fold increase in the size of the whole database and a 2-fold increase in the number of transmembrane proteins. availability and implementation: topdom database is available at http://topdom.enzim.hu. the webpage utilizes the common apache, php5 and mysql software to provide the user interface for accessing and searching the database. the database itself is generated on a high performance computer. contact: tusnady.gabor@ttk.mta.hu.protein domains can fold independently from other parts of proteins and have distinct functions. a function linked to a domain may be important in several processes, therefore one domain may appear in different proteins . since domains can only be functional in appropriate conditions, a particular domain in various proteins should be located in the same environment, i.e. in the same subcellular location or in organelles which interiors have similar physicalchemical properties. identifying those protein domains that consistently appear in the same location may help the annotation of unknown proteins with the same or similar domains or the topology prediction of transmembrane proteins . during process of cytosis, membranes keep their initial orientation; therefore, all cellular space can be defined as one of the followings: inside (cytoplasmic) or outside (extra-cytoplasmic) space. a detailed description of the various membranes and their sidedness can be found on the homepage of topdb database (http://topdb. enzim.hu;). here, we report the update of the topdom database, originally developed for gathering domains consistently located on the same side of tmps . the update was performed by extending the examination with globular proteins and using exhaustive search for domains and motifs in all proteins either having a precise location relative to the membranes (e.g. the localization mitochondrion is not precise but mitochondrion matrix is) or being transmembrane. moreover, we applied statistical significance test to select those domains and motifs that are consistently on the same side of the membrane either in tmps or in non-tmps.  
