accurate continuous geographic assignment from low-to high-density snp data motivation: large-scale genotype datasets can help track the dispersal patterns of epidemiological outbreaks and predict the geographic origins of individuals. such genetically-based geographic assignments also show a range of possible applications in forensics for profiling both victims and criminals, and in wildlife management, where poaching hotspot areas can be located. they, however, require fast and accurate statistical methods to handle the growing amount of genetic information made available from genotype arrays and next-generation sequencing technologies. results: we introduce a novel statistical method for geopositioning individuals of unknown origin from genotypes. our method is based on a geostatistical model trained with a dataset of georefer-enced genotypes. statistical inference under this model can be implemented within the theoretical framework of integrated nested laplace approximation, which represents one of the major recent breakthroughs in statistics, as it does not require monte carlo simulations. we compare the performance of our method and an alternative method for geospatial inference, spa in a simulation framework. we highlight the accuracy and limits of continuous spatial assignment methods at various scales by analyzing genotype datasets from a diversity of species, including florida scrub-jay birds aphelocoma coerulescens, arabidopsis thaliana and humans, representing 41197,146 snps. our method appears to be best suited for the analysis of medium-sized datasets (a few tens of thousands of loci), such as reduced-representation sequencing data that become increasingly available in ecology. availability and implementation:inferring the geographic origin of living organisms from their genetic information is of great interest for many applications in biology. it can provide information about gene flow, migration patterns and connectivity in natural populations but can also help inform wildlife managers about illegal animal translocations and poaching hotspots . as such, this information can complement the arsenal of dna-based fraud detection methods, aiming at detecting derivatives of endangered and trade-restricted species . in addition, dna-informed geospatial localization can reveal the geographic source of pathogens during epidemiological outbreaks or the geographic origin of plants and animals used in the industrial manufacture of food products (lees,). here, we introduce spatial bayesian inference (spasiba), a novel method for geospatial assignment. the premise of the spasiba method is that in most natural contexts, spatial patterns of allele frequencies are complex and are likely to be well captured by a geostatistical model such as the one implemented in the scat program , but here, we leverage the power of a recent breakthrough statistical theory developed by and . this allows us to make mcmc-free inference in only a fraction of the time required by scat.  
