bioinformatics discovery note structural bioinformatics tospovirus ambisense genomic rna segments use almost complete repertoire of stable tetraloops in the intergenic region the intergenic regions of the ambisense rna segments of viruses from the tospovirus genus form large extended rna structures that regulate virus replication. using comparative structure analysis , we show the presence of conserved alternative conformations at the apical parts of these structures. in one conformation, a branched y-shape, the 5 0-proximal hairpin arms are mostly capped by exceptionally stable tetraloop motifs. the tetraloop hairpins are folded in both virus and virus-complementary sense rnas, and different tetra-loops can functionally replace each other. folding simulations show that the branched y-shape structures can undergo a conformational transition to alternative extended rod-like conformations. functional importance of both alternatives is supported by nucleotide covari-ations. the balanced equilibrium between alternative structures is evi-denced by native gel electrophoresis of mutant rna transcripts with shifted equilibria. the tetraloops play a role in the stability and dynamics of structures but may also be recognized by proteins involved in translation and/or replication.viruses of the genus tospovirus are plant-infecting pathogens that possess ambisense genomic rna segments . these ambisense segments, m (medium) and s (small), yield viral rna transcripts of opposite polarities with non-overlapping protein-coding regions. the 3 0 ends of vrna sense (the polarity of the negative-sense rna packaged in the virion) and vcrna (virus-complementary) transcripts overlap in the intergenic regions (igr) . the tospovirus m and s rna transcripts are not polyadenylated like the majority of eukaryotic mrnas. instead, they contain a-rich sequences in the 3 0 utr of mrnas, encoded in the igrs that contain long stretches of a-rich and u-rich sequences. this results in the folding of extended stem-loop structures that have been suggested to regulate the translation and/or transcription termination of mrnas of both polarities . the determinants of the regulatory functions of tospovirus igr structured domains are not yet known. the structures (frequently called hairpins in the tospovirus literature) may fold into various shapes with branched or unbranched apical parts at the top of the a-urich stem-loops (e.g.). here, we investigate the hairpins formed by the tospovirus m and s rna igr domains, searching for conserved structural features.comparison of predicted tospovirus igr structures shows that their conserved hairpin arms exhibit a striking bias in the loop sequences to form tetraloops in the 5 0-proximal arms of both vrna and vcrna structures, using a considerable part of the known repertoire of extra stable tetraloop motifs. a probability of such a bias to be determined by chance alone is negligible. given a structure with two tetranucleotide hairpin loops, what is a constrained motif by itself, two stable tetraloops such as gnra and ynmg would randomly occur with probability 1/512 in an uniform nucleotide distribution (for gnra/ uncg: 1/1024). conservation of these motifs in different viruses is not determined just by shared ancestry because various tetraloop types are found in homologous hairpins, showing that the tetraloops were evolved several times. a probability of such independent events in different viruses and segments to be determined by chance, being the product of sequence motif probabilities, is negligible. this shows that the observed bias is determined by strong evolutionary constraints.these constraints suggest fast cotranscriptional formation of the metastable branched configurations that may delay the folding of more stable extended alternative stem-loops. the energy barrier for this transition is determined by simultaneous disruption of two hairpins, with total stacking free energy of 15 20 kcal/mol in 810 bp capped by stable tetraloops. thus, the transition times may be considerable and effectively trap tospovirus igrs in branched configurations. such kinetic trapping in a metastable conformation is supported by the igr folding simulations and the experimental study of alternative structures (supplementary). the coupled covariation pattern involving more than two bases is an indicator of a fine-tuned conformational transition , and multiplenote: the loop-closing pairs are shown in lowercase. the nucleotides in the loops other than stable tetraloops are shown by dots in the tetraloop type column.. coupled covariations (boxed) in the s segment vrna structures examples of functionally important cotranscriptional rna folding are known . functional interchangeability of tetraloop types is usually explained by their exceptional stabilities . however, the majority of tospovirus m segment gaaa tetraloops are closed by a u-a base pair , which neither confers the exceptional stability nor is a frequent gaaa closing pair . furthermore, the gaaa tetraloops fold significantly slower than ynmg ones and have folding kinetics comparable with the loops with an arbitrary sequence . thus, it seems that certain features other than just thermodynamic stability and folding rate are important in the tospovirus rna tetraloop replacements. both gnra and ynmg tetraloops are able to form tertiary interactions with various receptors in rna (e.g.) and also can be recognized by proteins . for instance, the less stable ugaaaa motif, present in many tospovirus m segments , specifically binds the phage n peptide . furthermore, by analogy to the behavior of the phage n peptide targets, the gtv vcrna 5 0-proximal loop gaaaa , containing the extruding adenine from the gaaa-like fold, is expected to retain comparable binding properties. the tospovirus igr structures were suggested to stimulate translation by assisting in circularization of mrna . their y-shape conformation resembles those of some of the plant virus translational enhancers such as the so-called bydv-like cap-independent 3 0 utr translational enhancers . remarkably, the bydv-like cap-independent 3 0 utr translational enhancer left arms have gnrna and gnra loops that have been suggested to determine the binding of the translation factor eif4g and recruitment of eif4e or other yet unidentified proteins . the tospovirus s rna structures have been shown to act in concert with the viral proteins n and nss, presumably involving nss binding to rna . one could speculate that the tetraloop motifs in the tospovirus igr structures determine the binding of translation factors and/or other proteins. a transition between two rna structures may determine switching between different processes such as translation, transcription and replication. replication enhancers may also adopt various y-shape or unbranched conformations with diverse loop motifs . structurally diverse igr domains are also folded in the ambisense segments of some viruses of the genera phlebovirus and arenavirus , but these structures are not conserved. this may be explained by differences in transcription termination mechanisms . further research is needed to elucidate the roles of the tospovirus ambisense igr structures and the function of the diverse tetraloop motifs.  
