towards 3d structure prediction of large rna molecules: an integer programming framework to insert local 3d motifs in rna secondary structure motivation: the prediction of rna 3d structures from its sequence only is a milestone to rna function analysis and prediction. in recent years, many methods addressed this challenge, ranging from cycle decomposition and fragment assembly to molecular dynamics simulations. however, their predictions remain fragile and limited to small rnas. to expand the range and accuracy of these techniques, we need to develop algorithms that will enable to use all the structural information available. in particular, the energetic contribution of secondary structure interactions is now well documented, but the quantification of non-canonical interactionsthose shaping the tertiary structureis poorly understood. nonetheless, even if a complete rna tertiary structure energy model is currently unavailable, we now have catalogues of local 3d structural motifs including non-canonical base pairings. a practical objective is thus to develop techniques enabling us to use this knowledge for robust rna tertiary structure predictors. results: in this work, we introduce rna-moip, a program that benefits from the progresses made over the last 30 years in the field of rna secondary structure prediction and expands these methods to incorporate the novel local motif information available in databases. using an integer programming framework, our method refines predicted secondary structures (i.e. removes incorrect canonical base pairs) to accommodate the insertion of rna 3d motifs (i.e. hairpins, internal loops and k-way junctions). then, we use predictions as templates to generate complete 3d structures with the mc-sym program. we benchmarked rna-moip on a set of 9 rnas with sizes varying from 53 to 128 nucleotides. we show that our approach (i) improves the accuracy of canonical base pair predictions; (ii) identifies the best secondary structures in a pool of suboptimal structures; and (iii) predicts accurate 3d structures of large rna molecules. availability: rna-moip is publicly available at: http:// csb.cs.mcgill.ca/rnamoip.ribonucleic acids perform a broad range of functions in cells. ribozymes such as the rnase p or the group ii introns catalyze chemical reactions, whereas micrornas hybridize to messenger rna to regulate gene expression. to achieve these functions, many rnas fold into specific 3d structures that are directly to whom correspondence should be addressed. encoded in their nucleotide sequence. the structural information is therefore useful to predict the function. nonetheless, experimental determination of rna structures remains time-consuming and technically challenging. it follows that we need to develop fast and reliable computational tools to help to predict them. during the last few years, several groups have developed fully automated rna 3d structure prediction programs. to date, the most popular ones are farna , the mc-pipeline , ifoldrna and nast . a recent review by laing and schlick (2010) proposes a comprehensive overview of these strategies. conditional random fields techniques implemented in barnacle and treefolder also appear as a promising approach. however, unlike classical secondary structure predictors such as rnastructure , rnafold , unafold , contrafold or contextfold , the range of application of the rna 3d structure predictors is limited. currently, their time requirement and/or their accuracy restrict their application range to sequences with 50 nucleotides. by contrast, secondary structure predictors are fast and reliable on sequences with 100 nucleotides. mc-fold and rnawolf (zu) expanded these techniques to predict extended secondary structures (i.e. including non-canonical interactions), but these algorithms remain limited to predict nested secondary structures without k-way junctions, thus, precisely lacking the structural motifs shaping the rna 3d structure. thus, ab-initio 3d structure prediction of large rna molecules (i.e. 50 nucleotides in our context) is still an open question. to overcome this barrier, new models are required. indeed, due to the paucity of structural data available, the design of a complete model accounting for all the subtle 3d structural variations observed in experimentally determined structures is unlikely. the methods developed in this article are based on a recent idea suggesting that rna 3d structures share common structural subunits. the decomposition of rna structures in elementary blocks was first introduced bywho proposed a description of rna secondary structures (including non-canonical interactions) based on cycles. more recently, the analysis of experimental 3d structures revealed that similar 3d motifs can be found in multiple unrelated structures. here, we define a motif as a group of nucleotides that adopt a specific 3d shape and interaction pattern (including non-canonical interactions). several groups have developed computational methods to extract and classify rna 3d motifs. the most popular databases are fr3d , rnamotif and rnajunction . importantly, these databases identify 3d motifs involving three or more segments of the same molecule defined as k-way junctions (when the motif is the branching point of several helical segments). such motifs are important because they are precisely those shaping the 3d structure of an rna molecule. despite the knowledge accumulated in these databases, the integration of this information into current models remains complicated. first, the classification of rna motifs can be ambiguous (i.e. a motif and its submotifs can match different database entries). next, the structural compatibility between two or more motifs can be difficult to resolve (i.e. how to concatenate two motifs). it is worth noting that a method to predict the topological family of a given 3-way junction has been recently introduced by. interestingly, to complement the secondary structure programs,implemented semiautomated methods (resp. rna2d3d and assemble) for building 3d models from known/predicted secondary structure information. these programs provide intuitive interfaces enabling their users to insert 3d motifs and modify backbone angles of a coarse grained input structure. from this standpoint, the hierarchical approaches (i.e. rna2d3d and assemble) appear well suited to the prediction of large rna structures. their advantage resides in their capacity to benefit from the high accuracy of classical secondary structure predictors (i.e. thermodynamic or comparative models) to build a scaffold of the structure, and then to leave to the user the task of decorating the model with the various structural motifs found in databases. although this strategy is flexible, it is time-consuming and requires human participation. recently, cruz and westhof (2011) developed rmdetect, a method to predict g-bulge loops, kinkturns, c-loops and tandem-ga loops in rna secondary structures. but the prediction of more complex motifs such as the k-way junctions and the construction of 3d rna structures remain open problems. in this article, we introduce rna-moip, an integer programming (ip) framework for inserting rna 3d motifs inside known (or predicted) rna secondary structures. we use our predictions as a template to generate putative rna 3d structures using the mc-sym software, and show that we are able to predict accurate 3d structures of large rna sequences. integer programming techniques have gained a lot of interest recently as they provided state-of-the-art methods for predicting rna secondary structures with pseudoknots . one of their strengths resides in their flexibility and capacity to incorporate heterogeneous constraints, a valuable advantage when it comes to incorporate k-way junctions. the article is organized as follows. in section 2 we formally define the motifs, describe our motif database, and introduce our ip model rna-moip. in section 3, we apply rna-moip on a set of nine rna used by laing and schlick (2010) to benchmark rna 3d structure prediction programs. our results show that rna-moip (i) improves the accuracy of canonical base pair predictions; (ii) identifies the best secondary structures in a pool of suboptimal structures generated by rnasubopt; and (iii) predicts accurate 3d structures for sequences with sizes varying between 53 and 128 nucleotidesan insight that cannot be reached by other programs. finally, in section 4, we discuss our results and propose future research directions.  
