towards a pirna prediction using multiple kernel fusion and support vector machine motivation: piwi-interacting rna (pirna) is the most recently discovered and the least investigated class of argonaute/piwi protein-interacting small non-coding rnas. the pirnas are mostly known to be involved in protecting the genome from invasive transposable elements. but recent discoveries suggest their involvement in the pathophysiology of diseases, such as cancer. their identification is therefore an important task, and computational methods are needed. however, the lack of conserved pirna sequences and structural elements makes this identification challenging and difficult. results: in the present study, we propose a new modular and exten-sible machine learning method based on multiple kernels and a support vector machine (svm) classifier for pirna identification. very few pirna features are known to date. the use of a multiple kernels approach allows editing, adding or removing pirna features that can be heterogeneous in a modular manner according to their relevance in a given species. our algorithm is based on a combination of the previously identified features [sequence features (k-mer motifs and a uri-dine at the first position) and pirnas cluster feature] and a new telomere/centromere vicinity feature. these features are heterogeneous , and the kernels allow to unify their representation. the proposed algorithm, named pirpred, gives promising results on drosophila and human data and outscores previously published pirna identification algorithms. availability and implementation: pirpred is freely available to non-commercial users on our web server evryrna http://evryrna.ibisc.using computational approaches is a practical manner to identify potential non-coding rnas (ncrnas), which can be experimentally studied further. many methods have been developed for the in silico prediction of several types of ncrnas such as micrornas (mirnas). the piwi protein-interacting rna (pirna) is the most recently discovered and the least characterized class of argonaute (ago)/piwi protein-interacting small ncrna. unlike the broad expression of mirna in most cells and tissue types, pirna expression is highly enriched in the germline. like mirna, pirna molecules are associated with proteins of the ago/piwi family to execute sequence-specific gene silencing. additionally, pirna molecules may fine-tune gene expression by mediating epigenetic modifications of heterochromatin. the germline-enriched expression pattern and the finding that mutating the pirna biogenesis pathway resulted in sterility demonstrated the critical impact of the piwipirna pathway exert on germline development and function . in addition to their activity in the germline, accumulating recent data have suggested pirna expression and biological activity in somatic cells as well, and recent discoveries suggest the involvement of pirnas in diseases such as cancer . therefore, an updated vision suggests a wider definition of pirna expression and biological function in both germline and somatic cells . the pirnas are the largest and most heterogeneous class of the small ncrna family, exceeding 2 million distinct pirna species in the mouse . initial identification and characterization of mammalian pirnas were achieved by experimental approaches that combined the isolation of piwi protein-interacting sequences and/or deep sequencing of germline-enriched short rna sequences . although this methodology appeared productive, it could not exhaustively cover the entire repertoire of pirna molecules in a specific organism. in particular, tissue-specific and low copy number-expressed pirna could not be fully detected using this methodology. unlike mirnas, pirnas lack clear secondary structure motifs, and primary sequence conservation, except for enrichment for the presence of a uridine nucleotide at the 5 0 first position of the transcript (le). one hallmark characteristic of pirna sequences, that are of 2435 nt of length, is that most of them are encoded in genome clusters ranging from 1 to 4100 kb long. there are both monodirectional clusters encoding pirnas on one strand, and bidirectional clusters whose halves encode pirnas on opposite strands and whose transcription starts in the opposite direction from a centrally located promoter . brennecke et al. have also reported that in drosophila, pirnas have the tendency to be expressed near telomere and centromere regions on the chromosome . the lack of conserved characteristics makes the identification of pirnas by computational methods a difficult challenge. only a few methods have been developed to predict pirnas. these methods can be classified into two classes. the first one uses a linear classification algorithm to predict individual pirnas , and the second one is based on clustering approaches to predict pirna clusters from rnaseq sequences . zhang et al. group proposed a method based on the use of k-mer strings for the identification of motifs in pirna sequences. all the 15 nt strings are considered, including 4 1-mer strings (a, c, g and t), to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2014. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com 16 2-mer strings, 64 3-mer strings, 256 4-mer strings and 1024 5-mer strings. a total of 1364 strings are obtained and used for classifying pirna and non-pirna sequences. two algorithms have been proposed for predicting pirna clusters from rnaseq data: protrac and piclust . the protrac algorithm is based on a statistical probabilistic analysis. it analyzes mapped sequence reads and identifies clusters based on significant deviations from a uniform pirna distribution, using different types of information, including the density of mapped reads, strand asymmetry, frequency of putative pirna loci with u at the first position of the sequence, or a at position 10. on the other hand, the piclust algorithm uses a density-based clustering approach without assuming any parametric distribution and considers the actual interdistance between mapped reads for the determination of clustering, with results that were claimed to outperform the protrac algorithm. taken together, previous pirna prediction algorithms were based on the following features: (i) transcript length of 2435 nt, (ii) nucleotide bias at position 1 of g expression, (iii) localization in clusters and (iv) differential frequencies of certain k-mer sequences. to the best of our knowledge, however, none of the previous publications have attempted to combine all of these features together. exploiting all these features could improve the results obtained by the existing algorithms. in this article, we propose a computational approach to combine heterogeneous types of pirna features. we developed a machine learning method based on the fusion of multiple kernels and support vector machines (svms) , a wellknown machine learning method that has been widely used in diverse areas of bioinformatics. svm is a kernel-based learner, which can find non-liner boundaries between data classes by using kernels. using kernel methods makes it possible to represent the original data by using a matrix representation, called a kernel matrix. symmetric positive definite kernel matrices encode the similarity between sequences in their respective input space. this implies that the heterogeneous features can all be replaced by appropriately kernel matrices. this allows the elimination of the data heterogeneity. constructing the same representation for all datasets and integrating these representations is the main intuition behind kernel fusion methods. in recent years, several machine learning methods have been proposed to exploit different information sources using kernels (g onen and alpayd, 2011). research in multiple kernel learning (mkl) has focused on both developing new formulations as well as optimizing them. different formulations are required to address the needs of different applications. most of the methods using these formulations propose to learn the combined kernels by tuning automatically the kernel weights (g onen and). early work focused on learning the kernel as a linear combination of given base kernels . non-linear kernel combinations , such as products of kernels and mixtures of polynomials, have also been shown to be appropriate in certain domains. many of these formulations can be easily cast in the generalized mkl (gmkl) framework proposed in . in the pirna prediction problem, the use of multiple kernels makes it possible to propose a modular and extensible method. thus, new kernels representing newly discovered pirna characteristics can easily be added. because the research on pirnas is at its beginning, it is important to have methods that can integrate new knowledge about this rna. the multiple kernel method also has the advantage of allowing exploration of characteristics, even when these are not yet validated, which is helpful in this context. thus, it could be possible to ignore an implemented kernel if it turns out not to be useful and/or corresponds to a false knowledge. our method is therefore adaptive, the user being able to consider the appropriate kernels according to the data type and studied species. to summarize, we have developed an extensible and adaptive classification method for pirna prediction, which is distinct from the existing methods in several aspects: (i) several kernels that represent heterogeneous feature sets are built and used, (ii) a new type of feature is explored, (iii) the characteristic of pirnas to occur in clusters on the chromosome is coded in a kernel to use it in a supervised way and (iv) a non-linear classifier approach is used, which is more suitable for real-world data. here we describe our multiple kernel-based svm algorithm, called pirpred, and we report the results that we have obtained, that are promising.the present study aimed at the development of a novel algorithm for the identification of pirna sequences. we propose a multiple kernel fusion and an svm-based approach that allows to use heterogeneous features, each kernel implementing a class of features. our approach is therefore modular, extensible and adaptive, allowing the implementation of new features or the use of more appropriate ones (depending on the species). in the context of pirnas, which have not been studied as extensively as mirnas, for instance, it is appreciable to be able to take into account new knowledge and discoveries on these rnas. because of the lack of known conserved characteristics of pirna sequences (except the occurrence of a uridine base at the first position) and structure (there is no known structure for pirnas), their identification by computational methods is a difficult task. to our knowledge, only one computational method, based on k-mer motifs, has been reported in the literature for pirna prediction . two other methods have been reported, based on the characteristic of pirnas to occur in clusters in the genome , which identify pirna clusters from deep sequencing data. in the present study, we have provided a few new elements. we have suggested and confirmed a new feature for pirna identification, which is the distance to telomere/centromere regions, which was reported on drosophila . we then tested this feature in combination with previously published features in the context of a modular algorithm, and surprisingly, we were able to identify its utility not only in drosophila but also in human. last, we provide a computational tool for pirna identification that gives better results than the previously published zhang et al. method . one of our further perspectives is to continue our investigation by finding other characteristics of pirnas that would allow us to define new kernels and thus to improve the prediction results. we plan, for instance, to consider a characteristic of pirna clusters highlighted by a computational analysis performed in the mouse by, who suggest that 25 of pirna clusters are bracketed by inverted repeats of varying length. one of our other perspectives for improving our classification results is to perform the training step on all known pirnas, i.e. on pirna sequences of pirnabank, and to build kernels with all these sequences. for this classification problem with large training dataset, accuracy, training and testing speed andnote: tp, true-positive predictions; se, sensitivity. in bold: the highest value in each column.  
