data and text mining towards building a disease-phenotype knowledge base: extracting disease-manifestation relationship from literature motivation: systems approaches to studying phenotypic relationships among diseases are emerging as an active area of research for both novel disease gene discovery and drug repurposing. currently, systematic study of disease phenotypic relationships on a phenome-wide scale is limited because large-scale machine-understandable diseasephenotype relationship knowledge bases are often unavailable. here, we present an automatic approach to extract dis-easemanifestation (d-m) pairs (one specific type of diseasepheno-type relationship) from the wide body of published biomedical literature. data and methods: our method leverages external knowledge and limits the amount of human effort required. for the text corpus, we used 119 085 682 medline sentences (21 354 075 citations). first, we used d-m pairs from existing biomedical ontologies as prior knowledge to automatically discover d-mspecific syntactic patterns. we then extracted additional pairs from medline using the learned patterns. finally, we analysed correlations between disease manifestations and disease-associated genes and drugs to demonstrate the potential of this newly created knowledge base in disease gene discovery and drug repurposing. results: in total, we extracted 121 359 unique d-m pairs with a high precision of 0.924. among the extracted pairs, 120 419 (99.2) have not been captured in existing structured knowledge sources. we have shown that disease manifestations correlate positively with both disease associated genes and drug treatments. conclusions: the main contribution of our study is the creation of a large-scale and accurate d-m phenotype relationship knowledge base. this unique knowledge base, when combined with existing phenotypic, genetic and proteomic datasets, can have profound implications in our deeper understanding of disease etiology and in rapid drug repurposing.discerning the genetic contributions to complex human diseases is challenging, demands new types of data and calls for new avenues for advancing the state-of-the-art in systems approaches to uncovering disease etiology. one recognized limitation of current computational candidate disease gene prediction and drug repurposing approaches is that the selection of gene or drug candidates is based on known molecular basis of diseases, genes or drugs, and is therefore limited in the capacity of identifying novel disease genes or new drug targets. it has been increasingly recognized that phenotypically related diseases often reflect overlapping molecular causations . therefore, the systematic study of phenotypic relationships among human diseases and integration of disease phenotypic data with existing genetic and omics data will allow for the elucidation of disease genetic mechanisms and the development of effective drug therapies without requiring detailed knowledge of the exact relationships among genes, which often are not clearly understood. however, current systematic study of disease phenotypic relationships on both phenome-and genomewide scale is limited owing to the fact that large-scale machineunderstandable disease phenotype knowledge bases are often not available. the lack of disease phenotype data to complement genetic and proteomic datasets has limited scientific progress towards elucidating the origins of human disease for better disease prevention and treatment. our ultimate research goal is to build a large-scale and accurate diseasephenotype relationship knowledge base from published literature, patient electronic health records (ehrs), biomedical ontologies and other knowledge sources. this diseasephenotype knowledge base will include relationships such as diseaserisk (environmental risk factors and predisposing diseases), diseasedisease comorbidity, diseaseorgan, diseasemanifestation (d-m) (symptom), among others. in this study, we focus on automatically extracting d-m pairs from the large amount of published biomedical literature (22 million citations in medline so far). as far as we know, this is the first large-scale effort focusing on automatically extracting diseasephenotype relationship knowledge from published biomedical literature. the unique disease phenotype knowledge base we create can have profound to whom correspondence should be addressed. implications in our deeper understanding of disease etiology and in rapid drug repurposing.we presented a large-scale and accurate relationship extraction approach to accurately extract many d-m phenotype pairs from medline. majority of these extracted pairs are not captured in existing knowledge bases. nevertheless, our study has several limitations: (i) we used known d-m pairs from umls to learn specific syntactic patterns. among all d-m pairs (50 551 before synonym expansion and 3 499 871 pairs after synonym expansion) from umls, only 6899 pairs appeared in medline sentences. one possible reason for this low presence of umls pairs in medline is that most of the umls d-m pairs are for rare syndromes such as digeorge syndrome, machado-joseph syndrome and marfans syndrome. the d-m pairs from medline are mainly for common complex diseases such as cardiovascular diseases, neurologic diseases, rheumatoid arthritis and diabetes mellitus. using the pairs from umls as prior knowledge, we discovered d-mspecific patterns. however, we do not know for sure whether these patterns associated with rare syndromes also represent typical patterns that researcher used to describe d-m relationships (including both rare syndromes and common complex diseases) in biomedical literature. intuitively, d-mspecific patterns should be disease-independent and should also notthe recall, we need to manually examine more top-ranked patterns and/or complement our approach with nonpattern-based approaches; (iii) currently, we filtered extracted noun phrase pairs based on exact matching terms in the disease lexicon. we can increase the recall of the extracted pairs by keeping nounphrase pairs as long as they contain any terms from the disease lexicons as substrings. for example, based on our current approach, d-m pair reovirus type 3 infectionprimary biliary cirrhosis is missed because term reovirus type 3 infection is not included in the disease lexicon. we can modify our pattern by extracting nounphrase pairs as long as they contain as substrings any terms from the input disease lexicon. however, the precision will also depend on the performance of the parser in nounphrase boundary detection; (iv) our approach is limited to extraction of d-m pairs that cooccur in the same sentences. therefore pairs that co-occurred in abstracts but not in the same sentences are missed. because of the large size of the text corpus (22 million articles so far), we expect that important d-m pairs will be reported in sentences; (v) we only performed a primitive correlation study between disease manifestations and disease-associated drugs and genes. currently, we are applying network-based systems approaches in using the extracted d-m pairs for drug repurposing and candidate disease gene selection. we acknowledge that many d-m pairs may appear only in other sources, such as patient ehrs. systematic extraction of diseasephenotype relationships from ehrs (phenotyping of ehrs) is discussed in and is one of our ongoing projects.  
