databases and ontologies toxygates: interactive toxicity analysis on a hybrid microarray and linked data platform motivation: in early stage drug development, it is desirable to assess the toxicity of compounds as quickly as possible. biomarker genes can help predict whether a candidate drug will adversely affect a given individual, but they are often difficult to discover. in addition, the mechanism of toxicity of many drugs and common compounds is not yet well understood. the japanese toxicogenomics project provides a large database of systematically collected microarray samples from rats (liver, kidney and primary hepatocytes) and human cells (primary hepatocytes) after exposure to 170 different compounds in different dosages and at different time intervals. however, until now, no intuitive user interface has been publically available, making it time consuming and difficult for individual researchers to explore the data. results: we present toxygates, a user-friendly integrated analysis platform for this database. toxygates combines a large microarray dataset with the ability to fetch semantic linked data, such as pathways , compoundprotein interactions and orthologs, on demand. it can also perform pattern-based compound ranking with respect to the expression values of a set of relevant candidate genes. by using toxygates, users can freely interrogate the transcriptomes response to particular compounds and conditions, which enables deep exploration of toxicity mechanisms. availability and implementation: toxygates is freely available to the public at http://toxygates.nibio.toxicogenomics is one of several recent omics approaches to the safety assessment of chemical compounds in early stage drug development. gene expression analysis of animals target organs after drug administration can help assess potential toxicity before phenotypic appearance through the use of biomarker genes . the japanese toxicogenomics project (tgp) , an initiative that set out to collect a large amount of toxicogenomics data systematically, began in 2002 as a joint govermentprivate sector project. this project lasted for 10 years, ending in 2012. its first outcome was the original tg-gates (toxicogenomics project-genomics assisted toxicity evaluation system), which is not open to the public. tg-gates is a data storage and toxicity assessment system for data analysis as part of the project. in early 2011, most of the tgp data, including the gene expression, biochemical, blood and histopathological data, as well as high resolution images of in vivo organ samples, were released to the public through the open tg-gates (otg) web site (http://toxico.nibio.go.jp). however, given the current form of otg, it is not easy for users to explore these gene expression data on their personal computers, because of the large amount of data as well as its static organization and raw format. for example, to extract correlations between gene expression and variables, such as time or dose level, the user would have to download binary files (in the affymetrix cel format), extract human-readable expression values and perform tasks such as normalization before this kind of analysis could begin. to make it more accessible, we now introduce toxygates, an integrated web-based user-friendly analysis platform. the tgp data have been produced in accordance with wellplanned experimental conditions. there are two main types of data: in vivo data and in vitro data. the condition pattern of the in vivo data, which was collected from rattus norvegicus, is the combination of four time points (3 h, 6 h, 9 h, 24 h), four dose levels (control, low, middle, high) and two organs (liver, kidney). these samples were taken after a single dose of the studied compound was administered. repeat dose data are also available for in vivo experiments. in the case of repeat dose samples, the parameters are identical to the single dose ones, except that the time points are 4 days, 8 days, 15 days and 29 days after the initial administration. the condition pattern of the in vitro data, available from r. norvegicus and homo sapiens, is the combination of three time points (2 h, 8 h, 24 h), four dose levels (control, low, middle, high) and one cell type (primary hepatocytes). these parameters potentially allow investigators to conduct not only classifier analysis, but also time series analysis, dose effect analysis and vivovitro bridging analysis. the value of a particular dataset is greater if a larger number of perspectives on it are available. it is simply possible to answer more questions when datasets can be related to each other. to whom correspondence should be addressed.clearly, it is desirable to integrate otg with other datasets to the greatest possible extent. in toxygates, data such as pathways, proteins and compound targets from a variety of databases are integrated and displayed alongside the microarray data, and the basic architecture is designed to allow for easy integration of additional data sources in the future. this is achieved in part by making use of linked semantic data in the resource description format (rdf) (http://www.w3.org/ rdf/). rdf makes it easy to combine and evolve datasets in an ad hoc fashion while still obtaining well-defined results. thus, toxygates is a rich analysis platform that allows for easy investigation of the otg data, offering several different kinds of analysis functions and data perspectives as well as extensible data integration.toxygates allows users to explore the available data interactively, optionally downloading them at any stage of processing. analysis begins by choosing a dataset. a dataset is a group of related dna microarrays (targeting messenger rna) with a common species, dose type (single or repeat) and organ (if in vivo) or in vitro cell type. for example, one dataset would be rat/in vivo/liver/single dose (rvls).gives an overview of the six datasets in toxygates. data are viewed from the perspective of sample groups; we define a sample group as a collection of samples. typically, each experiment, specified by a combination of the compound, dose level and measurement time point, was done in biological triplicate (for the in vivo data), and thus such a combination includes three samples (microarrays). for example, a sample group can be defined as consisting of methapyrilene, high dose, 24 h and acetaminophen, middle dose, 24 h. in the rvls dataset, this group would contain six samples: three from each compound, dose and time combination. such groups can easily be contrasted with each other, and genes can be analyzed for differential expression. microarray expression values are stored in a prenormalized format (see methods for the normalization details) and can easily be integrated with annotations from external datasets, such as kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg) pathways , gene ontology terms (gene ontology) and chembl or drugbank compounds. such annotations are obtained dynamically from linked data (resource description format, rdf) endpoints. these tools economize the researchers time and enable them to proceed to more detailed analysis more quickly.we have described toxygates, a novel user-friendly analysis platform for otg, a comprehensive toxicogenomics database developed in japan during the span of 10 years. otg is in itself a resource of potentially great value for the understanding of toxicity mechanisms and the identification of biomarker genes, assisting preclinical drug development. toxygates adds further value by making this data collection accessible to a large number of individual researchers and users, providing unique integrated analysis tools, which include dynamic views of remote data, as well as making data access simpler and easier than previously. toxygates allows users to query otg both by going from compounds and experimental conditions to relevant genes, and by going from relevant genes to compounds, although currently we place greater emphasis on the former style of investigation. the current release of toxygates represents the first public release, and we hope to make several improvements. we aim to curate and expand the collection of remote rdf datasets that have been integrated as probe sources and as dynamic columns. we also aim to integrate other gene expression datasets into toxygates. finally, we hope to provide additional valuable perspectives and data analysis methods in response to user feedback.  
