tppred3 detects and discriminates mitochondrial and chloroplastic targeting peptides in eukaryotic proteins motivation: molecular recognition of n-terminal targeting peptides is the most common mechanism controlling the import of nuclear-encoded proteins into mitochondria and chloroplasts. when experimental information is lacking, computational methods can annotate targeting peptides, and determine their cleavage sites for characterizing protein localization, function, and mature protein sequences. the problem of discriminating mitochondrial from chloroplastic propeptides is particularly relevant when annotating proteomes of photosynthetic eukaryotes, endowed with both types of sequences. results: here, we introduce tppred3, a computational method that given any eukaryotic protein sequence performs three different tasks: (i) the detection of targeting peptides; (ii) their classification as mitochondrial or chloroplastic and (iii) the precise localization of the cleavage sites in an organelle-specific framework. our implementation is based on our tppred previously introduced. here, we integrate a new n-to-1 extreme learning machine specifically designed for the classification task (ii). for the last task, we introduce an organelle-specific support vector machine that exploits sequence motifs retrieved with an extensive motif-discovery analysis of a large set of mito-chondrial and chloroplastic proteins. we show that tppred3 outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in all the three tasks. availability and implementation: the method server and datasets are available at http://tppred3.the vast majority of proteins localized in mitochondria and chloroplasts are nuclear-encoded and synthesized by the cytoplasmic ribosomes. then, they target the different organelles with the aid of specific and different molecular machineries, still partially characterized. one of most common ones requires the interaction between the import system and specific sequence signals, called targeting or transit peptides. routinely these signals are located in the n-terminal region of the native protein sequence. different proteolytic enzymes cleave targeting peptides upon protein translocation across organelle membranes. the recognition and annotation of targeting peptides starting from protein sequence assumes an important role in the characterization of the protein sub-cellular localization and function. for this reason, over the past years,) and mitoprot , specialized on chloroplasts and mitochondria, respectively. both are able to detect the presence of targeting peptides and to predict the position of the cleavage site along the sequence. other tools, such as targetp , ipsort , predotar , predsl , can predict both the presence of a targeting peptide and the localization of the protein. only predsl and targetp, however, perform a prediction of the cleavage site. recently, we introduced tppred , a method based on grammatical-restrained hidden conditional random fields (grhcrf) predicting the presence of targeting peptides and the localization of cleavage sites in both mitochondrial and chloroplastic proteins. tppred, however, does not address the task of discriminating the subcellular localization on the basis of the targeting peptide. tppred2.0 was introduced in order to improve the prediction of cleavage sites in mitochondrial proteins. it exploits the information extracted from sequence motifs known in literature and particularly frequent in the regions containing the cleavage sites of mitochondrial targeting peptides . in this article, we introduce tppred3, a comprehensive and integrated pipeline to address the prediction of organelle-targeting peptides in eukaryotic proteins, and particularly in green ones. indeed in photosynthetic eukaryotes, targeting peptides should be differently recognized by the import machinery in order to address both mitochondria and chloroplasts. our method is organized into three different modules, which collectively accomplish the following tasks: (i) the detection of the targeting signal in the n-terminal region of the protein; (ii) the classification of the identified signal as mitochondrial or chloroplastic; (iii) the precise identification of the targeting-peptide cleavage site in an organelle-specific manner. for the first task (detection of the targeting signal), we rely on our previously developed method, called tppred , which is based on a discriminative probabilistic sequence-labeling model . the detected targeting peptide is then classified into two classes (mitochondrial or chloroplastic) by means of an n-to-1 extreme learning machine (elm) model, an architecture of artificial neural networks specifically suited to address classification problems involving sequences . finally, a refining procedure is applied in order to better localize the cleavage site. this final task is addressed by means of two organelle-specific support vector machines (svms) that exploit information derived from organelle-specific sequence motifs surrounding the cleavage sites. we extracted them with an extensive motif-discovery analysis carried out on two datasets of experimentally validated mitochondrial and chloroplastic targeting peptides. we trained and tested the whole pipeline on a non-redundant dataset of proteins previously released to test tppred and tppred2 and generated a different dataset for motif discovery. our results show that tppred3 outperforms previous approaches in the task of predicting organelle-targeting peptides. in particular, by exploiting organelle-specific motifs, it is possible to reduce the error in the exact identification of the cleavage site in both mitochondrial and chloroplastic protein sequences.  
