genome analysis archtex: accurate extraction and visualization of next-generation sequence data motivation: the extension of mapped sequence tags is a common step in the analysis of single-end next-generation sequencing (ngs) data from protein localization and chromatin studies. the optimal extension can vary depending on experimental and technical conditions. improper extension of sequence tags can obscure or mislead the interpretation of ngs results. we present an algorithm, archtex (architectural tag extender), which identifies the optimal extension of sequence tags based on the maximum correlation between forward and reverse tags and extracts and visualizes sites of interest using the predicted extension. availability and implementation: archtex requires java 1.6 or newer. source code and the compiled program are freely available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/archtex/next-generation sequencing (ngs) is now being used with great success in conjunction with laboratory techniques such as chromatin immunoprecipitation (chip) , micrococcal nuclease (mnase) digestion , and faire . a standard high-throughput ngs run can typically produce several million short-read sequence tags . the number and length of the sequence tags varies depending on the particular experiment and the platform on which it was run . a standard run on a single lane of the illumina hiseq2000 platform produces upwards of 200 million tags ranging anywhere from 36 to 100 bp in length. these tags are then typically aligned to a reference genome using a short-read tag alignment algorithm such as eland or bowtie . further analysis is often dependent on the nature of the experiment and the personal preferences of the investigator. the use of sequence tag extension in ngs analysis is used to adjust for the length of dna that was sequenced and to smooth data at portions of the genome which may have been poorly to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors sampled . tag extensions are justified by the relatively short sequence tag lengths produced by the majority of high-throughput platforms. the short sequence tag represents the 5 end of a larger dna strand that was sequenced. the length of the extension should reflect the true length of the dna population that was sequenced. these extended tags are then typically overlaid on top of each other in a genome-wide tag frequency map. regions of interest can then be examined independently or as an average across multiple similarly classified regions. currently, researchers will extend their mapped sequence tags based on known biology such as 146 bp extensions in the case of a mononucleosome sequencing run or an extension based on the estimated length of the dna during the pre-sequencing library preparation protocol . this article describes an algorithm, archtex (architectural tag extender), which identifies the average length of the dna fragments that were sequenced using cross-correlation of single-read sequencing. archtex also provides a method for quick extraction and visualization of individual sites of interest using the optimal tag extension as predicted by cross-correlation. archtex can output the results in a format readable by other ngs analysis packages , clustering software, and can be uploaded to ucsc genome browser.the accuracy of archtex was confirmed for chip-seq and mnaseseq datasets by comparing archtexs extended data from singleend reads to the actual sequenced fragments from paired-end experiments (supplementary3). the problems of improper extensions such as peak shifting and bi-modal peak formation may be avoided using the predicted extension provided by archtex (supplementary), although these problems may persist if the length of dna in the experiment is highly variable. archtex provides immediate visualization of the tag distribution at individual regions of interest. this will be helpful in analysis of a variety of different ngs experiments including but not limited to chip-seq, mnase-seq and faire-seq.  
