trajectory-oriented bayesian experiment design versus fisher a-optimal design: an in depth comparison study motivation: experiment design strategies for biomedical models with the purpose of parameter estimation or model discrimination are in the focus of intense research. experimental limitations such as sparse and noisy data result in unidentifiable parameters and render-related design tasks challenging problems. often, the temporal resolution of data is a limiting factor and the amount of possible experimental interventions is finite. to address this issue, we propose a bayesian experiment design algorithm to minimize the prediction uncertainty for a given set of experiments and compare it to traditional a-optimal design. results: in an in depth numerical study involving an ordinary differential equation model of the trans-golgi network with 12 partly non-identifiable parameters, we minimized the prediction uncertainty efficiently for predefined scenarios. the introduced method results in twice the prediction precision as the same amount of a-optimal designed experiments while introducing a useful stopping criterion. the simulation intensity of the algorithms major design step is thereby reasonably affordable. besides smaller variances in the predicted trajectories compared with fisher design, we could also achieve smaller parameter posterior distribution entropies, rendering this method superior to a-optimal fisher design also in the parameter space. availability: necessary software/toolbox information are available in the supplementary material. the project script including example data can be downloaded fromregulation models are preferably used to describe intra-and inter-cellular interactions of biomolecules. the biomodel database of the european bioinformatics institute comprises over 400 published and curated models in its repository, most of them being ordinary differential equation (ode) models . the usefulness of a biomedical ode model is often assessed through its capability to predict possible scenarios of interest. in order to calibrate a biological ode model, expensive and time-consuming experiments are performed to gain the needed experimental training data. despite continuously improving measurement methods, the data for most models remain scarce, resulting in practically nonidentifiable parameters . to support the to whom correspondence should be addressed. learning process, several experiment design methods have been successfully developed including classical fisher information matrix (fim) design , bayesian methods and optimization-based methods . claiming that ode model predictions improve when reducing parameter uncertainty intervals, these methods design optimal experiments for parameter estimation (oed/pe). however, models can be used to make precise predictions despite sloppy parameters with large confidence intervals . this is rendering oed/pe an indirect method to improve predictions. methods have been developed to directly address experiment design for better model predictions , which we here refer to as oed/mp. in this work, we also propose to go this direct way, by predefining sets of experimentally feasible prediction scenarios of interest. we use a bayesian posterior inference method and predict experimentally feasible scenarios to purposively reduce uncertainty in the model trajectories. in addition, we define a reasonable stopping criterion to avoid further experimentation when the desired predictions meet a certain precision compared with the expected data quality. the method is successfully applied to reduce prediction uncertainty of an ode model of secretory pathway control at the trans-golgi network. in an intense comparison study, we were able to outperform aoptimal designed experiments in both prediction uncertainty and posterior distribution entropy, with affordable computational effort.  
