gene expression translating bioinformatics in oncology: guilt-by-profiling analysis and identification of kif18b and cdca3 as novel driver genes in carcinogenesis motivation: co-regulated genes are not identified in traditional micro-array analyses, but may theoretically be closely functionally linked [guilt-by-association (gba), guilt-by-profiling]. thus, bioinformatics procedures for guilt-by-profiling/association analysis have yet to be applied to large-scale cancer biology. we analyzed 2158 full cancer transcriptomes from 163 diverse cancer entities in regard of their similarity of gene expression, using pearsons correlation coefficient (cc). subsequently, 428 highly co-regulated genes (jccj 0.8) were clustered unsupervised to obtain small co-regulated networks. a major subnetwork containing 61 closely co-regulated genes showed highly significant enrichment of cancer bio-functions. all genes except kinesin family member 18b (kif18b) and cell division cycle associated 3 (cdca3) were of confirmed relevance for tumor biology. therefore, we independently analyzed their differential regulation in multiple tumors and found severe deregulation in liver, breast, lung, ovarian and kidney cancers, thus proving our gba hypothesis. overexpression of kif18b and cdca3 in hepatoma cells and subsequent microarray analysis revealed significant deregulation of central cell cycle regulatory genes. consistently, rt-pcr and proliferation assay confirmed the role of both genes in cell cycle progression. finally, the prognostic significance of the identified kif18b-and cdca3-dependent predictors (p = 0.01, p = 0.04) was demonstrated in three independent hcc cohorts and several other tumors. in summary, we proved the efficacy of large-scale guilt-by-profiling/ association strategies in oncology. we identified two novel oncogenes and functionally characterized them. the strong prognostic importance of downstream predictors for hcc and many other tumors indicates the clinical relevance of our findings.cancer is one of the leading causes of death . despite evident improvements in diagnostic procedures and the development of novel and effective therapies, the prognosis of disease remains dismal for many patients. a thorough understanding of the molecular basis of cancer development is critical to improve therapeutic options for a variety of cancers . however, the identification of genes causally associated with complex diseases such as cancer remains challenging and therefore constitutes a major barrier in advancing our limited mechanistic understanding of the disease . simultaneously, increasing awareness of the fact that highthroughput gene expression analysis may reveal valuable insights into cancer biology led to the establishment of a variety of cancer microarray datasets and large microarray dataset repositories . however, once published, these datasets are most often neglected as regards to further analysis. in fact, meta-analyses of this vast body of data are rarely attempted . the reasons are manifold, ranging from the difficulty of integrating various technical platforms to the absence of bioinformatics knowledge on the part of primarily molecular oriented scientists, and the need for advanced statistics . finally, these datasets could be subject to alternative analysis strategies to obtain additional information not yielded by standard analysis protocols. the concept of transferring gene function annotation from one gene to another based on the profile of their characteristics [guilt-by-profiling, guilt-by-association (gba)] has been frequently described. new biological relationships have been successfully identified in gba studies, including correlated gene expression , correlated phylogenetic profiles and membership within gene expression clusters . to whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. some guilt-by-profiling studies have exploited genegene relationships by transforming them into gene functional characteristics. this occurs when integrating gene expression profiling or functional annotations of the respective genes . despite such proven success, no attempts have been made to include samples from multiple tumor entities or samples of both types of inference. the benefits of such a large-scale gba approach are obvious because genes closely regulated across 42000 samples and various tumor entities may be active in a highly robust carcinogenic network. we therefore hypothesized that integrating multiple sources of biological information, such as expression profiling and functional annotation over thousands of tumor samples and entities, may provide novel insights into key regulatory changes in cancer development and help to identify highly causative genes. using this approach and proving its feasibility, we validated the use of bioinformatics gba strategies in large-scale molecular oncology, identified two novel oncogenes, demonstrated their deregulation in several tumors, functionally characterized the novel oncogenes, identified corresponding downstream targets and showed the prognostic relevance of downstream predictors for hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc) as well as many other tumors .  
