gene expression translatome: an r/bioconductor package to portray translational control high-throughput technologies have led to an explosion of genomic data available for automated analysis. the consequent possibility to simultaneously sample multiple layers of variation along the gene expression flow requires computational methods integrating raw information from different -omics. it has been recently demonstrated that translational control is a widespread phenomenon, with profound and still underestimated regulation capabilities. although detecting changes in the levels of total messenger rnas (mrnas; the transcrip-tome), of polysomally loaded mrnas (the translatome) and of proteins (the proteome) is experimentally feasible in a high-throughput way, the integration of these levels is still far from being robustly approached. here we introduce translatome, a new r/bioconductor package, which is a complete platform for the simultaneous pairwise analysis of transcriptome, translatome and proteome data. the package includes most of the available statistical methods developed for the analysis of high-throughput data, allowing the parallel comparison of differentially expressed genes and the corresponding differentially enriched biological themes. notably, it also enables the prediction of translational regulatory elements on mrna sequences. the utility of this tool is demonstrated with two case studies. availability and implementation: translatome is available in bioconductor.high-throughput (-omics) measurements of macromolecule variations in the cell offer the possibility to comprehensively understand how the cellular processes are regulated and to reveal how different layers of control are coordinated in producing a physiologically coherent response. these measurements are also invaluable to understand how the loss of this coordination contributes to disease origin. the establishment of highthroughput technologies and the consequent explosion of available data allow us to reach a systems understanding of the variations in gene expression only when a parallel evolution of algorithms and data mining techniques is achieved. this eventually enables to suggest and prioritize potential mechanistic processes. nonetheless, the integration of -omics data, ranging from epigenetic chromatin remodeling to the dynamics of transcription, translation and protein activities, still requires considerable experimental and computational developments. in this context, the low correlation observed between messenger rna (mrna) and protein levels is an unsolved issue . recently we showed that the analysis of the translatome, an intermediate level between the transcriptome and the proteome formed by mrnas engaged with polysomes, provides substantial and somewhat surprising new information . this and other examples show how the integration of -omics data can provide a biologically relevant outcome. here we present translatome, a new bioconductor package for the analysis of differential profiles coming from transcriptome, translatome and proteome studies. translatome will help to study mrna and protein variations in an exhaustive way, providing specific tools for the comparison of polysomal mrna with total mrna or protein data.  
