trans-species learning of cellular signaling systems with bimodal deep belief networks motivation: model organisms play critical roles in biomedical research of human diseases and drug development. an imperative task is to translate information/knowledge acquired from model organisms to humans. in this study, we address a trans-species learning problem: predicting human cell responses to diverse stimuli, based on the responses of rat cells treated with the same stimuli. results: we hypothesized that rat and human cells share a common signal-encoding mechanism but employ different proteins to transmit signals, and we developed a bimodal deep belief network and a semi-restricted bimodal deep belief network to represent the common encoding mechanism and perform trans-species learning. these deep learning models include hierarchically organized latent variables capable of capturing the statistical structures in the observed proteomic data in a distributed fashion. the results show that the models significantly outperform two current state-of-the-art classification algorithms. our study demonstrated the potential of using deep hierarchical models to simulate cellular signaling systems.due to ethical issues, modal organisms such as rat and mouse have been widely used as disease models in studying disease mechanisms and drug actions . for example, mouse models have been used to study the disease mechanisms and treatment of type-2 diabetes . since significant differences exist between species in terms of genome, cellular systems and physiology, the success of using model organisms in biomedical research is hinged on the capability to translate/ transfer the knowledge learned from model organisms to humans. for example, when using a rat disease model to screen drugs and investigate the action of drugs, rat cells inevitably exhibit different molecular phenotypes, such as proteomic or transcriptomic responses, when compared with corresponding human cells. thus, in order to investigate how the drugs act in human cells, it is critical to translate the molecular phenotypes observed in rat cells into corresponding human responses. recent species-translation challenges organized by the systems biology verification combined with industrial methodology for process verification in research (sbv improver, 2013) provided an opportunity for the research community to assess the methods for trans-species learning in systems biology settings . one challenge task was to predict human cells proteomic responses to distinct stimuli based on the observed proteomic response to the same stimuli in rat cells. more specifically, during the training phase, participants were provided with data thatmeasured the phosphorylation states of a common set of signaling proteins in primary cultured bronchial cells collected from rats and humans treated with distinct stimuli . in the testing phase, the proteomic data of rat cells treated with unknown stimuli were provided, and the task is to predict the proteomic responses of human cells treated with the same stimuli . to address the trans-species learning task, a simplistic approach is to train regression/classification models that use the phosphorylation data from rat cells as input features and treat the phosphorylation status of an individual protein from human cells (treated with the same stimulus) as a target class. in this way, predicting the proteomic profile of human cells can be addressed as a series of independent classification tasks or within a multi-label classification framework . however, most contemporary multi-label classification methods treat the target classes as independent or are incapable of learning the covariance structure of classes, which apparently does not reflect biological reality. in cellular signaling systems, signaling proteins often form pathways in which the phosphorylation of one protein will affect the phosphorylation state of others in a signaling cascade, and cross-talk between pathways can also lead to coordinated phosphorylation of proteins in distinct pathways . another shortcoming of formulating trans-species learning as a conventional classification problem is that contemporary classifiers, such as the support vector machine or regularized regression/classification , concentrate on deriving mathematical representations that separate the cases, whereas the real goal of trans-species learning is to capture the common signaling mechanisms employed by cells from both model organisms and humans in response to a common stimuli. indeed, the cornerstone hypothesis underpinning trans-species learning is that there is a common encoding mechanism shared by cells from different species, but distinct signaling molecules are employed by different species to transmit the signals responding to the same environmental stimuli. therefore, it is important to explore models that are compatible to the above hypothesis. recent advances in deep hierarchical models, commonly referred to as deep learning models , provide an intriguing opportunity to model the common encoding mechanism of cellular signaling systems. these models represent the signals embedded in observed data using multiple layers of hierarchically organized hidden variables, which can be used to simulate a cellular signaling system because the latter is also organized as a hierarchical network such that signaling proteins at different levels compositionally encode signals with different degrees of complexity. for example, activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr) will lead to a broad change of cellular functions including the activation of multiple signaling molecules such as ras and map kinases , which in turn will activate different transcription factors, e.g. erk-1 and c-jun/c-fos complex, with each responsible for the transcription of a subset of genes responding to egfr treatment. the signals encoded by signaling molecules become increasingly more specific, and they share compositional relationships. therefore, deep hierarchical models, e.g. the deep belief network (dbn) , are particularly suitable for modeling cellular signaling systems. in this paper, we present novel deep hierarchical models based on the dbn model to represent a common encoding system that encodes the cellular response to different stimuli, which was developed after the competition in order to overcome the shortcomings of the conventional classification approaches we employed during competition. we applied the model to the data provided by the sbv improver challenge and systematically investigated the performance. our results indicate that, by learning better representations of cellular signaling systems, deep hierarchical models perform significantly better on the task of trans-species learning. more importantly, this study leads to a new direction of using deep networks to model large omics data to gain in depth knowledge of cellular signaling systems under physiological and pathological conditions, such as cancer.in this study, we investigated the utility of novel deep hierarchical models in a trans-species learning setting. to our knowledge, this is the first report using deep hierarchical models to address this type of problem. our results indicate that, by learning to represent a common encoding system for both rat and human cells, the deep learning models outperform contemporary state-of-the-art classifiers in this trans-species learning task. the empirical success of deep hierarchical models may be attributed to the following advantages. first, the dbn is capable of learning novel representations of the data that are salient to the task at hand. the dbn models are more compatible to the biological systems that generate the observed data. the hidden variables at the different layers of the dbn models can capture information with different degrees of abstraction, thus allowing the models to capture a more complex covariance structure of the observed variables. it is possible that hidden nodes at lower layers, e.g. h (1) , directly capture the covariance of the observed protein phosphorylation states, whereas the higher layers can capture the crosstalk between signaling pathways that only occur in response to specific stimuli. thus, shallow models that only concentrate on the covariance at the level of observed variables, such as svm and elastic network, would have difficulties capturing such a high-level covariance structure of the data. it is now well appreciated that feature-learning methods, such as dbn, tend to outperform feature selection methods in complex domains, such as image classification and speech recognition . second, dbn strives to learn the common encoding system for both human and rat data, and it naturally performs multi-label classification by taking into account the covariance of the class variables. however, a conventional classifier, such as a svm, can only predict one human protein as the class variable in an independent manner, thus failing to capture the covariance of class variables and yielding inferior performance. the sbdbn model developed in this study provides a novel approach capable of simultaneously learning interactions and predicting the state of phosphoproteins. interestingly, the model assigns differential weights to the edges between phosphoproteins when comparing those from rat and human cells, which potentially indicates that different parts of signaling pathways are preferentially utilized in a species-specific manner. however, this hypothesis still needs to be experimentally tested in a relatively larger dataset. deep hierarchical models are particularly suited for modeling cellular signaling systems, because signaling molecules in cells are organized as a hierarchical network and information in the system is compositionally encoded. our results indicate that dbns were capable of capturing the complex information embedded in proteomic data. interestingly, in contrast to the training of deep learning models in a machine learning setting such as object recognition in image analysis where usually a large number of training cases is required, our results show that the dbn models performed very well given a moderate size of training cases. this indicates that biological data tend to have strong signals that can be captured by dbns with relative ease. our study demonstrates the feasibility of using deep hierarchical models to simulate cellular signaling systems in general, and we foresee that deep hierarchical models will be widely used in systems biology. for example, one can use deep hierarchical models to study how cells encode the signals regulating gene expression, to detect which signaling pathway is perturbed in a specific pathological condition, e.g. cancer. finally, models like our bdbn and sbdbn provide a novel approach to simultaneously model multiple types of omics data in an integromics fashion.  
