genome analysis treat: a bioinformatics tool for variant annotations and visualizations in targeted and exome sequencing data treat (targeted re-sequencing annotation tool) is a tool for facile navigation and mining of the variants from both targeted resequencing and whole exome sequencing. it provides a rich integration of publicly available as well as in-house developed annotations and visualizations for variants, variant-hosting genes and host-gene pathways.next-generation sequencing offers the promise of scientific discovery with the challenge of results interpretation . one experiment such as exome sequencing can generate tens of thousands of single nucleotide variants (snvs) and small insertions or deletions (indels), which must be elucidated in the search for disease associated mutations . whole exome sequencing is an application of ngs that has been successfully used to identify disease-associated variants in several monogenic disorders and complex diseases . while these studies demonstrated the power of ngs, they also highlighted the challenge of efficiently sifting through thousands of variants to identify a subset that is potentially clinically relevant. bioinformatics solutions are beginning to be released that address this challenge and facilitate filtering and interpretation of human sequence variation to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. data . we developed treat to extend the functionality of these tools and directly integrated structured and sortable formats with embedded hyperlinks to sequence alignment, gene specificity and gene pathway visualizations. in addition, to enable broad accessibility, we have fully deployed treat to the amazon cloud. treat is optionally offered as part of a complete workflow for exome or targeted sequencing, providing users with a convenient method for integrated sequence alignment, mutation detection and results interpretation. we believe this tool offers investigators with an accessible and convenient method for annotating and visualizing sequencing data and a means of efficiently identifying variants of interest.  
