treedom: a graphical web tool for analysing domain architecture evolution we present treedom, a web tool for graphically analysing the evolutionary history of domains in multi-domain proteins. individual domains on the same protein chain may have distinct evolutionary histories, which is important to grasp in order to understand protein function. for instance, it may be important to know whether a domain was duplicated recently or long ago, to know the origin of inserted domains, or to know the pattern of domain loss within a protein family. treedom uses the pfam database as the source of domain annotations, and displays these on a sequence tree. an advantage of treedom is that the user can limit the analysis to n sequences that are most similar to a query, or provide a list of sequence ids to include. using the pfam alignment of the selected sequences, a tree is built and displayed together with the domain architecture of each sequence.multi-domain proteins have evolved by insertions or deletions of distinct protein domains. tracing the history of a certain domain combination can be important for functional annotation of multidomain proteins, and for understanding the function of individual domains . in order to analyze the evolutionary history of the domains in multi-domain proteins it is desirable to inspect the sequence tree for each domain together with the domain architecture of the sequences. a few graphical tools exist that can combine trees with domain architectures. nifas is a java applet based on outdated java libraries that does not work in many current browsers. although it is a general-purpose tool, it has mainly been used as a plugin to the pfam database , but this is no longer supported. another discontinued tool is the treedomviewer . domosaics is a java applet package that includes a panel with a tree and unproportional domain architectures. however, it requires substantial manual work to produce such a view for a given case, which limits its usability. the phylomedb database for complete catalogs of gene phylogenies has a similar graphic display that also contains features other than domains. it is however limited to the phylogenies in phylomedb and not for general purpose. the same is true for the inparanoid database (sonnhammer and ) that shows domain architectures and tree for proteins in an orthologue group. finally, the treefam database of animal phylogenetic trees has a tree and domain architecture graphic which is built on a reusable biojs.tree javascript component.  
