treeefm: calculating elementary flux modes using linear optimization in a tree-based algorithm motivation: elementary flux modes (efms) analysis constitutes a fundamental tool in systems biology. however, the efficient calculation of efms in genome-scale metabolic networks (gsmns) is still a challenge. we present a novel algorithm that uses a linear programming-based tree search and efficiently enumerates a subset of efms in gsmns. results: our approach is compared with the efmevolver approach, demonstrating a significant improvement in computation time. we also validate the usefulness of our new approach by studying the acetate overflow metabolism in the escherichia coli bacteria. to do so, we computed 1 million efms for each energetic amino acid and then analysed the relevance of each energetic amino acid based on gene/protein expression data and the obtained efms. we found good agreement between previous experiments and the conclusions reached using efms. finally, we also analysed the performance of our approach when applied to large gsmns. availability and implementation: the stand-alone software treeefm is implemented in c and interacts with the open-source linear solver coin-or linear program solver (clp).many advances in medicine and biology would not be possible without a detailed understanding of the functional mechanisms of cellular metabolism . however, this is a very complex task as there are intricate regulatory events controlling cellular response. novel technologies, referred to with the suffix omics, are emerging in the last two decades and providing us with a cellular picture of unprecedented coverage and resolution . unfortunately, it is often difficult to detect the mechanisms behind an observed alteration using the data provided by omics technologies. the scientific community needs improved tools and methods to identify these mechanisms in different scenarios . several mathematical methods modeling metabolism are emerging that are able to incorporate datasets provided by different omics technologies. many of these methods are encompassed within constraint-based models , in which a set of mathematical constraints are defined using a genome-scale metabolic network (gsmn) reconstruction as a starting point. several curated gsmns can be found in the literature . however, being able to automatically characterize the biochemical reactions present in a particular metabolism through omics data truly constitutes a challenge . typically, constraint-based models account for two principal constraints, namely the mass balance equation at steady state, andthermodynamic-based irreversibility constraints. if, given a set of enzymes, all of them are essential to fulfill these two constraints, the set is referred to as an elementary flux mode (efm;). in other words, efms are solutions with the minimum support necessary to operate in stoichiometric steady-state balance with all reactions in the appropriate direction. the advantages of analysing metabolic networks based on efms have been shown in different works (e.g.). however, their use has been limited because enumerating them is computationally demanding. algorithms have been developed to enumerate all the efms in medium-size metabolic networks (; von). however, despite the development of novel methods using state of the art computational techniques expediting their application in larger networks , this family of algorithms fails on gsmns using standard computers, because of the combinatorial explosion in the number of efms . in this light, several methods have been recently proposed to determine a subset of efms in gsmns . continuing with this effort, we present here a novel algorithm that uses a linear programming-based tree search for efm numeration, denoted as treeefm. we benchmark the performance of our new approach with efmevolver , currently the most efficient framework to find efms in gsmns. the results show that treeefm outperforms efmevolver. after confirming the efficiency of the new approach presented here, we calculate a large set of efms to study a relevant biological question, the acetate overflow metabolism. the aerobic production of acetate causes serious economic losses in bacteria-based biofactories . finding the mechanisms that prevent this scenario constitutes an open question in the field . here we analyse the relevance of eight energetic amino acids in the overflow metabolism using our approach to compute a large set of efms. we then apply the methodology presented into score each efm based on expression data, using the gene/protein expression data provided by. on the basis of a literature review, we could validate the conclusions reached using efms. finally, we analysed the performance of our approach for handling even larger networks than traditional gsmns, paving the way for forthcoming models involving an ever-increasing number of reactions and metabolites.the methodology presented here based on linear programming and an efficient tree search procedure, is a general one for enumerating extreme points in a polytope. in this work, we focused on the computation of efms. our approach showed a computational advantage with respect to efmevolver, which is a key issue in the analysis of gsmns involving thousands of reactions.  
