genetics and population analysis treeqtl: hierarchical error control for eqtl findings commonly used multiplicity adjustments fail to control the error rate for reported findings in many expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) studies. treeqtl implements a hierarchical multiple testing procedure which allows control of appropriate error rates defined relative to a grouping of the eqtl hypotheses. availability and implementation: the r package treeqtl is available for download atthe goal of eqtl analysis is to gain insight into the genetic regulation of gene expression. typically, this is carried out by testing a vast collection of hypotheses h vg probing association between the genotype at variant v and the measured expression for gene g, where v 1;. .. ; m; g 1;. .. ; g, m is on the order of hundreds of thousands, and g of tens of thousands. given the large number of hypotheses tested, the need to adjust for multiplicity is universally recognized and the false discovery rate (fdr) is typically adopted as the target global error rate. in an effort to improve interpretability, reporting of results is typically organized along more general findings such as the discovery of genes subject to local regulation (egenes) or regulatory snps (esnps) . the adopted strategy for multiplicity adjustment needs then to offer guarantees on these reported global discoveries. for example, imagine testing the h vg hypotheses using the bh rule and defining as an esnp those variants v for which h vg is rejected for at least some gene g. while this would control the fdr among the h vg rejections, it would not control any measure of global error for the discovery of esnps, as shown by the simulations inresearchers in the eqtl field have recognized this challenge, and have additionally noted that since local regulation is more common than distal , hypotheses probing these two mechanisms should be tested separately. however, there is no single standard in the literature for error rates targeted or error-controlling strategies: for example, one finds the notion of pergene error rates or the application of bonferroni across genes in local regulation, while for distal effects significance cut-offs vary from 5 10 8 to 5.78 10 12 . this makes comparison across studies and replicability challenging.  
