systems biology tres predicts transcription control in embryonic stem cells unraveling transcriptional circuits controlling embryonic stem cell maintenance and fate has great potential for improving our understanding of normal development as well as disease. to facilitate this, we have developed a novel web tool called tres that predicts the likely upstream regulators for a given gene list. this is achieved by integrating transcription factor (tf) binding events from 187 chip-sequencing and chip-on-chip datasets in murine and human embry-onic stem (es) cells with over 1000 mammalian tf sequence motifs. using 114 tf perturbation gene sets, as well as 115 co-expression clusters in es cells, we validate the utility of this approach. availability and implementation: tres is freely available at http:// www.embryonic stem (es) cells have limitless self-renewal capability and the ability to differentiate into multiple cell types. this makes them a good model system to enhance our understanding of normal development and also for potential clinical applications. they facilitate in vitro studies of early developmental events as well as differentiation into crucial cell types, such as hematopoietic or neuronal cells . most importantly, they have proven to be a highly valuable resource in regenerative medicine, where es cells show great potential in tissue repair following disease or injury . these therapeutic applications have strengthened the push toward understanding how stem cells are programmed during self-renewal and differentiation. transcription factors (tfs) are key players in driving cellular programming . many tfs have been identified with crucial roles in es-cell biology , and their genome-wide putative targets have been mapped using chip-sequencing or chip-on-chip technology . moreover, it is also now feasible to obtain binding sequence preferences for hundreds of mammalian tfs . to use the complementary information from both these resources to aid novel hypotheses generation, we have developed a web tool called transcription regulation in embryonic stem cells, or tres for short, to link gene sets to likely upstream regulators in es cells.shows a screenshot of the web tool where users can paste a query gene list (human or mouse) or upload it from a file. the gene list is interrogated against four databases, and enrichment is calculated using the optimized methods for each database (see supplementary material for details). the output is displayed as a ranked list of tfs generated using rank aggregation of results from four databases as well as four tables, each listing significantly associated tfs, the source database, the gene overlap and corrected p-values sorted from lowest to highest within each database . the results can also be emailed to the user when the calculation is finished. the enrichment calculation protocols for the four databases are as follows (supplementary material for full details):  
