genetics and population analysis trinculo: bayesian and frequentist multinomial logistic regression for genome-wide association studies of multi-category phenotypes motivation: for many classes of disease the same genetic risk variants underly many related phenotypes or disease subtypes. multinomial logistic regression provides an attractive framework to analyze multi-category phenotypes, and explore the genetic relationships between these phenotype categories. we introduce trinculo, a program that implements a wide range of multinomial analyses in a single fast package that is designed to be easy to use by users of standard genome-wide association study software. availability and implementation: an open source c implementation, with code and binaries for linux and mac osx, is available for download at http://sourceforge.net/projects/trinculoof the many associations discovered by genome-wide association studies, a large number are shared across multiple traits , and many more predict different subtypes of the same disease . a significant challenge for researchers is finding statistical techniques that leverage this genetic sharing to increase power and discover new biology. multinomial logistic regression provides a powerful and flexible framework to carry out association analyses across multiple traits. the frequentist version has been used in studies of disease subphenotypes and in cross-disorder association studies . bayesian extensions have been used to select between different models of genetic sharing across multiple traits . however, these studies have fitted the models in an ad-hoc manner, using inefficient r or stata packages. the lack of a single, flexible tool for multinomial logistic regression has made using these methods difficult for most users, especially when compared to the availability of fast, user-friendly tools for binary logistic regression such as plink . to address this,we provide a software package that implements a wide range of multi-category logistic analyses in a single efficient and user-friendly program.  
