genome analysis triplex-inspector: an analysis tool for triplex-mediated targeting of genomic loci at the heart of many modern biotechnological and therapeutic applications lies the need to target specific genomic loci with pinpoint accuracy. although landmark experiments demonstrate technological maturity in manufacturing and delivering genetic material , the genomic sequence analysis to find suitable targets lags behind. we provide a computational aid for the sophisticated design of sequence specific ligands and selection of appropriate targets, taking gene location and genomic architecture into account. availability: source code and binaries are downloadable from www. bioinformatics.org.au/triplexator/inspector.targeting genomic loci with high accuracy is essential for modern molecular biology, such as for insertion of genetically engineered material into genomes. recent publications demonstrate the maturity of techniques using triplex-forming peptide nucleic acids (pnas) for accurate, sequence-specific gene targeting.apply pnas in conjunction with donor dna to introduce heritable gene modification andimprove the delivery by linking the antennapedia transport peptide (antp) to the pna to enable its transfer into the cell nucleus after systemic administration of the compound. in contrast to these biotechnological achievements, the determination of genomic targets that can be accurately targeted has been hampered by the lack of dedicated computational tools able to jointly optimize the choice of the target site and the design of the delivery molecule (e.g. pna) such that the number of possible collateral binding sites (off-targets) is minimized. althoughwere able to demonstrate site specificity by determining that the pnaantp conjugate did not alter the nearby control gene cii, which contains a potential triplex target site whose sequence differs from that of the intended target, they acknowledged the possibility of pna binding occurring at other genomic locations that have sequences similar to the target. the extent to which applications of pna-based delivery may be hampered by a non-optimal target choice is demonstrated by the fact that the sequence chosen byhas almost 20 000 identical copies across the mouse genome, making off-target binding a near certainty. the introduction of genetic material at any of these loci, but especially at the 469 sites that are located within exons, would have unpredictable (and probably undesirable) consequences. this illustrates the need for a computational aid that takes triplex-specific design features into account. triplex formation of conventional oligonucleotides relies on hydrogen-bonding of the third strand in the major groove of the genomic dna target and potential in vivo roles of triplexes are reviewed in. in contrast, pna-based targeting, as used by, depends on strand invasion resulting in a pna:dnapna triple-helix with a looped-out dna strand. the peptide backbone provides enhanced resistance to nucleases, and pnas show an increased affinity for dna compared with oligonucleotides . the target site consists, in either case, of a sequence of consecutive purines that provide the hydrogen donor and acceptor groups that stabilize the triple-helix. suitable genomic targets thus exhibit a dominant polypurinepolypyrimidine characteristic (polyrpoly-y).  
