gene expression tsser: an automated method to identify transcription start sites in prokaryotic genomes from differential rna sequencing data motivation: accurate identification of transcription start sites (tsss) is an essential step in the analysis of transcription regulatory networks. in higher eukaryotes, the capped analysis of gene expression technology enabled comprehensive annotation of tsss in genomes such as those of mice and humans. in bacteria, an equivalent approach, termed differential rna sequencing (drna-seq), has recently been proposed, but the application of this approach to a large number of genomes is hindered by the paucity of computational analysis methods. with few exceptions, when the method has been used, annotation of tsss has been largely done manually. results: in this work, we present a computational method called tsser that enables the automatic inference of tsss from drna-seq data. the method rests on a probabilistic framework for identifying both genomic positions that are preferentially enriched in the drna-seq data as well as preferentially captured relative to neighboring genomic regions. evaluating our approach for tss calling on several publicly available datasets, we find that tsser achieves high consistency with the curated lists of annotated tsss, but identifies many additional tsss. therefore, tsser can accelerate genome-wide identification of tsss in bacterial genomes and can aid in further characterization of bacterial transcription regulatory networks. availability: tsser is freely available under gpl license atidentification of transcription start sites (tsss) is a key step in the study of transcription regulatory networks. it enables identification of promoter regions, and thereby the focused search for binding sites of transcription factors. although for species such as mouse and human, methods to capture tsss have been developed 410 years ago , owing to differences in messenger rna (mrna) processing, these methods cannot be applied to bacteria. recently, however, a method for genome-wide identification of bacterial tsss has been proposed . the method, called differential rna sequencing (drna-seq), uses the 5 0 mono-phosphate-dependent terminator exonuclease (tex) that specifically degrades 5 0 mono-phosphorylated rna species such as processed rna, mature ribosomal rnas and transfer rnas, whereas primary mrna transcripts that carry a 5 0 triphosphate remain intact. this approach results in an enrichment of primary transcripts, allowing tsss to be identified by comparison of the tex-treated samples to control untreated ones. as an automated computational method to identify tsss based on drna-seq data has not been available, tss annotation based on drna-seq data required substantial effort on the part of the curators. the aim of our work was to develop an automated analysis method to support future analyses of drna-seq data. we here introduce a rigorous computational method that enables identification of a large proportion of bona fide tsss with relative ease. the method is based on quantifying 5 0 enrichment of tsss and also the significance of their expression relative to nearby putative tsss. benchmarking our method on several recently published datasets, we find that the identified tsss are in good agreement with those annotated manually, and that a relatively large number of additional tsss that also have the expected transcription regulatory signals are identified. tsser is freely available at http://www.clipz.unibas.ch/tsser/index.php.deep sequencing has truly revolutionized molecular biology. it enabled not only the assembly of the genomes of thousands of species, but also annotation of transcribed regions in these genomes and the generation of a variety of maps for dna-binding factors, non-coding rnas and rna-binding factors. highthroughput studies revealed that not only eukaryotic but also. properties of tsss that were present only in the reference list (left), both in the reference and the tsser list (middle) or only in the tsser list (right). (a) box plot of averaged normalized expression (the boxes are drawn from the first to the third quantile and the median is shown with the red line). (b) box plot of the displacement distribution relative to the start codon. (c) scatterplots of 5 0 versus local enrichment (both shown as percentage). (d) sequence logos indicating the positiondependent (5 0 ! 3 0 direction) frequencies of nucleotides upstream of the tss (datasets are shown from top to bottom rather than from left to right) prokaryotic genomes are more complex than initially thought. in particular, bacterial genomes encode relatively large numbers of non-coding rnas with regulatory functions and antisense transcripts . such transcripts are of particular interest because they are frequently produced in response to and contribute to the adaptation to specific stimuli . the availability of a large number of bacterial genomes further enables identification of regulatory elements through comparative genomicsbased approaches . however, these methods benefit from accurate annotation of tsss that enables a focused search for transcription factor binding sites. although the data supporting tss identification can be obtained with relative ease , the annotation of tsss has so far been carried out manually, which is tedious and likely leads to an incomplete set of tsss. only recently, as our manuscript was in the review process, methods for automated annotation of tsss based on drna-seq data started to emerge (see also http://www.tbi.univie.ac.at/newpapers/pdfs/tbip-2013-4.pdf). the method that we propose here is meant to provide a starting point into the process of tss curation. because it uses drna-seq data, it is clear that only tsss from which there is active transcription during the experiment can be annotated. as we have determined in the benchmark against the h.pylori, there remain tsss for which the expression evidence is poor, yet have the properties of bona fide tsss. additional samples, covering conditions in which these tsss are expected to be expressed are necessary to identify them. alternatively, they can be brought in during the process of manual curation. nonetheless, the advantage of an unbiased automated method such as the one we propose here is that it allows the discovery of tsss that may not be expected or easily evaluated such as those of antisense transcripts, alternative tsss and tsss corresponding to novel genes. furthermore, this method can provide an initial set of high-confidence tsss that can be used to train more complex models of transcription regulation, which could be used to iteratively identify additional tsss, that may be supported by a small number of reads. to illustrate this point, we here used an hmm, which we trained on high-confidence tsss from the common category, to provide an additional list of putative tsss that appear to have appropriate transcription regulatory signals but that were not captured with high abundance or enrichment in the experiment (supplementary). thirty-six percent of the tsss that were only present in the reference annotation are part of this list. more sophisticated versions of this approach could be used toward comprehensive annotation of tsss in bacterial genomes. finally, the method can be applied to other systems in which genomic regions give rise to an increased number of transcripts in specific conditions.we have proposed an approach for genome-wide identification of tsss in bacteria, which uses drna-seq data to quantify the 5 0 and local enrichment in reads at putative tsss and their corresponding significance. the method is implemented in an automated pipeline, which we applied to several recently published drna-seq datasets. a thorough benchmarking of the tsss proposed by our method relative to manual curation indicates that the method performs well in identifying known tsss and is able to further detect novel tsss that have the expected properties of bona fide tss. thus, our method should enable rapid identification of tsss in bacterial genomes starting from drna-seq data.  
