genome analysis tssi—an r package for transcription start site identification from 5 mrna tag data high-throughput sequencing has become an essential experimental approach for the investigation of transcriptional mechanisms. for some applications like chip-seq, several approaches for the prediction of peak locations exist. however, these methods are not designed for the identification of transcription start sites (tsss) because such datasets contain qualitatively different noise. in this application note, the r package tssi is presented which provides a heuristic framework for the identification of tsss based on 5 mrna tag data. probabilistic assumptions for the distribution of the data, i.e. for the observed positions of the mapped reads, as well as for systematic errors, i.e. for reads which map closely but not exactly to a real tss, are made and can be adapted by the user. the framework also comprises a regularization procedure which can be applied as a preprocessing step to decrease the noise and thereby reduce the number of false predictions. availability: the r package tssi is available from the bioconductor web sitehigh-throughput sequencing has become an essential experimental approach to investigate genomes and transcriptional processes. the core of most applications is a peak finding algorithm which is required to identify regions of interest. these algorithms are designed application specifically because the requirements depend on characteristics of the measurements as well as on the questions of interest. while cdna sequencing (rna-seq) using random priming and/or fragmentation of cdna will result in a shallow distribution of reads typically biased toward the 3 end, approaches like capcapture enrich 5 ends of mrnas and result in distinguishable peaks around the transcription start site(s) (tsss). similar methods to whom correspondence should be addressed. can also be applied to specifically target 3 ends of mrnas. the resolution and utility of the multitude of end-tagging methods have been tremendously increased in recent years by the application of next-generation sequencing technologies which allow 5 or 3 digital gene expression at genome scale . when applied to sequencing of dna fragments isolated by immunoprecipitation (chip-seq) broad and almost unimodal densities without gaps are obtained around a target position which, depending on the protein used for immunoprecipitation, usually represents a transcription factor binding site or provides insight into chromatin structure. for such applications, several approaches have been proposed although benchmark problems show that these algorithms still work insufficiently in some cases (references are provided in the supplementary material). predicting the location of tsss is complicated by the possible existence of an unknown number of multiple, alternative tsss. furthermore, the transcription of many genes in eukaryotic genomes is initiated at not well-defined sharp or peaked sites, but in more fuzzily defined, broad transcription start regions (see references in the supplementary material). in addition, as illustrated in, the measurements typically contain background reads, i.e. false positives not originating from real tsss. therefore, only the counts which are significantly larger than an expected number of background reads are intended to be predicted as tsss. the 5 end tag data used as a test set for our study (see section 2) comprises reads mapping to 211 669 genomic positions. this vastly exceeds the expected number of tsss, indicating the existence of reads not originating from real tsss. such reads cluster to certain genomic positions, i.e. the level of background noise seems to be proportional to proximate measurements yielding false positive reads preferably in regions of transcriptional activity. it is yet unclear, whether these are artifacts introduced from the experimental procedure or whether there is a biological meaning to this noise. as currently there is no error model available describing such noise, an heuristic approach is introduced for an automated and flexible prediction of tsss in the following.  
