sequence analysis turnip: tracking unresolved nucleotide polymorphisms in large hard-to-assemble regions of repetitive dna sequence turnip comprises a suite of perl scripts and modules that facilitates the resolution of microheterogeneity within hard-to-assemble repetitive dna sequences. turnip was originally developed for the saccharomyces genome resequencing project (sgrp) within which the ribosomal dna (rdna) of 36 strains of s.cerevisiae were analysed to investigate the occurrence of potential polymorphisms. here, partially resolved snps, or psnps, as well as indels, were found to be far more prevalent than previously suspected. more generally, the turnip software ascertains degrees of variation between large tandem repeats within a single locus, offering insights into mechanisms of genome stability and gene conversion in any organism for which genome sequence data are available. availability: the turnip source code, results files and online help are available atthe drive to continually decrease the cost of dna sequencing to achieve better sequence value-for-money has led to a whole host of new sequencing platforms and analytical techniques. highthroughput next-generation platforms such as abi solid, roche 454 and solexa (illumina, inc.) can generate so much data in a single run that where previously major concerns centered around read quality and coverage, now the challenges are shifting towards data storage, data management and timely analysis. assembly strategies and tools have had to keep up with the deluge of nucleotide bases, and as a result many are now highly sophisticated. alongside (and often coupled with) these tools are a large number of snp calling algorithms that aim to categorise point variation using reference-based or de novo assembly. however, these algorithms are not appropriate in all cases, such as dealing with repetitive regions. an extreme case of a large repetitive genomic region is the ribosomal dna (rdna) tandem repeat array. for example, in the brewers yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae this array, which typically comprises between 50 and 200 copies of a 9 kb repeat unit dependinginserted gaps in the template and subject sequences are spanned with surrounding known quality scores. aligned seed read 20mers at a given window position are discarded if they have any single base below a set sequence quality score threshold (this does not mean that a particular read is discarded for the whole analysis, but just at the current 20mer window. see). if they pass these constraints, the seed read 20mers are then compared with the consensus and called for variation . in this way, the turnip software encapsulates, and contains improvements to, the method suggested by us and used in. in particular, due to fine-scale alignment and filtering mechanisms employed within, turnip is able to resolve variable-length indels as well as point mutations, and other problematic features such as long homopolymeric (polya and polyt) tracts. the turnip algorithmic process is described in greater detail in the online documentation. portions of the turnip software, such as blast, muscle and the sliding window approach, can be configured to run concurrently on a multi-core/cluster environment and hence analyse multiple window positions simultaneously. as an example, strain ys4 from the saccharomyces genome resequencing project (sgrp) strain set, sequenced using sanger wholegenome shotgun sequencing at approximately 1 coverage, has an estimated 100 repeat copies giving a complete dataset of just under 1 mb. on a dual core 3 ghz desktop machine with 2 gb ram, this dataset took 3 min to process using turnip. at each stage of the analysis, turnip writes output files that allow it to use precomputed data in case of process interruption, or if certain variationcalling threshold parameters are changed and a simple reanalysis of the final alignments is needed. turnip produces simple text file output describing the positions, types and frequencies of the resolved polymorphisms, as well as sql files for database importing and gff3 for bulk loading into a gbrowse database . a custom pie chart glyph and an example gbrowse configuration file are included in the turnip distribution. the turnip suite also provides scripts to produce distance matrices and phylogenetic trees from the output variation frequency data. trees generated from analysis of the sgrp s.cerevisiae dataset can be viewed and interactively modified by strain subset selection at the ncyc web site (see availability). the trees generated from psnp distances closely match those produced as part of the study of, showing that analysis of the rdna region of the yeast genome alone can be sufficient to produce informative phylogenies based on variation that is not fully resolved. this information could be used in future for the purposes of precision strain characterization and evolutionary studies including investigation into gene conversion in closely related lineages.  
