systems biology tvnviewer: an interactive visualization tool for exploring networks that change over time or space the relationship between genes and proteins is a dynamic relationship that changes across time and differs in different cells. the study of these differences can reveal various insights into biological processes and disease progression, especially with the aid of proper tools for network visualization. toward this purpose, we have developed tvnviewer, a novel visualization tool, which is specifically designed to aid in the exploration and analysis of dynamic networks. availability: tvnviewer is freely available with documentation and tutorials on the web atbiological relationships, such as those between proteins, between transcription factors and dna binding sites, and between cells, differ across different tissues and change over time. recent studies have shown that changes in network architecture from the cell cycle and in response to diverse stimuli are quite significant . despite the dynamic nature of these interactions, the general scientific paradigm has often been to consider these relationships as static entities. however, many recent studies have advanced the field through insight from network dynamics across time or tissue in a variety of species including: human blood leukocyte response , rice regulatory hierarchies of gene expression , temporal interaction in caenorhabditis elegans and correlated changes in gene expression between mouse tissues . the study of network dynamics has the potential to produce crucial discoveries in gene regulation, cell cycle, and cancer progression. representing biological relationships visually through networks is considered the best way to demonstrate the interplay between different genes or proteins. network representations of such data range from the small and simple networks to large, complex networks that represent thousands of genes. the potential for network visualization to aid in our fundamental understanding of biological relationships has resulted in an explosion of software platforms and visualization toolkits . these software applications include popular tools such as cytoscape , osprey to whom correspondence should be addressed., visant , graphle and many more. while some tools are specific to biology, others such as medusa are general purpose and can be customized to other domains. each network visualization tool approaches the problem from a different angle; advantages and disadvantages between them are varied. however, despite the complex array of software available, there remains the unmet need for software to explore dynamic networks . to explore dynamic networks, researchers must awkwardly create a series of static networks and manually inspect them to identify rewiring behavior. we have developed tvnviewer, a web site built for the exploration and analysis of networks that change over time and space. both circle and force-directed layouts are available for users to scroll through a series of networks in real time, providing a natural way to quickly identify network rewiring. additionally, tvnviewer gives users access to analysis tools describing how the degree of the nodes and descriptors in the network change over time. although tvnviewer was developed with biological interactions in mind, it can be used for any type of dynamic network.  
