genome analysis twist-dna: computing base-pair and bubble opening probabilities in genomic superhelical dna local opening of the dna double helix is required in many fundamental biological processes and is, in part, controlled by the degree of superhelicity imposed in vivo by the protein machinery. in particular, positions of superhelically destabilized regions correlate with regulatory sites along the genome. based on a self-consistent linearization of a thermodynamic model of superhelical dna introduced by benham, we have developed a program that predicts the locations of these regions by efficiently computing base-pair and bubble opening probabilities in genomic dna. the program allows visualization of results in standard genome browsers to compare dna opening properties with other available datasets. availability and implementation: source codes freely available for download at http://www.cbp.ens-lyon.fr/doku.php?iddeveloppe ment:productions:logiciels:twistdna, implemented in fortran90 and supported on any unix-based operating system (linux, mac os x).many key biological processes like transcription or replication require the local opening of double-helical dna. under physiological conditions, most base-pairs are double-stranded, but transient melting or unwinding of bubbles can occur spontaneously at specific locations along the genome . in vivo, the double helix of dna is mechanically constrained by protein machineries, imposing generally a negative superhelical stress to dna with a typical superhelical density of about 0.06 in bacteria. this tendency to underwind dna globally destabilizes the double helix, which might result in changes in the local physicochemical dna features, like, for example, the binding constants of transcription enzymatic complexes . it is therefore believed that highly destabilized regions in the sequence might be related to regulatory sites. over the past 20 years, based on a thermodynamic model of superhelical dna introduced by craig benham , it has been shown that these strongly stressinduced duplex destabilized regions significantly correlate with yeast origin of replications or promoter regions in bacteria . such observed correlations suggest that information on the local opening properties of dna could drive the identifications and annotations of putative regulatory regions in genomes. nine years ago, bi and benham developed the web server websidd that predicts the destabilization properties of genomic dna in response to superhelical stress. however, the systematic use of this tool to genome-wide analysis of dna local melting is highly limited by important computation times that restrict the use of the server to sequences 510 000 bp. recently, we have developed a computationally efficient self-consistent linearization of the benham model that allows the prediction of position-dependent opening properties of entire genomes within minutes on a personal computer. here, we describe twist-dna, a novel freely available open source program that computes local base-pair and bubble opening probabilities of superhelical dna, under any given temperature, ionic condition or superhelical stress density. in particular, it reads generic sequence files in fasta format and provides output files in bed format that can be loaded into genome browsers to compare destabilization properties of genomic dna with existing annotations or available datasets.  
