two-dimensional segmentation for analyzing hi-c data motivation: the spatial conformation of the chromosome has a deep influence on gene regulation and expression. hi-c technology allows the evaluation of the spatial proximity between any pair of loci along the genome. it results in a data matrix where blocks corresponding to (self-)interacting regions appear. the delimitation of such blocks is critical to better understand the spatial organization of the chromatin. from a computational point of view, it results in a 2d segmentation problem. results: we focus on the detection of cis-interacting regions, which appear to be prominent in observed data. we define a block-wise segmentation model for the detection of such regions. we prove that the maximization of the likelihood with respect to the block boundaries can be rephrased in terms of a 1d segmentation problem, for which the standard dynamic programming applies. the performance of the proposed methods is assessed by a simulation study on both synthetic and resampled data.many key steps of the cell development and cycle, such as dna replication and gene expression are influenced by the 3d structure of the chromatin . the folding of the chromosome in the space defines chromosomal territories, the function of which has been studied for few years now . typically, topologically associating domains contain clusters of genes that are co-regulated . thus, the detection of chromosomal regions having close spatial location in the nucleus will provide insights for a better understanding of the influence of the chromosomal conformation on the cells functioning. several chromosome conformation capture technologies have been developed in the past decade, among which hi-c is the most recent. this technology is based on a deep sequencing approach and provides read pairs corresponding to pairs of genomic loci that physically interact in the nucleus . the raw measurement provided by hi-c is therefore a list of pairs of locations along the chromosome, at the nucleotide resolution. these measurement are often summarized as a square matrix y, where y i,j stands for the total number of read pairs matching in position i and position j, respectively. positions refer here to a sequence of non-overlapping windows of equal sizes covering the genome. the number n of windows may vary from one study to another: liebermanconsidered an mb resolution, whereaswent deeper and used windows of 100 kb. blocks of higher intensity arise among this matrix, revealing both cis-and trans-interacting regions . although both types of interaction are likely to exist, cis-interacting regions seem to be prominent in the data (see, for instance), and some have been confirmed to host co-regulated genes . such regions result in block of higher signal along the diagonal of the data matrix. the purpose of the statistical analysis is then to provide a fully automated and efficient strategy to determine these regions. a first attempt was presented in, where the author strategy is first to summarize the 2d data into a 1d index, called the directionality index, then to apply a regular hidden markov model to the summary data to retrieve the segmentation. in this article, we show that such a two-step strategy can be avoided, and that summarizing the data is not required to solve the segmentation problem. detecting diagonal blocks can be seen as a particular 2d segmentation issue. the 2d segmentation has been widely investigated for the detection of contour with arbitrary shape in images (see, for example,). from a computational point of view, image segmentation is an open problem because no predefined ordering exists that could be used to provide exact and efficient algorithms. compared with contour detection, it is worth noticing that hi-c data segmentation displays a specific pattern that did not receive any special attention from the image processing community. one of our contributions is to prove that this 2d segmentation problem boils down to a 1d segmentation problem for which efficient dynamic programming algorithms apply . our formulation of the problem also allows us to solve some nonblock diagonal segmentation problems (see the end of section 2.2). the article is organized as follows. in section 2, we define a general statistical model for hi-c data, which can deal with both raw and normalized data. we prove that the maximum likelihood estimates of the block boundaries can be efficiently retrieved. in section 3, we first present an extensive simulation study to assess the performance of our approach on both simulated and resampled data. we then apply the proposed methodology to the data studied by, which are publicly available, and compare our results with their regions. the package implementing the proposed method is presented in section 4 where some open problems are also discussed. to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2014. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com  
