bioinformatics discovery note sequence analysis two distinct ssb protein families in nucleo-cytoplasmic large dna viruses motivation: eukaryote-infecting nucleo-cytoplasmic large dna viruses (ncldvs) feature some of the largest genomes in the viral world. these viruses typically do not strongly depend on the host dna replication systems. in line with this observation, a number of essential dna replication proteins, such as dna polymerases, primases, helicases and ligases, have been identified in the ncldvs. one other ubiquitous component of dna replisomes is the single-stranded dna-binding (ssb) protein. intriguingly, no ncldv homologs of canonical ob-fold-containing ssb proteins had previously been detected. only in poxviruses, one of seven ncldv families, i3 was identified as the ssb protein. however, whether i3 is related to any known protein structure has not yet been established. results: here, we addressed the case of missing canonical ssb proteins in the ncldvs and also probed evolutionary origins of the i3 family. using advanced computational methods, in four ncldv families, we detected homologs of the bacteriophage t7 ssb protein (gp2.5). we found the properties of these homologs to be consistent with the ssb function. moreover, we implicated specific residues in single-stranded dna binding. at the same time, we found no evolutionary link between the t7 gp2.5-like ncldv ssb homologs and the poxviral ssb protein (i3). instead, we identified a distant relationship between i3 and small protein b (smpb), a bacterial rna-binding protein. thus, apparently, the ncldvs have the two major distinct sets of ssb proteins having bacteriophage and bacterial origins, respectively.the largest currently known viruses belong to the group of eukaryotic nucleo-cytoplasmic large dna viruses (ncldvs) . at present, this group of double-stranded dna viruses is classified into seven families . replication of these large viruses typically does not strongly depend on the host dna replication and transcription systems. in line with the large genome size and the relative replication independence, comparative genomics studies revealed that ncldv genomes encode essential dna replication proteins, including dna polymerase, helicase and primase . however, conspicuously absent among the identified conserved ncldv protein families were canonical single-stranded dna-binding (ssb) proteins. the ssb function in nature is strongly associated with the specific structural solution, oligonucleotide-binding (ob) fold, featuring a five-stranded-barrel capped with an-helix . to our knowledge, there are only two documented exceptions, where the structure of an ssb protein is unrelated to ob-fold. the two exceptions include adenovirus and thermoproteales, a clade of hyperthermophilic crenarchaea . given the importance of ssb proteins in various dna transactions, the seeming absence of canonical ob-fold ssb proteins in ncldv genomes was all the more intriguing. although in poxviruses, one of seven ncldv families, the ssb protein (i3) has been identified , whether it is based on the ob-fold or some unrelated structure has not yet been established . in this study, we aimed to resolve the puzzle of missing canonical ob-fold ssb proteins in the ncldvs and to explore the evolutionary origins of the enigmatic poxviral ssb protein family.  
