sequence analysis uchime improves sensitivity and speed of chimera detection motivation: chimeric dna sequences often form during polymerase chain reaction amplification, especially when sequencing single regions (e.g. 16s rrna or fungal internal transcribed spacer) to assess diversity or compare populations. undetected chimeras may be misinterpreted as novel species, causing inflated estimates of diversity and spurious inferences of differences between populations. detection and removal of chimeras is therefore of critical importance in such experiments. results: we describe uchime, a new program that detects chimeric sequences with two or more segments. uchime either uses a database of chimera-free sequences or detects chimeras de novo by exploiting abundance data. uchime has better sensitivity than chimeraslayer (previously the most sensitive database method), especially with short, noisy sequences. in testing on artificial bacterial communities with known composition, uchime de novo sensitivity is shown to be comparable to perseus. uchime is 100 faster than perseus and 1000 faster than chimeraslayer. contact: robert@drive5.com availability: source, binaries and data: http://drive5.com/uchime.chimeric sequence identification poses a challenging problem in algorithm design, especially with short reads, where the available evidence is often limited to very small numbers of observed differences. uchime achieves a significant improvement in detection accuracy over previous methods that use a reference database, and performs comparably to a state-of-the art de novo method designed specifically for pyrosequencing, despite the fact that uchime was not designed or trained for this particular type of data. uchime achieves much faster execution speeds than previous programs. our results show that uchime has robust performance when presented with different types of 16s data and is tolerant of simulated noise, suggesting that uchime is likely to perform well page: 2199 21942200 uchimeinput sequences are denoised amplicons and abundances predicted by ampliconnoise . these results show that de novo uchime (ucdn) with default parameters (obtained by training on sim2) has similar sensitivities and error rates to perseusd. in reference database mode (ucref), using the microbiome utils gold reference database, uchime performance is similar, reflecting the fact that many of the 16s sequences in the communities are found in the gold database. n is the number of chimeric sequences and m is the number of segments in the chimera. goodseqs and chimeras are the total numbers of biological sequences and chimeras, respectively, found using a separate reference database of 16s sequences for species in the communities (seefor details).elapsed time required to execute two implementations of the uchime algorithm compared with chimeraslayer and perseus on the uneven1 subset of the mock data, which has 1124 sequences. the chimeraslayer reference database (5181 sequences) was used for both uchime and chimeraslayer. the stand-alone uchime program is tested and also an implementation of the same algorithm in the usearch package . a single-core, 1 ghz 32-bit i86 linux computer with 1 gb ram was used.with other types of data, e.g. the fungal its region or reads from novel sequencing technologies. uchime requires either a database with adequate coverage of the phylogenetic diversity in the input sequences (reference mode), or an estimate of unique amplicon sequences and their abundances (de novo mode). construction of a suitable reference database and robust estimation of amplicon sequences and their abundances (denoising) are both challenging problems that are discussed in more detail in the supplementary material. although we regard the experiments reported here as informative for comparing algorithms, realism is hard to achieve both in simulations and in mock communities, so results may not be predictive of sensitivity and error rates that would be achieved on experimental data from environmental samples. the emerging interest in characterizing the effects of members of the rare biosphere in a range of clinical and environmental contexts, combined with the rapid decrease in sequencing cost, challenges us to improve the efficiency of sequence analysis so that that computational cost does not become a limiting factor. uchime meets this challenge for an essential step in many experiments, offering a unique combination of accuracy and speed that will be of great value to biologists.  
