sequence analysis umelt: prediction of high-resolution melting curves and dynamic melting profiles of pcr products in a rich web application umelt sm is a flexible web-based tool for predicting dna melting curves and denaturation profiles of pcr products. the user defines an amplicon sequence and chooses a set of thermodynamic and experimental parameters that include nearest neighbor stacking energies, loop entropy effects, cation (monovalent and mg ++) concentrations and a temperature range. using an accelerated partition function algorithm along with chosen parameter values, umelt interactively calculates and visualizes the mean helicity and the dissociation probability at each sequence position at temperatures within the temperature range. predicted curves display the mean helicity as a function of temperature or as derivative plots. predicted profiles display stability as a function of sequence position either as 50 helicity temperatures or as the helicity probability at specific temperatures. the loss of helicity associated with increasing temperature may be viewed dynamically to visualize domain formation within the molecule. results from fluorescent high-resolution melting experiments match the number of predicted melting domains and their relative temperatures. however, the absolute melting temperatures vary with the selected thermodynamic parameters and current libraries do not account for the rapid melting rates and helix stabilizing dyes used in fluorescent melting experiments. umelt provides a convenient platform for simulation and design of high-resolution melting assays. availability and implementation: the application was developed in actionscript and can be found online atdna melting analysis with fluorescent dyes is a new method to conveniently scan for genetic variation without sequencing . the ability to predict the shape and position of melting curves is essential for assay design and optimization. umelt builds on existing models of dna melting using nearest neighbor thermodynamics and recursive calculations using statistical mechanics (; to whom correspondence should be addressed.) to predict fluorescent melting analysis of pcr products in a rich web application.  
