unbiased classification of spatial strategies in the barnes maze motivation: spatial learning is one of the most widely studied cognitive domains in neuroscience. the morris water maze and the barnes maze are the most commonly used techniques to assess spatial learning and memory in rodents. despite the fact that these tasks are well-validated paradigms for testing spatial learning abilities, manual categorization of performance into behavioral strategies is subject to individual interpretation, and thus to bias. we have previously described an unbi-ased machine-learning algorithm to classify spatial strategies in the morris water maze. results: here we offer a support vector machine (svm) based, automated, barnes-maze unbiased strategy (buns) classification algorithm, as well as a cognitive score scale that can be used for memory acquisition, reversal training and probe trials. the buns algorithm can greatly benefit barnes maze users as it provides a standardized method of strategy classification and cognitive scoring scale, which cannot be derived from typical barnes maze data analysis. availability: freely available on the web at http://okunlab.wix.com/okunlab as a matlab application.while the molecular and genetic tools applied in neuroscience are becoming ever more sophisticated, the most robust tasks that assess cognitive spatial memory have been largely unchanged since the early 1980s. the morris water maze (mwm), described by richard morris , and the barnes maze, described by carol barnes , are the most widely used paradigms for assessing spatial learning in rodents . we have recently described the must-c (morris water maze unbiased strategy classification) algorithm, which rapidly classifies spatial swim strategies in the mwm and provides an unbiased assessment of the cognitive capacity of rodents . similar to the mwm, the convenient and robust nature of the barnes maze has facilitated the investigation of spatial learning in both control and disease states. for example, assessing spatial learning using the barnes maze has important implications for many pathologies in which learning is impaired such as aging , alzheimers disease (ad) , neurodevelopmental disorders, mental retardation, pharmacological assays to assess drug efficiency and more. the barnes maze also has advantages in assessing improvements in spatial capacity, such as following enriched environment , caloric restriction , or exercise . in contrast to the mwm paradigm, the barnes maze is a dry maze, reducing water-related stress that enables the use of in-vivo devices such as optogenetics. however, assessment of performance in the barnes maze is susceptible to experimenter bias, calling for a more objective method of data analysis. the difference between the mwm and barnes maze tasks, often results in different sets of navigation strategies utilized by rodents (illouz, associate editor: dr. jonathan wren the author (2016). published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.). as a consequence, these differences call for a novel classifier dedicated to the barnes maze. in the barnes maze, rodents are trained to find an escape box hidden under the surface of a circular table by relying on extra-maze cues (o). the high illumination used in this task (1350 lux), causes anxiety in the mice, providing the motivation to find the hidden chamber. performance in this task relies on hippocampal place cells, validating its use as a task for spatial learning . the efficiency in which mice perform this task is then quantified using specific parameters such as the latency to reach the escape chamber, total distance traveled, mean moving speed, and path efficiency (calculated as the distance between the first and last locations divided by the total distance). additional attributes are typically used to control for the animals behavior, such as immobility and mean speed. both cognitive and non-cognitive traits are evident during spatial navigation, including changes in mean speed, path efficiency, duration, and body rotations. mice typically exhibit specific navigation strategies when tested in the barnes maze, reflecting the extent of their spatial acquisition of the environment and thus provide information about the integrity of hippocampus-dependent functions and cognitive state. based on narrower previous strategy definitions (direct, serial and mixed) as well as our empirical data, we have defined 6 main navigation strategies for the barnes maze. this broader range of spatial strategies is described from highly spatial to non-spatial strategies: (a) direct, reflects the optimal acquisition of the targets location, as the animal efficiently identifies its location and the targets location and thus uses the shortest trajectory possible (b) corrected, reflects a slightly lower efficiency, as the animal makes a minor correction in the trajectory towards the target, and often follows re-angualtion (c) long-correction consist of a major correction in the trajectory, as the animal navigates to a distal region of the environment, re-angulates and make a direct movement towards the target (d) focused search reflects a localized scanning of the region surrounding the target (e) serial search reflects a systematic non-spatial method of enhancing the probability of finding the target, as the animal travels from one hole to the adjacent hole in a serial manner (f) random search reflects no acquisition of the target location, as the animal utilizes a non-systematic method of enhancing the probability of finding the target by traveling randomly in the environment. the specific combination of strategies employed by mice in the barnes maze are considered representative of the level of cognitive resources being used for the task . however, despite thorough assessment of trajectory parameters, non-spatial navigation strategies can increase in efficiency over time, resulting in a decreased latency to reach the escape box. moreover, simple quantification of latency, mean speed, distance and other parameters describing performance in the barnes maze often result in only a partial understanding of mouse behavior and cognitive capacity. in order to avoid such erroneous or incomplete interpretation of behavioral data in the barnes maze, manual assessments of mouse behavior are often required. manual assessments of spatial strategies are time-consuming, and different experimental conditions alter searching attributes used in the apparatus, hindering cross-experiment analysis of mouse behavior. moreover, manual assessments are prone to experimenter bias during analysis. thus, manual assessment fails to reliably detect important aspects of cognitive spatial behavior in the barnes maze, due to reduced sensitivity to nuances, bias, and environmental factors. for these reasons, we constructed the barnes maze unbiased strategy (buns) classification tool, an automatic classification algorithm, freely available for the analysis of mouse behavior. this tool uses generic features of the mouse path to enable unbiased analysis of spatial learning strategies, and presents a cognitive scoring scale based on the spatial learning strategy used by the mice. we have compared performance of mice in the barnes maze in order to validate and assess the sensitivity of our algorithm.. our data demonstrate that the buns algorithm provides unbiased analysis of barnes maze behavioral data and extends the capacity of researchers to understand the mechanisms of spatial learning and memory in rodents.  
