uncovering multiloci-ordering by algebraic property of laplacian matrix and its fiedler vector motivation: the loci-ordering, based on two-point recombination fractions for a pair of loci, is the most important step in constructing a reliable and fine genetic map. results: using the concept from complex graph theory, here we propose a laplacian ordering approach which uncovers the loci-ordering of multiloci simultaneously. the algebraic property for a fiedler vector of a laplacian matrix, constructed from the recombination fraction of the loci-ordering for 26 loci of barley chromosome iv, 846 loci of arabidopsis thaliana and 1903 loci of malus domes-tica, together with the variable threshold uncovers their loci-orders. it offers an alternative yet robust approach for ordering multiloci. availability and implementation: source code program with data set is available as supplementary data and also in a software category of the website (http:// biophysics.a locus is the chromosome location of a gene, a genetic marker or any specific dna sequence, and can be regarded as a point on a line. the loci-ordering is a linear arrangement of genes or genetic markers in a linkage group which is a group of genes with their loci located on the same chromosome. for these genes, the segregation ratio for the genotypes and phenotypes departs from the mendelian law. therefore, the loci-ordering is the most important step in constructing a reliable and fine genetic map. the loci-ordering also includes localizing a new locus, a disease, or a marker locus, on an existing map. however computational estimation of loci-ordering for dense genes is rate-limiting step in genetic mapping procedures including linkage grouping or distance spacing between genes. genetic recombination is estimated by the recombination fraction, which is the ratio of recombinant gametes to total gametes . for homologous recombination, we expect that the greater the physical distance between two loci on a chromosome, the greater the chance they will recombine. let l 1 , l 2 ,. .. , l n denote n loci in a linkage group, then our interest is ordering n loci to construct genomic map based on two-point recombination fractions r ij , 1 i j n for a pair of loci i and j, which usually ranges from 0 to 0.5. if two loci i and j are closely located, i.e. tightly linked, then r ij is close to 0, and if not it is away from 0. with n loci, there are n!/2 possible orderings if the orientation of the orders is ignored. locus ordering searches for the best locus order among the possible orders and it amounts to evaluating the maximum likelihood for each order. with only 10 loci, for example, there are 1 814 000 possible orders, and therefore, the loci-ordering entails a formidable computational problem and is practically unfeasible. in overcoming such difficulties, the loci-ordering minimizing the number of crossovers was regarded as the best ordering, and thismethod has been shown to be the maximum likelihood ordering under the full penetrance assumption, i.e. lack of interference . also, several other approaches, closely related with this idea, have been suggested. examples for objective score functions used in other approaches are the minimum of adjacent recombination fractions criterion , the maximum sum of adjacent lod scores criterion , minimum sum of the probability of double recombinants , maximum likelihood , and minimum obligatory crossovers . most searching procedures for optimizing those objective score functions are exhaustive and the efficient techniques for searching strategies are necessary. to reduce the exhaustive searching procedures, seriation and branch-andbound . softwares for computing genetic maps by using various objective score functions and optimizing techniques have been developed and distributed such as mapmaker , joinmap , carthagene , neighbour mapping , mapmanger qtx , record , antmap , mstmap , madmapper . here we suggest a conceptually different yet a simple laplacian ordering method for the loci-ordering via the fiedler vector , taking the close analogy with the recent development for characterizing complex network phenomenon in broad areas , which circumvents most of the difficulties in the previous approaches . we view that the elements of a correlation matrix, constructed from twopoint recombination fractions r ij , 1 i j n for a pair of loci i and j, share a complex correlation for n loci in a linkage group. the fiedler vector from the graph theory has been used for several graph manipulations such as partitioning , linear labelling and envelope minimization . recently, the fiedler vector was successfully employed in clustering and classification problem of complex networking phenomena .  
