uncovering the co-evolutionary network among prokaryotic genes motivation: correlated events of gains and losses enable inference of co-evolution relations. the reconstruction of the co-evolutionary interactions network in prokaryotic species may elucidate functional associations among genes. results: we developed a novel probabilistic methodology for the detection of co-evolutionary interactions between pairs of genes. using this method we inferred the co-evolutionary network among 4593 clusters of orthologous genes (cogs). the number of co-evolutionary interactions substantially differed among cogs. over 40 were found to co-evolve with at least one partner. we partitioned the network of co-evolutionary relations into clusters and uncovered multiple modular assemblies of genes with clearly defined functions. finally, we measured the extent to which co-evolutionary relations coincide with other cellular relations such as genomic proximity, gene fusion propensity, co-expression, proteinprotein interactions and metabolic connections. our results show that co-evolutionary relations only partially overlap with these other types of networks. our results suggest that the inferred co-evolutionary network in prokaryotes is highly informative towards revealing functional relations among genes, often showing signals that cannot be extracted from other network types. availability and implementation: available under gpl license as open source.prokaryotic genomes are highly variable in their size . comparative genomic analyses revealed that variability in gene content among genomes is a major factor contributing to this size variability . this substantial variability is mainly the result of gene acquisition via horizontal gene transfer (hgt) and gene loss, e.g. as a result of reductive evolution . gene content across genomes is compactly represented by phyletic patterns (also known as phylogenetic profiles), in which the presence or absence of each cog (clusters of orthologous genes) in each genome is represented as a 0/1 binary character (seefor details). genes can have correlated evolutionary histories. this may reflect mutual dependency constraints, e.g. when these genes correspond to proteins that are part of a complex. detecting such co-evolutionary interactions is important for understanding genome evolution as a to whom correspondence should be addressed.coordinated process rather than as a collection of single evolutionary descriptions of each gene. for protein and rna evolutionary studies, a great deal of effort was invested in developing tools that can detect co-evolving sites (e.g.), the most accurate of these explicitly account for the phylogenetic tree that generated these sequences . these approaches, in essence, search for correlated evolutionary events among sites, i.e. at two co-evolving positions, the substitutions occur in a pattern that is different from that expected by chance for two independently evolving sites. a similar approach can be used for the detection of co-evolving genes, in which gains and losses tend to co-occur in the same lineages. accordingly, perfectly correlated genes are co-gained and co-lost during their entire history. methods to search for co-evolving genes were previously developed . phylogeny-based examples include methods that employ the maximum parsimony framework (e.g.) and methods that rely on explicit evolutionary models of co-evolution (e.g.). however, using the maximum parsimony criterion may be misleading, in particular when there is substantial variability in branch lengths . furthermore, we have previously shown that maximum parsimony is less accurate for the inference of gain and lost events compared with model-based approaches . ideally, methods that rely on models that explicitly take into account co-evolution among genes, rather than methods that only use models to test for deviation from the independence assumption should preferably be used. however, explicit modeling of co-evolutionary interactions is currently too computationally extensive to allow the analysis of large datasets, such as those studied in this work. here we present a novel probabilistic methodology to detect co-evolutionary interactions from phyletic patterns. we apply our methodology to analyze hundreds of genomes and thousands of cogs and provide novel insights into the co-evolutionary dynamics of genes across the bacterial domain.  
