systems biology understanding the limits of animal models as predictors of human biology: lessons learned from the sbv improver species translation challenge motivation: inferring how humans respond to external cues such as drugs, chemicals, viruses or hormones is an essential question in biomedicine. very often, however, this question cannot be addressed because it is not possible to perform experiments in humans. a reasonable alternative consists of generating responses in animal models and translating those results to humans. the limitations of such translation, however, are far from clear, and systematic assessments of its actual potential are urgently needed. sbv improver (systems biology verification for industrial methodology for process verification in research) was designed as a series of challenges to address translatability between humans and rodents. this collabora-tive crowd-sourcing initiative invited scientists from around the world to apply their own computational methodologies on a multilayer systems biology dataset composed of phosphoproteomics, transcrip-tomics and cytokine data derived from normal human and rat bronchial epithelial cells exposed in parallel to 52 different stimuli under identical conditions. our aim was to understand the limits of species-to-species translatability at different levels of biological organization: signaling, transcriptional and release of secreted factors (such as cytokines). participating teams submitted 49 different solutions across the sub-challenges, two-thirds of which were statistically significantly better than random. additionally, similar computational methods were found to range widely in their performance within the same challenge, and no single method emerged as a clear winner across all sub-challenges. finally, computational methods were able to effectively translate some specific stimuli and biological processes in the lung epithelial system, such as dna synthesis, cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix, translation, immune/inflammation and growth factor/proliferation pathways, better than the expected response similarity between species.from basic biology to translational medicine and clinical trials, animal models have been an invaluable tool for inferring human biological responses. yet, in spite of the advances these models have facilitated, numerous findings have also been unsuccessfully translated to humans, as evidenced by the failure of many clinical trials. these failures could derive from species-specific differences in response to perturbations or stimuli that would preclude naively translating information learned in one animal model directly to another. systems biology offers the means for understanding the limits of translatability of animal models in different settings, from clinical trials to toxicological assessments to basic cell biology. this approach can provide a more comprehensive predictive model because it considers changes at different levels of the entire system. this is achieved through the development of systematic studies and integration of data over multiple experiments and data-generation platforms . these more complete models will aid our understanding of at what regulatory levels and to what degree responses to different perturbations are translatable between species. when developing models for species translation, orthologous genes are commonly thought to share the same or similar function. this assumption does not always hold, as several reports show that even among closely related species this is not necessarily the case . such divergence goes beyond differences in function and can be seen in changes in essentiality; among 120 mouse orthologs of human to whom correspondence should be addressed.we organized the stc as part of the sbv improver initiative and provided participants with experimental data describing multiple layers of different signaling pathways. the goal was to assess the ability of computational methods to predict biological responses in primary nhbe cells based on responses observed in primary nrbe cells. several of our observations support the conclusion that changes in phosphorylation status and gene set activation induced by cellular response to 52 different perturbations in human cells can be predicted to some extent given responses generated in rat cells. overall, stimuli caused more activation in rat than in human cells for most gene sets and for all phosphoproteins, except for phosphoproteins ks6a1 and hspb1 (supplementary). the differences in stimulusinduced activity could be due to a more homogenous biological sample in rats than in humans, or simply to higher sensitivity and faster signaling of nrbe cells compared with nhbe cells. interestingly, differences between the kinetics of activation of homolog phosphoproteins at the 5 and 25 min time points were minimal [14 pairs for the whole dataset; seein in this issue]. although not statistically significant, the average performance over all participants tended to be higher in sc2 than in sc3. this was seen in the higher pr values when predicting stimuli activity across all phosphoproteins or gene sets and also when predicting the challenges respective signaling layer, gene set activation or phosphorylation responses across all stimuli. this observation holds when considering the performance of the best performer in both sub-challenges, where team amgs prediction pr values were higher for sc2 versus sc3. when we considered cases where the majority of participants performed better than species similarity, i.e. a na ve, direct translation, 12 stimuli and 71 (of 176) active gene sets were well predicted in sc3, and 8 phosphoproteins and 1 stimulus in sc2 (and d and 4c and d). the greater number ofwell-predicted stimuli by gene set activation may have to do with the relatively lower levels of similarity s g as compared with s p , although, importantly teams were able to find informative biological signal in spite of these lower levels of response conservation. finally, 10 teams in sc2 and 5 teams in sc3 submitted predictions that were statistically significantly different from random in two of the three metrics used (supplementary tables s1s3). overall for sc1-3, about two-thirds of the submissions were statistically significant (26 of 41), this indicates that in sc1, gex data were sufficiently informative to infer upstream phosphorylation responses and that overall across-species predictions were achievable for specific stimuli, phosphoproteins and gene sets. while many teams achieved a statistically significant result when considering random submissions as a null hypothesis, most teams in sc2 found their methods were unable to outperform a completely na ve approach to the challenge. if a team had submitted the rats subset b protein phosphorylation status in sc2 and the gene set activations in sc3 as their predictions, they would have ranked second and fifth, respectively. however, best-performer teams used approaches that did significantly better than the na ve approach, suggesting that their computational methods could capture additional informative biological signal in rat data [see in this issue (. interestingly, there was also not a statistically significant difference between the five teams that used both p and gex data and all others. the sc2 second place team, team igb, went further to test multiple variations of their neural network method to include gex data and found it fared worse than methods using phosphorylation data alone [see (. this may be owed to the smaller difference in relative standard deviations (rsd) between human and rat phosphorylation response data versus gex data (supplementary). the similarity in phosphorylation response across species may have been difficult to detect due to the low number of replicate samplesonly 3. these observations suggesting that it was relatively easier to predict a response of the phosphoproteomic layer are also reflected in the median z-scoreshierarchical clustering of gene sets and genes that are present in at least 4 of the top 25 best predicted gene sets. each cell is valued according to gene set membership and frequency the gene is found as part of that gene sets gsea core enrichment set. gene/gene set pairs are assigned a 0 if the gene is not a member,of the challenge metrics, where sc2 z-scores were higher than sc3 for aupr and pcc (c). these results likely reflect both the larger universe of predictions for sc3, which were an order of magnitude greater than for sc2 (246 26 = 6396 gene sets/stimuli pairs versus 16 26 = 416 phosphoproteins/stimuli pairs) and also a higher conservation between rat and human for protein phosphorylation activation (s p = 0.71) compared with the gene set activation (s g = 0.38). it is also possible that the higher similarity in phosphorylation response and smaller difference in the rsd between human and rat in the protein phosphorylation data with respect to the gex data enabled more accurate predictions (supplementary). this is likely due to the greater heterogeneity of human samples coming from two different donors compared with rat samples coming from an inbred laboratory strain but also given the increased complexity of human signaling. transcriptional responses are a relatively downstream event from phosphorylation in signaling cascades. hence, it is possible that when the signal finally propagates to the transcriptional layer, many other species-specific factors may amplify the differences of response between both species. an alternative explanation could be related to platform-specific biases due to inherent differences in mrnas. however, we paid special attention to experimental design and execution as well as sample and data processing to minimize, as much as possible, experimental biases and avoid confounding effects within and between species . additionally, phosphorylation response predictions benefited from more targeted experiments, which looked at 16 phosphoproteins enriched for active signals while gex data was genome-wide and would only be expected to have a small percentage of genes differentially expressed. an interesting follow-up experiment would be to look at targeted gene expression for the pathway components using more specific measurements, like qrt-pcr or deep-sequencing. more sampled time points for gex could provide greater granularity and may reveal patterns difficult to observe with a single 6 h exposure time point, and also confirm whether this choice left transcriptional responses to particular stimuli undetected. the stcs results indicate that gex data were potentially noisier and the numbers of active gene setstimulus pairs were low, however participants in sc3 made better predictions per stimulus than per gene sets . this shows that given sufficiently large datasets, it was still possible to extract a biologically relevant signal. stimuli such as the chemical formaldehyde, cholesterol-derived taurocholic acid and the serotonin 5-ht 4 receptor agonist cisapride were predicted better than the conservation of the response between both species. similarly, the hydroxylase inhibitor dimethyloxalyglycine, the cytokine ccl3, the tlr activator polyic and the nerve growth factor nt3 were effectively translated and predictable at a level comparable with the observed conservation of response s when based only on activation of protein phosphorylation. when we considered the overall prediction performance for phosphorylation response and gene set activation by all teams in sc2 and sc3, the antidepressant clomipramine and cytokine il1b were better predicted than the levels of response conservation. this observation indicates that teams were able to identify human-specific signals that were not significantly present in the rat data. we also found that predictions based on the two data-generating platforms were not always in agreement, as in the case of insulin, which was well predicted based on protein phosphorylation but not based on gene set activation, and vice versa for nacl (and b). regarding the inference of biological processes, the gene sets predicted better than species similarity and/or best-predicted were related to dna synthesis, cytoskeleton and ecm, translation, immune/inflammation and growth factor/proliferation (and supplementary). the gene sets associated with growth factor/proliferation processes shared a subset of core driver genes belonging to the following signaling pathways pi3k, ras, raf, mapk, erk and creb. when considering only gene sets that were among the top 25 best predicted and had at least 1 member shared with at least 3 other best predicted gene sets, both creb1 and akt1 genes were present in, respectively, 4 and 6 of 19 gene sets . to note, the empirical p-values calculated for their presence across gene sets was not significant, indicating that these genes are frequently present in gene sets (see). this may be due to a central role of these genes in many biological functions leading to a broad representation of those genes through c2cp gene sets. at the protein level, the activity of creb1, akt1 and map kinases such as mapk9 and mp2k6 was well translated based on protein phosphorylation activation, showing a consistency in similar pathway perturbation prediction at different layers of the cellular system. it is interesting to note that the species similarity of mapk9 and mp2k6 activation profile across stimuli was low, whereas the activation of both proteins was well predicted. the best predicted protein activity was that of ks6b (p70s6k). this protein is activated upstream by pi3k/ akt/mtor protein kinases and regulates downstream phosphorylation of p70s6 protein, which is directly involved in the translation process found to be among the top best-predicted functions at the gene expression level. interestingly, eif4ebp1 and eif4g1 factors involved in rate-limiting steps during the initiation phase of protein synthesis were identified as core driver genes of translation-related gene sets, and the p-value associated to their presence across best-predicted gene sets was significant, indicating that those genes were rarely shared with other genes sets and therefore were specific to this biological function. importantly, eif4g1 gene also belonged to core genes contributing to the enrichment of translation-related gene sets in rat cells, suggesting a conserved role for this gene between human and rat species. other proteins, such as tf65 and ikba, associated to the nfkb signaling pathway showed good predictability in their activity in human cells. this result was coherent with the observation of good predictability for immune/inflammatory-related gene sets. except for some proteins such as mapk9 and mp2k6 as mentioned above, many proteins of our measured panel have a level of species similarity that positively correlated with the level of predictability. this suggests that conserved responses at the protein levels possibly drive the translatability between both species in this cellular context. agreement in the biological processes that are similar between rat and human extends to the results of sc4, for the insulin, il1r, mapk, creb1 and nfkb pathways (see  
