data and text mining undo: a bioconductor r package for unsupervised deconvolution of mixed gene expressions in tumor samples we develop a novel unsupervised deconvolution method, within a well-grounded mathematical framework, to dissect mixed gene expressions in heterogeneous tumor samples. we implement an r package, unsupervised deconvolution (undo), that can be used to automatically detect cell-specific marker genes (mgs) located on the scatter radii of mixed gene expressions, estimate cellular proportions in each sample and deconvolute mixed expressions into cell-specific expression profiles. we demonstrate the performance of undo over a wide range of tumorstroma mixing proportions, validate undo on various biologically mixed benchmark gene expression datasets and further estimate tumor purity in tcga/cptac datasets. the highly accurate deconvolution results obtained suggest not only the existence of cell-specific mgs but also undos ability to detect them blindly and correctly. although the principal application here involves microarray gene expressions, our methodology can be readily applied to other types of quantitative molecular profiling data. availability and implementation: undo is available at http://biocon-ductor.org/packages.tumorstroma interactions serve as both a major confounding factor and an underexploited information source in studying tumor and microenvironment . although analyzing tumor cells in their microenvironment provides the most relevant context, mixed expressions cannot be resolved directly by global profiling . experimental solutions to isolate pure cells are inconvenient and have many limitations . current computational alternatives perform basically a supervised deconvolution , where the required a priori information is often inaccurate or context dependent, thus greatly limits supervised approaches. supported by a well-grounded mathematical framework, we argue that both cell-specific expression profiles and mixing proportions can be estimated in a completely unsupervised mode from two or more heterogeneous samples using raw measured gene expression values. fundamental to the success of our approach is the geometric identifiability of cell-specific marker genes (mgs) warranted by (i) non-negativity of gene expression values and (ii) co-definition of distinct phenotypes and cellspecific mgs. the unsupervised deconvolution (undo) r package adapts and extends recent unsupervised deconvolution framework in the literature . using undo to dissect tumorstroma mixed gene expressions, we show that (i) the scatterplot of mixed cell expression profiles is a compressed version of the scatterplot of pure cell expression profiles; (ii) resident genes on the two radii of scatter sector are cellspecific mgs, and furthermore, the two radius vectors defined by the mgs coincide with mixing proportions. accordingly, undo first detects mgs on the two radii of the scatter sector in tumor samples, then estimates cell proportions using standardized average expression values of mgs and finally uncovers pure cell expression profiles by matrix inversion. we demonstrate the performance of undo on both synthetic and benchmark real gene expression datasets with highly accurate deconvolution results. we further apply undo to estimate tumor purity in three datasets from tcga (the cancer genome atlas)/ cptac (clinical proteomic tumor analysis consortium) and obtain highly comparable results with the estimates by bacom 2.0 and absolute based on somatic copy number data .the undo software delivers a completely unsupervised deconvolution method for dissecting tumorstroma mixed gene expressions (supplementary). tested on many benchmark datasets, undo is effective at detecting cell-specific mgs and degs and estimating cell proportions and cell-specific expression profiles. we expect undo method, with a bioconductor r package, to be a useful tool for extracting cellspecific molecular signals in studying tumorstroma interactions in many biological contexts. though the undo method currently works for two-source mixtures only, it is principally applicable to the situation where tumor or non-tumor tissue is assumed to have a common composition of cellular subtypes across the tumor samples.  
