structural bioinformatics unialign: protein structure alignment meets evolution motivation: during the evolution, functional sites on the surface of the protein as well as the hydro-phobic core maintaining the structural integrity are well-conserved. however, available protein structure alignment methods align protein structures based solely on the 3d geometric similarity, limiting their ability to detect functionally relevant correspondences between the residues of the proteins, especially for distantly related homologous proteins. results: in this article, we propose a new protein pairwise structure alignment algorithm (unialign) that incorporates additional evolutionary information captured in the form of sequence similarity, sequence profiles and residue conservation. we define a per-residue score (uniscore) as a weighted sum of these and other features and develop an iterative optimization procedure to search for an alignment with the best overall uniscore. our extensive experiments on cdd, homstrad and balibase benchmark datasets show that unialign outperforms commonly used structure alignment methods. we further demonstrate unialigns ability to develop family-specific models to drastically improve the quality of the alignments. availability and implementation: unialign is available as a web service at: http://sacan.biomed.protein structure alignment can reveal distant evolutionary relationships between proteins, that sequence alignment alone is incapable to capture, and thus plays an essential role in understanding protein function . supposing the evolutionary continuity of structure and function, identification of structure similarities could elucidate the possible function of newly discovered proteins. structure alignment identifies functionally equivalent residues in proteins and is often used as the gold standard for improving multiple sequence alignments . despite the importance of the problem and the recent advances in the field, there is yet no widely accepted method for structural alignment. large scale comparisons of existing methods have concluded that there is no single best method that works well for all proteins . various pairwise protein structure alignment programs have been developed, differing in their representation of protein structure, the scoring function used to evaluate the goodness of an alignment, and the optimization algorithm used to search for the best alignment with respective to the scoring function . generally, there are two different strategies to generate a structural alignment: directly searching for the optimal alignment by piecing together small aligned substructures, e.g. dalilite and ce ; and iteratively optimizing a rough initial alignment using cycles of geometric superposition and residue pair collection steps, e.g. tmalign and deepalign .the scoring function is used to evaluate how good an alignment is and recognize the optimal alignment among all the candidates. common scoring functions utilize the root mean square distance (rmsd) between the aligned residues, taking into account the length of the proteins. traditionally, protein structure alignment has been described as a geometric optimization problem, prudently optimizing the geometric superposition of proteins. this limits the usefulness of the resulting alignments, requiring researchers to seek additional validation from the amino acid types or catalytic activity of the aligned residues. this is evident from the presence of alternative alignments that are equally good in terms of the quality of their geometric superposition, but that vary widely in terms of their accuracy in identifying functionally and evolutionarily equivalent residues . for example, it is possible to achieve a good geometric superposition of immunoglobulin, despite misaligning a conserved disulfide bridge . furthermore, pure geometric information based structure alignment programs are found highly sensitive to conformational changes . it has been suggested that structural alignment can benefit from the evolutionary information provided by the alignment of homologous proteins . this is not surprising since information extracted from homologous proteins represent general features of the protein family and allow the identification of similarity to a remote sequence or family, even when the similarity to each individual aligned sequence is not significant . in recent years, researchers have begun to integrate sequence similarity information into the scoring function. for example, formatt incorporates amino acid substitution matrices derived from evolutionarily-related protein pairs when constructing the alignment. deepalign incorporates the blosum mutation matrix, a local substructure mutation matrix, and hydrogen-bonding similarity into its scoring function. while these methods utilize the amino acid similarity as described by the blosum substitution matrix, they do not utilize evolutionary information available from the history of the proteins being aligned. it is well established that evolutionary profiles have a dominant advantage over sequence-based alignments, and provide greater accuracy in fold recognition and protein classification tasks . motivated by this, we introduce uniscore, a new similarity score for structure alignment, which integrates evolutionary information in the form of sequence and conservation profiles; as well as amino acid, secondary structure and geometric similarity measures. using this new similarity score, we implement unialign, a new protein pairwise structure alignment algorithm, which focuses on identifying not only structurally equivalent, but also evolutionarily favorable residue alignments. we demonstrate that compared to other methods, the alignments generated by unialign are in better agreement with hand-curated reference alignments. furthermore, for difficult cases when unialign and other methods fail to generate good alignments, we propose familyspecific alignment models to drastically improve the alignments.in this study, we have introduced unialign, a new structural alignment method that integrates different sources of information in order to achieve a more accurate alignment. compared to classical methods that utilize only the geometry of the proteins and the recently developed methods that incorporate sequence information; unialign produces alignments that are in better agreement with expert-curated datasets. unialign is robust with respect to the sequence homology or the geometric similarity levels of the proteins being aligned. furthermore, adjustment of unialigns parameters allows for development of family-specific models that highlight the features most relevant to the proteins in that family. the increased accuracy achieved by unialign is at the cost of increased demands in computing time. for an average sized pair of proteins, it can take up to 15 min to calculate a structure alignment, with most of this time spent on the homology search to construct a multiple sequence alignment. the running times can be significantly reduced by caching and re-using the evolutionary information calculated for each protein in their alignments with different proteins. a detailed running time analysis is provided in the supplemental data. we expect a number of downstream applications to benefit from the additional accuracy provided by unialign. ability to develop family-specific alignment models will find use in structure classification problem. integration of evolutionary information is likely to improve the protein-protein interaction prediction protocols that rely on structural alignment.note: for each protein pair, better of the two alignments is shown in bold.unialign  
