unified tests for fine-scale mapping and identifying sparse high-dimensional sequence associations downloaded from motivation: in searching for genetic variants for complex diseases with deep sequencing data, genomic marker sets of high-dimensional genotypic data and sparse functional variants are quite common. existing sequence association tests are incapable of identifying such marker sets or individual causal loci, although they appeared powerful to identify small marker sets with dense functional variants. in sequence association studies of admixed individuals, cryptic relatedness and population structure are known to confound the association analyses. method: we here propose a unified marker wise test (ufinemap) to accurately localize causal loci and a unified high-dimensional set based test (uhdset) to identify high-dimensional sparse associations in deep sequencing genomic data of multi-ethnic individuals with random relatedness. these two novel tests are based on scaled sparse linear mixed regressions with l p (0 p 1) norm regularization. they jointly adjust for cryptic relatedness, population structure and other confounders to prevent false discoveries and improve statistical power for identifying promising individual markers and marker sets that harbor functional genetic variants of a complex trait. results: with large scale simulation data and real data analyses, the proposed tests appropriately controlled type i error rates and appeared to be more powerful than several prominent methods. we illustrated their practical utilities by the applications to dna sequence data of framingham heart study for osteoporosis. the proposed tests identified 11 novel significant genes that were missed by the prominent famskat and gemma. in particular, four out of six most significant pathways identified by the uhdset but missed by famskat have been reported to be related to bmd or osteoporosis in the literature. availability and implementation: the computational toolkit is available for academic use:deep sequencing technologies have been generating huge amounts of data of rare and common dna sequence variants. a number of sequence association tests have been developed to identify marker sets, e.g. a group of snps or cnvs (copy-number variations), that contain functional genetic variants. most of these tests, however, do not jointly model cryptic relatedness, population structure and other covariates. with the growing demand of analyzing next generation sequencing data of multi-ethnic individuals, linear mixed models have become popular because of their demonstrated effectiveness in accounting for sample relatedness and population structure which occurs when there are large-scale systematic differences in genetic ancestry among individuals in a sample. typical examples include individuals with various levels of immigrant ancestry and more recent shared ancestors than one would expect in a homogenies population. cryptic relatedness, refers to the presence of relatives in a sample of ostensibly unrelated individuals, could pose more serious confounding than population structure , especially for samples from small and isolated populations . accounting for population structure is more challenging when family structure or cryptic relatedness is also present . we paved the way to correct for the effects of both confounders jointly. within the framework of linear mixed models, famskat and gemma (genome-wide efficient mixed model association) appeared as two powerful sequence association tests for identifying small marker sets that harbor dense functional genetic variants. famskat is a set based test which is an extension of skat to be applicable to family data. gemma is a computationally efficient method for fitting multivariate linear mixed models. these prominent tests require that the number of markers in a testing set is much smaller than the sample size. however, in deep sequencing studies, one encounters quite often high-dimensional data sets (hds), where the number of marker loci is larger than the sample size and the number of functional variants is very small. the aforementioned tests are incapable of identifying such sparse hds and the functional variants. some sparse regression methods were developed to localize individual functional markers from high-dimensional marker sets, jointly modeling pedigree structure and population structure. they include lasso , ridge regression (, elastic-net and the usr that we proposed recently . however, these methods yield biased solutions and are ineffective to prevent false discoveries of random markers and high-dimensional marker sets irrelevant to functional variants. in this article, we first present a unified test (ufinemap) for accurately localizing individual causal loci. the ufinemap is a marker wise test under a scaled sparse linear mixed regression, which jointly models marker wise effect, relatedness and population stratification. it applies scaled l p (0 p 1) norm regularization to generate a debiased solution. next, we present an additional significant test (unified high-dimensional set based test, uhdset) for identifying highdimensional sparse associations in deep sequencing genomic data of related individuals. the uhdset integrates the marker wise statistics of the ufinemap to identify susceptible high-dimensional marker sets. in the uhdset, the dependence among markers is modeled to appropriately control set-based type i error rates. under extensive simulations, the ufinemap outperformed the gemma and a scaled lasso based method . the uhdset yields higher statistical power than famskat and gemma. applications to framingham heart study also show that our methods yield novel interesting candidate genes and pathways for follow-up studies, showing its advantages over the two compared prominent alternative methods. finally, caveats of the proposed methods and perspective future efforts are discussed.to validate our proposed tests, we conducted simulations under various types of pedigree structures to demonstrate their performances comprehensively, in terms of both type i error rates control and statistical power.some promising association tests with the adjustment of family structure have been established on the ldss (low dimensional sets). however, these tests would suffer power loss in high dimensional data. to overcome the limitations of these tests, we propose the ufinemap and uhdset tests for assessing the significance of the hdss with cryptic relatedness, which are based on novel scaled linear mixed sparse regressions. the proposed tests are designed to address the challenge of variants detection under complex pedigree structures, which implement an explicit way to properly control the type i error rates at both single marker level and snps set level. the promising results of testing on both simulated and real data indicate that the ufinemap and uhdset tests yield considerably higher statistical power gains in comparison to other competing methods, especially for high dimensional data with cryptic relatedness. the ufinemap test can pinpoint single susceptible variants with higher resolutions, even for rare functional variants. in addition, our methods also maintain substantial power for detecting susceptibility variants in low dimensional data of large samples. last but not least, our methods can identify both rare and common variants efficiently. one limitation of the proposed methods is that we assume linear mixed relationship between phenotype and genotype, which might not be true in the real world. therefore, non-linear regression models with adjustment of relatedness and population stratification may be more suitable. in addition, the overall computational complexity is on 2 m 3 , which is much higher than simply solving the sparse linear mixed model or other efficient methods designed for ldss, particularly for extremely large data. to solve this issue, parallel computing is implemented to reduce the total computational time for large scale genetic data analyses.  
