genome analysis unifiedwmwqpcr: the unified wilcoxon–mann–whitney test for analyzing rt-qpcr data in r motivation: recently, de neve et al. proposed a modification of the wilcoxonmannwhitney (wmw) test for assessing differential expression based on rt-qpcr data. their test, referred to as the unified wmw (uwmw) test, incorporates a robust and intuitive normalization and quantifies the probability that the expression from one treatment group exceeds the expression from another treatment group. however, no software package for this test was available yet. results: we have developed a bioconductor package for analyzing rt-qpcr data with the uwmw test. the package also provides graphical tools for visualizing the effect sizes. availability and implementation: the unifiedwmwqpcr package and its user documentation can be obtained through bioconductor.conventional approaches for analyzing rt-qpcr data first adopt a separate normalization step, e.g. using the bioconductor package slqpcr , before assessing differential expression. this preprocessing step can obscure the interpretation of the statistical test. furthermore, the type i error can be inflated, as the additional uncertainty associated with normalization is typically ignored. if c 1 q denotes a quantification cycle associated with treatment group 1 and c 2 q a quantification cycle associated with group 2 for a particular feature (typically a gene or a microrna), then the unified wilcoxonmann whitney (uwmw) test considers the null hypothesiswhere the probability px d y :=px5y+0:5px=y allows for tied quantification cycles. if there is no need for normalization, under the null hypothesis of no-treatment effect, = 0.5 and the ordinary wilcoxonmannwhitney (wmw) test can be used. however, because of errors in the fluorescence quantification or differences in the amount of starting material and enzymatic efficiencies, among other reasons, 6 0.5 even in the absence of a treatment effect, and hence, normalization is required. the uwmw test consists of the following steps: (i) estimate based on housekeeping features or on all features when housekeeping features are not available. the latter approach assumes up-and downregulation to be balanced; (ii) perform an adjusted wmw test to test h 0 (1) while accounting for the additional uncertainty caused by estimating from the data; and (iii) provide standard errors and p-values. h 0 (1) can be equivalently expressed in terms of odds and odds ratios (ors) as followswhere oddsa=pa=1 pa; 0 ==1 , andorc 1 q d c 2 q =oddsc 1 q d c 2 q = 0 .  
