databases and ontologies uniformly curated signaling pathways reveal tissue-specific cross-talks and support drug target discovery motivation: signaling pathways control a large variety of cellular processes. however, currently, even within the same database signaling pathways are often curated at different levels of detail. this makes comparative and cross-talk analyses difficult. results: we present signalink, a database containing eight major signaling pathways from caenorhabditis elegans, drosophila melanogaster and humans. based on 170 review and 800 research articles, we have compiled pathways with semi-automatic searches and uniform, well-documented curation rules. we found that in humans any two of the eight pathways can cross-talk. we quantified the possible tissue-and cancer-specific activity of cross-talks and found pathway-specific expression profiles. in addition, we identified 327 proteins relevant for drug target discovery. conclusions: we provide a novel resource for comparative and cross-talk analyses of signaling pathways. the identified multi-pathway and tissue-specific cross-talks contribute to the understanding of the signaling complexity in health and disease, and underscore its importance in network-based drug target selection.intracellular signaling, from the simplest cascades to the highly intertwined networks of protein kinases, contributes extensively to the diversity of developmental programs and adaptation responses in metazoans (pires-dasilva and). in humans, defects in intracellular signaling can cause various diseases, e.g. cancer, neurodegeneration or diabetes. thus, understanding the structure, function and evolution of signal transduction is an important task for both basic research and medicine. by now genetic studies have uncovered functionally separate, though interacting (cross-talking), pathways and the direction of information flow between pairs of signaling molecules in a number of species . on the other hand, biochemical experiments have allowed the detailed characterization of direct physical interactions involved in signaling . integrating these data sets using uniform manual curation criteria can significantly contribute to a more precise assessment of their tissue-and cancer-specific utilization and the effects of drug treatments . for example, inhibitors used for eliminating a signaling pathway in cancerous cells may in fact have the opposite effect. these drugs may suppress negative feedback loops and thereby, paradoxically, activate the targeted pathway . intracellular signaling was originally regarded as an assembly of distinct and almost linear cascades. over the past decade, however, it has been realized that signaling pathways are highly structured and rich in cross-talks (where cross-talk is defined here as a directed physical interaction between pathways). consequently, intracellular signaling is now viewed as a set of intertwined pathways forming a single signaling network . this paradigm shift calls for novel experimental, curation and network modeling techniques . currently, high-throughput (htp) experiments are the major sources of known proteinprotein interactions (ppis). however, so far in most htp experiments extracellular, membrane-bound and nuclear proteins have been underrepresented. these and other sampling biases strongly reduce their usability for identifying signaling interactions. another limitation of htp assays is that they produce undirected interactions even though in signaling directions are essential. accordingly, several signaling pathway databases have been created recently by manually collecting the directed interactions from the literature . manually curated signaling pathway databases are often assembled without strictly defined and published standardized curation criteria . therefore, even within the same database, e.g. in kegg (kyoto encyclopedia of), the level of detail of curation and the rules for setting pathway boundaries can vary among pathways. in addition, in several signaling resources the definition of signaling pathways has no evolutionary or biochemical background. in other cases, e.g. in reactome and netpath (;only the differences from signalink are listed. the features setting signalink most clearly apart have a gray background.), curation criteria are standardized; however,  
