genome analysis unipro ugene: a unified bioinformatics toolkit unipro ugene is a multiplatform open-source software with the main goal of assisting molecular biologists without much expertise in bioinformatics to manage, analyze and visualize their data. ugene integrates widely used bioinformatics tools within a common user interface. the toolkit supports multiple biological data formats and allows the retrieval of data from remote data sources. it provides visualization modules for biological objects such as annotated genome sequences, next generation sequencing (ngs) assembly data, multiple sequence alignments, phylogenetic trees and 3d structures. most of the integrated algorithms are tuned for maximum performance by the usage of multithreading and special processor instructions. ugene includes a visual environment for creating reusable workflows that can be launched on local resources or in a high performance computing (hpc) environment. ugene is written in c++ using the qt framework. the built-in plugin system and structured ugene api make it possible to extend the toolkit with new functionality. availability and implementation: ugene binaries are freely available for ms windows, linux and mac os x at http://ugene. unipro.ru/download.html. ugene code is licensed under the gplv2; the information about the code licensing and copyright of integrated tools can be found in the license.3rd_party file provided with the source bundle.the number of available bioinformatics tools has grown dramatically over the past two decades. however, as a result of increasing complexity of the tools and a lack of rigorous software engineering practices, using, installing and configuring a bioinformatics application, along with ensuring that it is communicating well with other programs, can be a challenging task. moreover, a large number of computational methods and tools are available only as source-code packages, command-line utilities which can run only in a linux/unix environment, web-services , or programming libraries , and cannot be easily accessed by biologists who do not have the necessary skills. a number of existing tools also lack user documentation and have limited support. to whom correspondence should be addressed.some solutions have been proposed to improve the situation. there are bioinformatics tools which are multiplatform, easy to install and hide the underlying complexity behind an easy-to-use gui interface. usually, these tools are focused on a particular niche. good examples of such tools are the artemis genome browser , jalview multiple alignment editor , tablet and igv next-generation sequencing data visualization packages. applications such as galaxy or taverna solve communication issues between tools by providing easily accessible capabilities to manage bioinformatics workflows, but still require significant effort to set up on a local server. there are also closed-source commercially available programs, such as vectornti (www.invitrogen.com), geneious (www.geneious.com) or clcbio (www.clcbio.com) that could act as a bioinformatics swiss army knife. in this article, we introduce unipro ugene, a multiplatform open-source application, which integrates popular bioinformatics algorithms and tools, providing both graphical and command-line interfaces. it has an active user community and support from a team of professional software developers. to perform complex computational experiments, ugene allows the construction of reusable workflow diagrams.  
