databases and ontologies updating annotations with the distributed annotation system and the automated sequence annotation pipeline the integration between biodas proserver and automated sequence annotation pipeline (asap) provides an interface for querying diverse annotation sources, chaining and linking results , and standardizing the output using the distributed annotation system (das) protocol. this interface allows pipeline plans in asap to be integrated into any system using http and also allows the information returned by asap to be included in the das registry for use in any das-aware system. three example implementations have been developed: the first accesses transfac information to automatically create gene sets for the coordinated gene activity in pattern sets (cogaps) algorithm; the second integrates annotations from multiple array platforms and provides unified annotations in an r environment; and the third wraps the uniprot database for integration with the spice das client. availability: source code for asap 2.high-throughput methods in the biological domain have generated an abundance of data, providing opportunities for mining and learning algorithms. the full potential of these data is not currently realized as heterogeneity in the content, format, and availability makes integration a difficult task. the automated sequence annotation pipeline (asap) was developed to link diverse annotation sources and integrate annotations across platforms . the asap system wraps existing web resources in a consistent format and allows users to query these data sources either by creating plans using perl or by invoking existing plans. programmatic interaction with asap can be difficult because it is designed as a standalone application. although the system allows client programs to invoke plans, it requires custom perl scripts to be written and does not standardize the output format across different annotation resources. here we present a system allowing client side integration through http using the distributed annotation system (das) . the results are formatted according to the das 1.6 xml specification to standardize the output. through this integration, annotations can be automatically accessed by any das-compatible system, and annotations can be integrated in a consistent manner across different molecular platforms.  
