genome analysis using bioinformatics to predict the functional impact of snvs motivation: the past decade has seen the introduction of fast and relatively inexpensive methods to detect genetic variation across the genome and exponential growth in the number of known single nucleotide variants (snvs). there is increasing interest in bioinformatics approaches to identify variants that are functionally important from millions of candidate variants. here, we describe the essential components of bionformatics tools that predict functional snvs. results: bioinformatics tools have great potential to identify functional snvs, but the black box nature of many tools can be a pitfall for researchers. understanding the underlying methods, assumptions and biases of these tools is essential to their intelligent application.the most common form of intra-species variation is the single nucleotide variant (snv) . recent sequencing of whole human genomes has identified the number of snvs in each individual to be in the range of 35 million . common snvs have recently been a focus of population genetics and medical research. with the advent of high-density snv microarrays, researchers can do fast genome-wide genotyping of study populations. this technology has been used to trace the ancestry of modern humans and migration patterns of ancient humans . snvs are now the most commonly used markers in casecontrol association studies. genome-wide association studies (gwas) have identified over 3300 common snvs with statistically significant correlations to disease phenotypes (http://www.genome.gov/gwastudies/ october 14, 2010). however, these correlations do not necessarily imply causality, and researchers have found that most significant snvs identified by gwas do not contribute biologically to the disease phenotype of interest . while most snvs are likely to be functionally neutral , some snvs have a functional impact and thus directly contribute to disease susceptibilities and drug sensitivities. discovering these to whom correspondence should be addressed.in an age of personal genomics, snv prioritization has become essential. this task can now be facilitated by snv meta-servers , which are essentially black boxes to automate execution of multiple assessments, one for each of the many factors that can lead to a functional snv. however, anyone who uses black box snv assessment tools should understand how the assessments are made, and what their limitations are. one limitation shared by all of the prediction methods described in this review is that prediction relies on knowledge, and our knowledge is incomplete. for example, current ess predictors are based on only one family of splicing factors (hnrnp family proteins), but there is no reason to believe that these proteins represent the complete universe of esss. happily, our knowledge is likely to expand thanks to new technologies. chip-seq technology represents a significant advance in evaluating the impact of snvs on dna binding, because there is no requirement of knowing the precise binding sequences in advance. this technology will facilitate research on the impact of snvs on dna methylation, chromatin and transcription factor binding, and rna processing (through clipseq). additionally, the task of snv assessment is likely to benefit from research currently underway on assessing the consequence of gains or losses of tfbss, predicting isres, and further characterizing microrna binding. chromosomal segmentation may soon offer new insights on the medical relevance of intergenic snvs, by distinguishing active intergenic chromatin from largescale repressed chromatin . a communitywide effort cagi (critical assessment of genomic interpretation) has been created to compare analytical methods to assess genomic variation through blind prediction, modeled after the casp contests and should provide excellent information on what types of methods are effective in practice (http://genomecommons.org/cagi/).  
