using biologically interrelated experiments to identify pathway genes in arabidopsis motivation: pathway genes are considered as a group of genes that work cooperatively in the same pathway constituting a fundamental functional grouping in a biological process. identifying pathway genes has been one of the major tasks in understanding biological processes. however, due to the difficulty in characterizing/inferring different types of biological gene relationships, as well as several computational issues arising from dealing with high-dimensional biological data, deducing genes in pathways remain challenging. results: in this work, we elucidate higher level genegene interactions by evaluating the conditional dependencies between genes, i.e. the relationships between genes after removing the influences of a set of previously known pathway genes. these previously known pathway genes serve as seed genes in our model and will guide the detection of other genes involved in the same pathway. the detailed statistical techniques involve the estimation of a precision matrix whose elements are known to be proportional to partial correlations (i.e. conditional dependencies) between genes under appropriate normality assumptions. likelihood ratio tests on two forms of precision matrices are further performed to see if a candidate pathway gene is conditionally independent of all the previously known pathway genes. when used effectively, this is a promising approach to recover gene relationships that would have otherwise been missed by standard methods. the advantage of the proposed method is demonstrated using both simulation studies and real datasets. we also demonstrated the importance of taking into account experimental dependencies in the simulation and real data studies.a biological pathway is a series of chemical reactions that form an integral and critical part of every biological process. pathway genes, or genes involved in the same biological pathway, constitute a fundamental functional grouping in a biological process. a major task in understanding biological processes is to identify a set of genes in the same biological pathways and elucidating the relationships between them. using gene expression data, there have been two popular computational approaches for finding pathway genes: clustering analysis and network models. clustering analysis uses a co-expression measure to quantify similarities in gene expressions and then assigns similar genes into clusters . genes in each cluster are considered to be functionally related, and thus likely to be in the same pathway. this approach works when the pathway genes exhibit strong co-expressions with one another. network models generally model a pathway as a network, with the genes represented as nodes and the gene relationships represented as edges linking the nodes, e.g. the work in. starting with a full network, a typical pathway can be identified as a connected (sub)network after all the weak or insignificant edges are removed by a backward edge exclusion technique. or alternatively, starting with an empty network, strong or significant edges can be added gradually to form a (sub)network using the method of forward inclusion of edges. both have been widely used in literature to construct biological networks . the property of a network mainly relies on how to evaluate the edges between genes. there are two ways to assign edge weights. one is based on gene covariance matrix, which measures marginal similarity/correlation between any two genes. the other is based on inverse covariance matrix of genes, leading to a graph concerning conditional independence relationships. the latter is equivalent to using partial correlations as similarities. despite their appealing features, the approaches described above have limitations. one limitation comes from the high dimensionality of microarray data. the well-known large p, small n problem can result in an unreliable co-expression measure and hence a very high rate of false discoveries in clustering analysis. in the network models, this raises concern about the stability and accuracy of the model inference; it is almost impossible to employ the network models on a genomic scale as the estimation of covariance or its inverse matrices becomes problematic. although there has beenpage: 816 815822we evaluate the performance of the proposed method in identifying pathway genes using simulation data and real microarray datasets. in both studies, we calculated precision = tp/(tp+fp) and recall = tp/(tp+fn) to assess the results from our approach and several other methods mentioned in section 2. here tp is the number of true positive findings of pathway genes, fp is the number of false positives and fn is the number of false negatives. note that precision and recall are popular measures for evaluation of classification performance. in the context of this study, they can be regarded as a measure of exactness and completeness of our pathway gene searching results, respectively. in the real data analysis, we will present the strength and usefulness of our approach as a tool for identifying pathway genes, particularly in glucosinolate (gsl) and flavonoid biosynthesis (fb) pathways. in our study, the pathway genes are defined as composed of structural genes that encode an enzyme, whereas regulator genes are defined as genes controlling the expression of the structural genes.we have proposed a novel approach to identify genes associated with a pathway specified by a set of seed genes. this approach considers the space of pathway genes as a span generated by its pathway genes and uses partial correlation as a distance measure to determine genes interacting with the previously identified pathway genes. this approach differs from many existing approaches in the following aspects: (i) it uses the partial correlation conditioned upon identified pathway genes, not on all genes; (ii) it enables us to identify genes having higher level interaction (i.e. group interaction) although their pair-wise marginal correlations are weak; (iii) it considers experiment dependencies when inferring gene relationships; (iv) its computational workload is less demanding. the first aspect above implies our method is pathway specific. it focuses its search only on a particular pathway among all existing multiple (unknown) pathways in a dataset. this is a limitation of our approach. but we note that this specific search has shown huge advantages in reducing false positive discoveries in both our simulation and real data studies, and has also led to a deeper and insightful biological interpretation of the results. this approach can potentially be extended to the situation that the seed genes or target pathways are not available, if the seed genes for different pathways can be originated from analysis of other sources of biological data. although our approach has yielded encouraging biological results in a real dataset application, there is still room for further improvement, including exploration of properties of this approach to answer questions like, what are the biological properties of the identified genes? and, how reliable is the set of identified genes?. further biological understanding of the identified pathway genes would give us deeper insights into the biological process under consideration.  
