using genomic annotations increases statistical power to detect egenes motivation: expression quantitative trait loci (eqtls) are genetic variants that affect gene expression. in eqtl studies, one important task is to find egenes or genes whose expressions are associated with at least one eqtl. the standard statistical method to determine whether a gene is an egene requires association testing at all nearby variants and the permutation test to correct for multiple testing. the standard method however does not consider genomic annotation of the variants. in practice, variants near gene transcription start sites (tsss) or certain histone modifications are likely to regulate gene expression. in this article, we introduce a novel egene detection method that considers this empirical evidence and thereby increases the statistical power. results: we applied our method to the liver genotype-tissue expression (gtex) data using distance from tsss, dnase hypersensitivity sites, and six histone modifications as the genomic annotations for the variants. each of these annotations helped us detected more candidate egenes. distance from tss appears to be the most important annotation; specifically, using this annotation, our method discovered 50 more candidate egenes than the standard permutation method.many studies over the past decade examined the contribution of genetic loci to phenotypic variation in complex traits. genetic loci that are associated with gene expression are called expression quantitative trait loci (eqtls) . one important task in eqtl studies is to find egenes or genes whose expressions are associated with at least one genetic variant. the standard method to determine whether a gene is an egene requires association testing at all variants near the gene (cis-variants) and the permutation test to correct for multiple testing. the permutation test is the gold standard for multiple-testing correction, as it properly accounts for the linkage disequilibrium (ld) structure in the genome. however, this standard method does not consider which variants are more likely to regulate gene expression. in order to better detect egenes, we can increase the statistical power of this standard method by using annotation data. in practice, regulatory variants found near the transcription start sites (tsss) and certain histone modifications are more likely to be associated with gene expression (van de). additionally, recent large-scale genomics studies have annotated regions of the genome that are likely to alter gene expression in individuals . for example, almost 80 of the chip-based heritability of disease risk for 11 human diseases examined in the wellcome trust case control consortium (wtccc) can be explained by genome variation in dnase i hypersensitivity sites. these variations are likely to regulate chromatin accessibility and thus transcription . these genomic annotations for the variants can be used to increase the power to detect egenes. although several methods were recently developed to address challenges in multiple-testing correction in eqtl studies, these methods do not improve statistical power in comparison to the standard method.improved the runtime of the standard permutation test by replacing the permutation procedure with sampling from the multivariate normal distribution (mvn).we applied our method func-egene to the gtex dataset. the gtex pilot study collected 9365 tissue samples from more than 30 distinct tissues from 237 post-mortem donors and performed rnaseq to quantify gene expression in those tissues . we used the liver tissue data that has 97 samples. all individuals were genotyped at 5m snps and imputed with 1000 genomes phase i as the reference panel. the number of genes expressed in this tissue is 21 868.in this article, we have introduced a new method func-egene that relies on the association study methods in darnell et al. (2012) and eskin (2008) and uses genomic annotations of the cis-variants to create a non-uniform prior that can detect more egenes. we applied our method to the liver tissue dataset from the gtex consortium, and the results indicate that distance from tss appears to contain enough information that is needed to find more candidate egenes. our method has many layers of procedures which can be timeconsuming. to reduce runtime, we introduced many ideas. we employed lr statistic which is more efficient to obtain than a p-value in a multi-threshold association study. we replaced the timeconsuming permutation test with the use of mvn sampling. to avoid reassessing significance thresholds at each new prior in our gridmvn power at 2 prior ratios (b)search, we developed an approximation method which uses a subset of the tested genes. due to these heuristics, we were able to conduct a grid search using tss, dnase and six histone modifications as functional classes. because our method uses grid search where the runtime increases exponentially with the number of annotations, our current method is not yet applicable for simultaneously handling a large number of annotations. one future goal is to develop a better optimization method than a grid search. lastly, we address the fact that in the alternative hypothesis, the true effects of the variants on the gene expression are unknown in practice. it has been demonstrated in previous studies that different choices of these effect sizes do not greatly change the outcome . another option is to consider some continuous prior density on these true effects and then integrate over their valid domain . this idea is another future research plan.  
