using kernelized partial canonical correlation analysis to study directly coupled side chains and allostery in small g proteins motivation: inferring structural dependencies among a proteins side chains helps us understand their coupled motions. it is known that coupled fluctuations can reveal pathways of communication used for information propagation in a molecule. side-chain conformations are commonly represented by multivariate angular variables, but existing partial correlation methods that can be applied to this inference task are not capable of handling multivariate angular data. we propose a novel method to infer direct couplings from this type of data, and show that this method is useful for identifying functional regions and their interactions in allosteric proteins. results: we developed a novel extension of canonical correlation analysis (cca), which we call kernelized partial cca (or simply kpcca), and used it to infer direct couplings between side chains, while disentangling these couplings from indirect ones. using the conformational information and fluctuations of the inactive structure alone for allosteric proteins in the ras and other ras-like families, our method identified allosterically important residues not only as strongly coupled ones but also in densely connected regions of the interaction graph formed by the inferred couplings. our results were in good agreement with other empirical findings. by studying distinct members of the ras, rho and rab sub-families, we show further that kpcca was capable of inferring common allosteric characteristics in the small g protein super-family. availability and implementation: https://github.com/lsgh/ismb15predicting allosteric regions in proteins and understanding their interaction mechanisms are challenging problems in bioinformatics. it is common to mainly identify backbone motions responsible for the allosteric behaviour of proteins. however, recent studies have not only highlighted the commonly neglected role of side-chain fluctuations in information transmission within a molecule , but also emphasized the presence of allostery in proteins with minimal backbone motions . moreover, recent discoveries by x-ray crystallography reveal that alternate side-chain conformations are more prevalent than previously thought . these findings further accentuate the importance of a thorough study of the role played by side-chains in allostery . intrinsic networks of correlated residues are known to play an important role in the propagation of information during an allosteric event. identifying networks of directly coupled allosteric residues is thus of crucial importance for understanding the allosteric mechanism and interaction paths in a molecule. common correlation-based analyses, however, cannot disentangle causal (or direct) correlations from transitive (or indirect) ones . to this effect, the statistical concept of partial correlation, a conditional dependence measure between two variables given all other variables, is more appropriate for inferring direct couplings. existing methods based on the partial correlation such as the graphical lasso (glasso;), on the other hand, often assume that the data are generated from a multivariate normal distributionalthoughwe have proposed a novel extension of cca, namely kpcca, to quantify direct correlations between multidimensional angular data. existing methods for inferring direct correlations do not handle data of this type, which are common in structural bioinformatics, where side-chain conformations of proteins are characterized by a number of dihedral angles. using information about side-chain fluctuations in the inactive structure alone, we are able to identify common, allosterically crucial regions (e.g. switch i and switch ii) in the ras, rho and rab sub-families of small g proteins. residues in these allosteric regions appear in the strongest couplings inferred by our method and in the densest regions of the corresponding interaction graph. furthermore, allosteric sites and binding sites are connected,. .. , x 4 for (a) h-ras (b) rac1 (c) sec4. red: glasso (with bias correction). blue: kpcca (without bias correction). the kpcca does not show significant bias towards residues with more rotamer alternatives; in fact, the average number of rotamers is lower for the kpcca than for the glasso in general. 2d interaction graphs for rheb, using the top 47 couplings (the same number as identified by the crn). residues in switch i (3341), switch ii (63 79) and the phosphate-binding loop (p-loop) are coloured yellow, blue and orange, respectively. the p-loop residues are connected to the switches in the crn. crucial couplings emerge at higher positions in the ranked list of the kpcca (a) than in that of the glasso (b)kernelized partial canonical correlation analysis and allostery in small g proteins i131 in these graphs, which may explain the mechanism with which allostery occurs in these proteins. our analytic framework is modular. in principle, ensembles generated by other techniques such as mc and/or md can be used as well. but currently they are much less efficient. for instance, in one of our test cases (rap2a; pdb id: 1kao, 167 residues), scwrl took about 1 second to generate a structure whereas an mc method in rosetta, like that described by, took as much as 40 seconds. hence, for an ensemble of size 167 167 1=2 14; 000, our current method took about 4 hours but an mc method would have taken 160 hours, almost a full week, for a single protein! in future studies, our proposed analytic framework can be extended to include backbone dihedral angles as well. this will allow us to study allosteric behaviours of all protein types, even those that may undergo drastic backbone motions. the method also can be applied to other problems in the bioinformatics, e.g. for revealing the hot spot residues in proteinprotein interactions by using only the fluctuation information of the unbound protein .  
