using manifold embedding for assessing and predicting protein interactions from high-throughput experimental data motivation: high-throughput protein interaction data, with ever-increasing volume, are becoming the foundation of many biological discoveries, and thus high-quality proteinprotein interaction (ppi) maps are critical for a deeper understanding of cellular processes. however, the unreliability and paucity of current available ppi data are key obstacles to the subsequent quantitative studies. it is therefore highly desirable to develop an approach to deal with these issues from the computational perspective. most previous works for assessing and predicting protein interactions either need supporting evidences from multiple information resources or are severely impacted by the sparseness of ppi networks. results: we developed a robust manifold embedding technique for assessing the reliability of interactions and predicting new interactions, which purely utilizes the topological information of ppi networks and can work on a sparse input protein interactome without requiring additional information types. after transforming a given ppi network into a low-dimensional metric space using manifold embedding based on isometric feature mapping (isomap), the problem of assessing and predicting protein interactions is recasted into the form of measuring similarity between points of its metric space. then a reliability index, a likelihood indicating the interaction of two proteins, is assigned to each protein pair in the ppi networks based on the similarity between the points in the embedded space. validation of the proposed method is performed with extensive experiments on densely connected and sparse ppi network of yeast, respectively. results demonstrate that the interactions ranked top by our method have high-functional homogeneity and localization coherence, especially our method is very efficient for large sparse ppi network with which the traditional algorithms fail. therefore, the proposed algorithm is a much more promising method to detect both false positive and false negative interactions in ppi networks. availability: matlab code implementing the algorithm is available from the web siteover the last decade, the development of novel high-throughput techniques has resulted in a rapid accumulation of data that provide a global description of the whole network of proteinprotein interaction (ppi) for many organisms . many essential cellular processes such as cellular metabolism, controlling the function of enzymes, transport and most regulatory mechanisms rely on physical interactions between proteins. therefore, the interactome analysis is expected to obtain biological insights and enable us to collect comprehensive knowledge for the control mechanism and organization of a living cell . this motivates researchers to utilize the interactome to study the disease mechanisms at a system level. however, the highthroughput methods are prone to a high rate of false-positives and false-negatives, i.e. protein interactions which are identified by the experiment do not take place in the cell or interacting protein pairs can not be identified by current experiment technology. for example, it has shown that the false positive (fp) rate of high-throughput yeast two-hybrid assays is 50 . the rate of false negative (fn) is also very high . thus it is highly desired to develop computational techniques to assess the reliability of protein interactions and predict new interactions of ppi network. many such techniques have emerged recently . currently, the available methods for assessing and predicting protein interactions can be divided into four categories: (i) functional homogeneity or localization coherence based methods. the main idea of these approaches is to utilize the supporting evidence from the biological perspective to assess the reliability of an interacting protein pair . for example, if two proteins are localized in the same cellular component or have a common cellular role, the reliability that these two proteins interact with each other is high. (ii) methods based on information integration . for example, via using bayesian network approach, li et al. combined multiple heterogeneous biological evidences, including gene expression, genome context, functional annotation, interaction domain and network topology structure, to assign reliability scores to the human ppis identifiedin this section, we first quantify the success of embedding the ppi network into the low-dimensional metric space through receiver operator characteristic (roc) curve and the probability densitythe euclidean distance between protein pairs the probability density p(similarity interaction) p(similarity non-interaction)in this article, we have developed a robust technique to assess and predict protein interactions from high-throughput experimental data using manifold embedding. the proposed approach first transformed the ppi network into a low-dimensional metric space based on isomap algorithm, and then a ri which indicates the interacting likelihood of two proteins is assigned to every protein pair in the ppi networks on the basis of the similarity between the points in the embedded space. the experimental results show our method outperforms the existing methods no matter assessing or predicting interactions when a sparse ppi network is used. our method is better than ig2 and irap, and has a comparable performance with cd-dist and fsweight method when a densely connected ppi network is used. we demonstrate that the proposed approach might shed more light on assessing and predicting protein interaction in both densely connected and sparse ppi networks. it should be noticed that our method solely use the ppi network topology to assess and predict interactions. it is a complementary to those page: 2751 27442751  
