genome analysis ustiloxins, fungal cyclic peptides, are ribosomally synthesized in ustilaginoidea virens motivation: ustiloxins a and b are toxic cyclic tetrapeptides, tyr-val/ala-ile-gly (y-v/a-i-g), that were originally identified from ustilaginoidea virens, a pathogenic fungus affecting rice plants. contrary to our report that ustiloxin b is ribosomally synthesized in aspergillus flavus, a recent report suggested that ustiloxins are synthesized by a non-ribosomal peptide synthetase in u.virens. thus, we analyzed the u.virens genome, to identify the responsible gene cluster. results: the biosynthetic gene cluster was identified from the genome of u.virens based on homologies to the ribosomal peptide biosynthetic gene cluster for ustiloxin b identified from a.flavus. it contains a gene encoding precursor protein having five tyr-val-ile-gly and three tyr-ala-ile-gly motifs for ustiloxins a and b, respectively, strongly indicating that ustiloxins a and b from u.virens are ribosomally synthesized. availability and implementation: accession codes of the u.virens and a.flavus gene clusters in ncbi are br001221 and br001206, respectively.ustiloxins are toxic cyclic peptides that were originally identified from ustilaginoidea virens, a pathogenic fungus affecting rice plant . the circular moieties of these peptides are composed of tyr-val/ala-ile-gly tetrapeptides that are circularized at the side-chains of tyr and ile . ustiloxin a, a derivative of ustiloxin peptides, contains a circularized tetrapeptide with the composition of tyr-val-ile-gly (yvig), whereas ustiloxin b, another derivative of ustiloxin peptides, contains the circularized peptide of tyr-ala-ile-gly (yaig).the aromatic rings of the tyr residues in both ustiloxins a and b are modified by norvaline, a non-protein-coding amino acid, through a sulfoxide bond . recently, the ustiloxin b biosynthetic gene cluster was experimentally identified from aspergillus flavus using a novel method to predict gene clusters from transcriptome data, middas-m, and the subsequent validation by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of the gene deletion mutants . the ustiloxin b gene cluster contains 15 genes including those encoding a fungal type c6 transcription factor, a major facilitatorsuperfamily transporter and cytochrome p450. until recently, this cyclic peptide was believed to be biosynthesized by the so-called non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (nrps) because it contains a nonproteinogenic amino acid, norvaline, in its chemical structure. however, bioinformatic analyses of amino acid sequence indicated that no nrps domains were observed in the gene cluster . instead, a function-unknown gene, usta, with a translated product containing 16 repeats of the tetrapeptide yaig, which is the exact amino acid sequence of the cyclic moiety of ustiloxin b, was identified in the gene cluster . consequently, ustiloxin b was shown to be the first case of a ribosomally synthesized peptide reported from filamentous fungi . very recently,reported the whole genome sequence of u.virens, and proposed that an nrps gene cluster is responsible for biosynthesis of ustiloxins in u.virens. however, our analysis strongly suggests that an entirely different gene cluster is responsible for the ustiloxin biosynthesis as ribosomal peptides in u.virens, based on homology to the ustiloxin b biosynthetic gene cluster from a.flavus.  
