utilizing de bruijn graph of metagenome assembly for metatranscriptome analysis motivation: metagenomics research has accelerated the studies of microbial organisms, providing insights into the composition and potential functionality of various microbial communities. metatranscriptomics (studies of the transcripts from a mixture of microbial species) and other meta-omics approaches hold even greater promise for providing additional insights into functional and regulatory characteristics of the microbial communities. current metatranscriptomics projects are often carried out without matched metagenomic datasets (of the same microbial communities). for the projects that produce both metatranscriptomic and metagenomic datasets, their analyses are often not integrated. metagenome assemblies are far from perfect, partially explaining why metagenome assemblies are not used for the analysis of metatranscriptomic datasets. results: here, we report a reads mapping algorithm for mapping of short reads onto a de bruijn graph of assemblies. a hash table of junction k-mers (k-mers spanning branching structures in the de bruijn graph) is used to facilitate fast mapping of reads to the graph. we developed an application of this mapping algorithm: a reference-based approach to metatranscriptome assembly using graphs of metagenome assembly as the reference. our results show that this new approach (called tag) helps to assemble substantially more transcripts that otherwise would have been missed or truncated because of the fragmented nature of the reference metagenome.metagenomes are being generated at an accelerating pace, revealing important properties of microbiomes. other meta-omic (e.g. metatranscriptomic and metaproteomic) techniques can provide additional insights, in particular into functional characteristics of microbial communities, such as gene activities and their regulatory mechanisms. bacteria have low inventories of short-lived mrnas; as such, fluctuations in their mrna pools provide a highly sensitive bioassay for environmental signals [e.g. the concentrations of dissolved organic carbon and pollutant concentrations relevant to microbes (. the acquisition of meta-omics data on human microbiomes will enable us to refine the annotations of the metagenomes [the encode and modencode projects are great exemplars], and more importantly to study gene activity and its regulation in complex microbial communities in order to understand how microbial organisms work as a community in response to changes in their environment, e.g. health conditions of their human hosts . a recent metatranscriptomic study of the human oral microbiome using patient-matched healthy and diseased (periodontal) samples revealed that health-and diseaseassociated communities exhibit defined differences in metabolism that are conserved between patients while the metabolic gene v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.we tested our tool (tag) on two metatranscriptomic datasets : one derived from a mock microbial community consisting of three bacterial species, and the other derived from a real microbiome sample in human stool. results showed that our graph-based reads mapping algorithm (read2graph) is efficient, and tag, which is based on the mapping algorithm, significantly improves the assembly of metatranscriptomes by considering reads mapping to branching structures in de bruijn graphs of matched metagenomes.even though thousands of complete prokaryotic genomes and many more draft genomes are available, metagenomes are constantly found to contain many new species and new genes . it is therefore important to develop methodologies for metatranscriptome data analysis that are not constrained by the sequenced genomes. with matched metagenomic and metatranscriptomic datasets, we believe that proper utilization of the metagenome data will help greatly the analysis of metatranscriptomic data (and vice versa). the eventual integration of these datasets (as well as other meta-omic datasets) will provide new insights on the composition, function and regulation of microbiomes. well-assembled transcripts are important for the function annotation of the metatranscriptome, and also for inferring gene regulatory mechanisms such as the operons. we developed a novel reads mapping algorithm (read2graph) that allows fast mapping of short reads from transcriptome sequencing onto the assembly graphs of reference genomes. we applied this mapping algorithm for metatranscriptome assembly, showing the utility of the de bruijn assembly graph of the metagenome in downstream applications such as the metatranscriptome analysis. our mapping tool is fast and can be applied to other applications, for example, mapping metagenomic sequencing reads onto the de bruijn graph of closely related species for estimating the relative abundances of these species . we have shown in a related research that genes are often broken into fragments in metagenome assembly, and multi-edge-spanning reads can stitch them together . the mapping of multi-edge-spanning reads will also improve quantification of gene expression based on read counts, in particular for genes (from the same or different organisms) sharing highly similar sequences. in reality, however, we may still miss the mapping of a small fraction of multi-edgespanning reads: if a read contains a sequencing error in the occurrence of a branching k-mer, we cannot find its location in the graph. because of the low error rate (1) in illumina reads, we believe this fraction of reads is indeed negligible in metatranscriptomic data analysis.we note that de bruijn graphs will naturally capture the genomic variations of the metagenomes in the graphs [e.g. the single-nucleotide variations are represented as bulges , the variations in tandem repeats are represented as wheels, and structural variations are represented long loops (, which is yet another advantage of using graphs instead of contigs to represent metagenomes. genomic variations in metagenomes are naturally handled by our graph-centric mapping approach. we expect that a combination of different approaches (reference-based and de novo) need to be applied to accomplish the comprehensive metatranscriptome analysis. as the references for metatranscriptome analysis, the matched metagenome will never be perfect, due to biological (rare species may be poorly sampled), experimental (some genomic regions may not be covered well) and computational (assemblers are not perfect) reasons. integration of known reference genomes, matched metagenomes and even nonmatched metagenomes can maximize the coverage of references for reference-based approaches. on the other hand, if a microbial community contains new, rare but highly expressed microbial species, their transcripts can only be revealed by de novo metatranscriptome assembly but not by the reference-based approaches such as the one presented in this article.  
