gene expression utilizing rna-seq data for de novo coexpression network inference motivation: rna-seq experiments have shown great potential for transcriptome profiling. while sequencing increases the level of biological detail, integrative data analysis is also important. one avenue is the construction of coexpression networks. because the capacity of rna-seq data for network construction has not been previously evaluated, we constructed a coexpression network using striatal samples, derived its network properties and compared it with microarray-based networks. results: the rna-seq coexpression network displayed scale-free, hierarchical network structure. we detected transcripts groups (modules) with correlated profiles; modules overlap distinct ontology categories. neuroanatomical data from the allen brain atlas reveal several modules with spatial colocalization. the network was compared with microarray-derived networks; correlations from rna-seq data were higher, likely because greater sensitivity and dynamic range. higher correlations result in higher network connectivity, heterogeneity and centrality. for transcripts present across platforms, network structure appeared largely preserved. from this study, we present the first rna-seq data de novo network inference.rna-seq is a relatively new method for gene expression analysis that has provided important insights into transcriptome structure. the level of detailed biological insight available through transcriptome sequencing is superior to microarray platforms, most notably in detecting alternatively spliced isoforms and non-coding rnas and small rnas that are not generally interrogated using microarray platforms. in addition, rna-seq offers significantly higher levels of transcript accuracy when compared to microarray platforms . to whom correspondence should be addressed. while increasing our understanding of specific biological processes, these new insights have also brought into focus the full extent of the complexity of eukaryotic transcriptomes. in this context, integration of rna-seq data into a systems-level framework of transcription analysis is increasingly important. network analysis provides a productive approach to visualization and analysis of high-throughput biological data. transforming the data into a graph/network framework offers distinct advantages, allowing the adoption of techniques developed in graph theory, engineering and computer science; these approaches can directly relate specific biological interactions or disease states with the network properties and dynamics . gene coexpression networks have provided important insights into the global structure of the transcriptome in a variety of species . the transcriptome coexpression network displays many properties often associated with biological and social networks: modularity, centralization, heterogeneity and clustering . as experimental techniques improve and the level of technical/experimental noise decreases, improved estimates of these parameters can be expected.our results illustrate the advantages of rna-seq data in gene coexpression network construction. importantly, we find that the increased dynamic range and accuracy of deep sequencing as compared with microarray platforms allows better estimation of network properties, such as network density, connectivity, centralization and heterogeneity. we find that rna-seq estimates of these values are generally higher than values derived from microarray data; this is of interest because heterogeneity and centralization distinguish hierarchical networks from purely random networks . note that several modules do not appear preserved based on cross-tabulation-based preservation measures. while this may reflect real differences between platforms, it could also be due to the instability observed in many clustering procedures (von luxburg, 2010). a major advantage of the networkbased module preservation statistics (z density, etc) used in this article is that they do not require module assignment in the test dataset and therefore, allow one to make rigorous claims regarding module preservation. according to these preservation statistics, we find that network module structure is significantly preserved across platforms in particular with respect to density-based preservation statistics. we derive functional annotation and neuroanatomical features of the transcriptome that provide insights into the biological mechanisms underlying the coexpression structure: we find that genes that share functional annotation are often coexpressed, as are genes that share spatial localization within the striatum. taken together, our results suggest that network approaches are a promising avenue of integrative rna-seq data analysis.  
