variantbam: filtering and profiling of next-generational sequencing data using region-specific rules we developed variantbam, a c read filtering and profiling tool for use with bam, cram and sam sequencing files. variantbam provides a flexible framework for extracting sequencing reads or read-pairs that satisfy combinations of rules, defined by any number of genomic intervals or variant sites. we have implemented filters based on alignment data, sequence motifs, regional coverage and base quality. for example, variantbam achieved a median size reduction ratio of 3.1:1 when applied to 10 lung cancer whole genome bams by removing large tags and selecting for only high-quality variant-supporting reads and reads matching a large dictionary of sequence motifs. thus variantbam enables efficient storage of sequencing data while preserving the most relevant information for downstream analysis.as the cost of genome sequencing decreases, the storage and computational burden of handling large sequencing datasets is an increasing concern. whole genome sequencing of a human genome to 30 coverage can result in approximately 1 billion reads, requiring more than 100 gb of disk space even in the compressed bam format . to mitigate this, the cram format was established to provide reference-based compression of bam files, resulting in a 23 reduction in file size . however, the cram format is not currently supported by many analysis tools, and can still leave whole-genome files at 30 coverage at 30 gb. an alternative is to create trimmed bam files that contain only the sequence information relevant for a particular set of scientific questions. for instance, one group may be interested in only mutations in exons, while another may be interested in only reads that support structural variants. furthermore, depending on the quality of the sequencing library, a large fraction of the low-quality reads can be removed with little effect on downstream analyses. even further reductions in size can be achieved by removing alignment tags or subsampling reads in areas of high coverage. read filtering that meets all of these needs could reduce the data footprint while preserving the most relevant information in a compact file. the original bams could then be moved to low-cost archival storage, or retained on an external server (e.g. dbgap) and filtered during retrieval. read filtering can also be used directly in analysis pipelines that operate only on a subset of reads. research questions in different fields (e.g. epigenomics, metagenomics, etc.) will tend to focus onthese issues, we developed variantbam, a scriptable bam/cram/sam filtering tool designed to provide a robust and flexible method for retrieving custom sets of reads. variantbam uses a hierarchical system of filtering rules to determine if a given read should be included in the output. unique combinations of filtering rules can be applied to different genomic intervals, allowing for the needs of various analyses (e.g. snps, exon variants) to be met with a single pass through the sequencing file. variantbam provides advanced filtering options not available through other filtering tools, including motif matching to a dictionary of sequences, cigar parsing, considerations for base-quality scores, and the ability to subsample to a maximum sequence coverage. variantbam is written in c and utilizes the rapid c htslib (github.com/samtools/htslib) to perform i/o with high efficiency. output to bam, cram, sam and standard output is supported.  
