genetics and population analysis varying coefficient model for gene–environment interaction: a non-linear look motivation: the genetic basis of complex traits often involves the function of multiple genetic factors, their interactions and the interaction between the genetic and environmental factors. gene environment (ge) interaction is considered pivotal in determining trait variations and susceptibility of many genetic disorders such as neurodegenerative diseases or mental disorders. regression-based methods assuming a linear relationship between a disease response and the genetic and environmental factors as well as their interaction is the commonly used approach in detecting ge interaction. the linearity assumption, however, could be easily violated due to non-linear genetic penetrance which induces non-linear ge interaction. results: in this work, we propose to relax the linear ge assumption and allow for non-linear ge interaction under a varying coefficient model framework. we propose to estimate the varying coefficients with regression spline technique. the model allows one to assess the non-linear penetrance of a genetic variant under different environmental stimuli, therefore help us to gain novel insights into the etiology of a complex disease. several statistical tests are proposed for a complete dissection of ge interaction. a wild bootstrap method is adopted to assess the statistical significance. both simulation and real data analysis demonstrate the power and utility of the proposed method. our method provides a powerful and testable framework for assessing non-linear ge interaction.the genetic basis of a complex trait often involves multiple genetic factors functioning in a coordinated manner. the extent on how our genetic blueprint expresses also depends on the interactions between genetic and environmental factors. increasing evidences have shown that geneenvironment (ge) interactions play pivotal roles in determining the risk of diseases, for instance, the psychiatric diseases (reviewed in), the neurodegenerative and to whom correspondence should be addressed. cardiovascular diseases , and cancer . due to the complex nature of the form and mechanism of ge interaction in different living organisms, hunting down the molecular machinery of ge interaction has been a daunting task in the post-genomic era. there is a pressing need in developing efficient and powerful statistical methods for a rigorous investigation of ge interaction. ge interaction refers to how genotypes influence phenotypes differently in different environments . from a biological point of view, ge interaction can be better viewed as the genetic responses to environment changes or stresses . in a typical ge interaction study design, environment is often defined as different conditions coded as a discrete variable in a statistical model. for example, in a study of ge interaction related to lung cancer, smoking status can be defined as an environment condition coded as 1 (smoking) or 0 (no smoking). in many other studies, the environment condition is defined as a continuous measure. for one example, studies show that 80 of type ii diabetes and 70 of cardiovascular disease are related to obesity [defined by body mass index (bmi)]. to track down genetic factors responsible for diabetes or cardiovascular disease, obesity can be defined as an environment factor that may induce or reduce the expression of particular genes to affect the disease status. the contribution of the same gene to a disease status may be largely different under different bmi levels. as another example, the peak bone mineral density (bmd) in adulthood varies a lot across different age groups. the amount of nutrition intake (e.g. vitamin d) is also an important environment factor influencing the variation of bmd . individuals carrying the same gene may respond differently to the rate of density decrease as they get older. also the peak bmd measure may vary a lot across groups with different nutrition intake, potentially due to the interaction of specific genes with the amount of nutrition intake (e.g. vitamin d). statistical methods for testing ge interaction can be broadly categorized into two areas: the model-based method, either parametrically, non-parametrically or semi-parametrically (e.g.), and the model-free method such as the multifactor dimensionality reduction method . in a modelbased regression framework, traditional parametric methods need strong model assumptions such as assuming linear ge interactionpage: 2120 21192126the natural variation of a quantitative phenotype is not only determined by the inherited genetic factors, but also can be explained by how sensitive a genetic factor responds to environmental stimuli. geneenvironment interaction, the genetic control of sensitivity to environment, plays a pivotal role in determining trait variations. in humans, most diseases results from a complex interaction between an individuals genetic blueprint and the associated environmental condition. for example, type ii diabetes and cardiovascular disease are often due to the complex interaction between an individuals genes and obesity condition. the more we learn about how genes interact with environment in determining trait variations and disease risks, the more we can achieve in prevention and treatment of illnesses.the importance of ge interaction in human disease has been historically recognized (e.g.). many statistical methods have been proposed to target ge interaction. in this work, we relaxed the linear ge interaction assumption, and proposed a new method considering non-linear ge interaction. we focused our attention on environment with continuous measurement (e.g. dietary intake, obesity condition and the amount of addictive substances). we adopted the well-known vc model into a genetic mapping framework and proposed to estimate the functional coefficient by the non-parametric b-spline technique. the superior performance of the vc model in detecting non-linear ge interaction has been demonstrated with extensive monte carlo simulations. when the genetic contribution to the variation of a phenotype varies largely across environmental conditions, the proposed vc model achieves the optimal power compared with models assuming constant or linear coefficient. although in theory, the b-spline estimator converges to the true underlying function, depending on various factors, the vc model may not achieve the optimal power when the true function is constant or linear. in real data analysis, often the heritability level is unknown before we fit a model. thus, it is necessary to conduct a hypothesis test to assess the true underlying functional coefficient. based on the results from simulation and real data analysis, we conclude that the vc model cannot completely substitute the linear parametric model in ge analysis. our practical recommendation is to do a hypothesis test first to assess the function of the coefficients, then fit the appropriate model. in many cases, linear or constant coefficients are preferred, and a linear model can be fitted. noted that the estimation of the varying coefficients is essentially a least-squares problem, hence is computationally fast. the computational cost comes with the wild bootstrap procedure to assess the significance of the coefficients. by first assessing the function of the coefficients, we could save computation time dramatically. we applied the method to a real dataset to identify genetic factors interacting with mothers mbi to explain the normal variation of babys birth weight. we adopted a two-parameter model which is biologically more attractive than a one-parameter model. we found a few snps showing non-linear penetrance across different environmental stimuli (i.e. different mbmi levels) . even though only two snps showed statistical significance after multiple testing adjustments following the fdr procedure , we still found a few others with relatively strong signals (p0.005). in checking the function of the snps, some of those are growth factors that are directly related to fetal growth, for example, platelet-derived growth factor b (pdgfb) and fibroblast growth factor 4 (fgf4). fgf4 is essential for mammalian embryogenesis and fetal growth . snp 634043245 in exon 3 located in fgf4 was also identified by a different model showing a strong dominance effect on small for gestational age along with maternal body weight when searching for genetic conflict effect . like many other statistical methods in association analysis, genotyping errors and missing data are certainly obvious issues as pointed out by one referee. in the current analysis, we focused on the model in a general setting. these issues need to be evaluated with extensive simulations and will be considered in our future work. in addition to these two issues, our method does not apply to rare variants either. further model development is needed to take rare variants into consideration. for snps with highly unbalanced page: 2126 21192126  
