vasohibins: new transglutaminase-like cysteine proteases possessing a non-canonical cys-his-ser catalytic triad vasohibin-1 and vasohibin-2 regulate angiogenesis, tumour growth and metastasis. their molecular functions, however, were previously unknown, in large part owing to their perceived lack of homology to proteins of known structure and function. to identify their functional amino acids and domains, their molecular activity and their evolutionary history, we undertook an in-depth analysis of vasohibin sequences. we find that vasohibin proteins are previously un-detected members of the transglutaminase-like cysteine protease superfamily, and all possess a non-canonical cys-his-ser catalytic triad. we further propose a calcium-dependent activation mechanism for vasohibin proteins. these findings can now be used to design constructs for protein structure determination and to develop enzyme inhibitors as angiogenic regulators to treat me-tastasis and tumour growth.tight regulation of angiogenesis contributes to normal physiology, growth and development, but when misregulated leads to, or dramatically affects, pathological conditions, such as ischaemia, wound healing and cancer . angiogenesis is a fundamental step in transitioning tumours from benignancy to malignancy. the use of angiogenesis inhibitors in treating cancer has thus received considerable attention over the last four decades . vasohibin-1 (vash1) was initially identified as a vascular endothelial growth factor inducible gene that regulates endothelial cell migration . despite lacking a classical secretion signal, human vash1 protein is released extracellularly, assisted by a small vasohibin-binding protein which is the only known vash1-interacting protein . over-expression of a paralogue, vasohibin-2 (vash2), is associated with diverse tumours, with major roles to angiogenesis, malignant transformation, and metastasis . knockout mouse studies have revealed the contrasting roles of the two paralogues . vash1 is expressed in endothelial cells in zones within which angiogenesis is arrested, whilst vash2 is expressed in infiltrating mononuclear cells at the sprouting front in which angiogenesis is enhanced . the molecular activity of neither paralogue is known, in large part due to a perceived lack of homology to proteins of known structure and function.given the strong statistical significance of sequence and profile comparisons, and the concordance of secondary structure predictions and conserved active site residues, we have shown that vasohibin proteins are new members of the transglutaminase-like cysteine protease superfamily, and possess a non-canonical cys-his-ser/thr catalytic triad. this insight should immediately help guide experiments to clarify the molecular mechanisms by which vash1 and vash2 control angiogenesis.  
