vecuum: identification and filtration of false somatic variants caused by recombinant vector contamination motivation: advances in sequencing technologies have remarkably lowered the detection limit of somatic variants to a low frequency. however, calling mutations at this range is still confounded by many factors including environmental contamination. vector contamination is a continuously occurring issue and is especially problematic since vector inserts are hardly distinguishable from the sample sequences. such inserts, which may harbor polymorphisms and engineered functional mutations, can result in calling false variants at corresponding sites. numerous vector-screening methods have been developed, but none could handle contamination from inserts because they are focusing on vector backbone sequences alone. results: we developed a novel methodvecuumthat identifies vector-originated reads and resultant false variants. since vector inserts are generally constructed from intron-less cdnas, vecuum identifies vector-originated reads by inspecting the clipping patterns at exon junctions. false variant calls are further detected based on the biased distribution of mutant alleles to vector-originated reads. tests on simulated and spike-in experimental data validated that vecuum could detect 93 of vector contaminants and could remove up to 87 of variant-like false calls with 100 precision. application to public sequence datasets demonstrated the utility of vecuum in detecting false variants resulting from various types of external contamination. availability and implementation: java-based implementation of the method is available at http:// vecuum.sourceforge.net/the detection of somatic variants from massively parallel sequencing data is a core analysis in genomic studies. recent advances in sequence analysis have remarkably improved the accuracy of somatic variant detection to consider low-allelic fraction mutations and genetic subpopulations in a sample . this improvement has enabled researchers to interrogate genetic causes that act in a minute circumstance in various diseases. for instance, studies on neurodevelopmental malformations identified disease-causing variants at a very low-allelic fraction (down to a few percent;), while several metagenomic studies revealed small subpopulations of microbial pathogens regarding carcinogenesis . there is also a growing possibility for the clinical use of high-resolution next-generation sequencing (ngs) in diagnosing genetic diseases that are hardly detectable by conventional clinical testing . however, extending the range of somatic mutation analysis accompanies increased vulnerability to false findings that result from numerous factors including machine errors, mapping ambiguity, imprecise call models and observational stochasticity (inevitable amplification or the reduction of alternative alleles in an observational process). of these, external sample contamination is a significant risk that can generate critical erroneous calls that perplex the investigators even at an infinitesimal amount. for example, the cause of genetic anomalies observed in various genome-sequencing data has been identified to be an inclusion of unexpected cell line dna and viral contamination . recent studies showed that microbial contamination also exists even in large-scale international projects . a series of findings in experimentally well-controlled studies indicate that external contamination needs to be assessed by more systematic and computational approaches in quality control . external contamination by recombinant vector is a continuously occurring problem in sequencing experiments, which has been reported from traditional pcr-based sequencing to the ngs sequencing era . recombinant vectors are extraordinary problematic contaminants compared with others, because of the presence of recombinant inserts. unlike, vector backbone sequences that are easily distinguishable in xenogeneic genomes, the sequences of recombinant inserts is hardly separable once mixed in sample dna to form homogeneous short-read mapping in ngs sequencing; recombinant inserts are usually designed for transfection based on the genetic sequence of the target organism in order to express a transcript in target cells. moreover, vector inserts are often engineered to harbor the intended mutations for in vitro or in vivo validation, thus generating variant-like alternative alleles at functionally important sites (, yellow marks). such false variants can result in serious pitfalls in interpreting the results of sequence analysis and assessing the occurrence of disease causing mutations. so far, numerous methods have been developed for the identification and filtration of vector-contaminated reads and are used as a quality control process in sequence analysis (; https://sourceforge.net/projects/seqclean/). however, none could filter out such variant-containing reads generated from vector inserts, because all previous attempts have been confined to searching reads containing vector backbone sequences (, blue reads). therefore, a novel approach that guarantees the removal of the entire vector contaminant is required for more robust somatic mutation analysis in ngs. here, we introduce vecuum that computationally estimates vector-originated reads including vector backbones and recombinant inserts, and identifies the resultant false variants caused by inherent contamination. vecuum identifies the existence and sites of vector contamination by detecting vector backbone sequences in an ultra-high-speed screening step based on bwa-fastmap. vecuum then attempts to capture short reads from recombinant inserts usingsequence reads of a contaminated specimen consists of dna originating from the sample (grey reads) and recombinant vector (blue and red reads). due to ordinary mapping of reads from vector inserts, engineered mutations can be observed as low-frequent variants (yellow marks). since recombinant inserts do not include intronic sequences in general, unique mapping patterns are generated by vector-originated reads at exon junctions (clipped and discordant reads), which provides a clue to identify the false variants. (b) the analysis consists of two major steps with four sub-processes. in the vector contamination assessment step, vecuum checks for vector contamination and predicts insert regions. false variants are then examined within the predicted insert regions in the next step. the identified false variants with probability scores are provided as a result intron-less mapping signatures (split or discordantly mapped reads at exon junctions with a full recovery in transcript mapping,, red discordant reads); vector inserts for molecular cloning are generally constructed from intron-less processed cdnas. finally, vecuum identifies false variants based on observation bias of mutant alleles in vector-originated reads using statistical tests. in a carefully designed simulation, we demonstrated that vecuum not only outperforms previously reported methods, but also reduces the computation time in the vector identification problem. vecuum also accurately identified the genomic regions of contamination and detected most of the false variants, which has not been attempted in the previous methods. these performances were further validated by real spike-in experimental data. by applying vecuum to public sequence datasets, we revealed that various types of external contaminations can be detected including mammalian expression vectors, mouse genes in xenografts and prepped mrna (cdna) libraries. based on these results, we expect that vecuum will improve the reliability of low-frequent somatic variant calls in ngs data by providing a novel quality control method for external contamination.in this study, we developed a novel computational method, vecuum, for the detection of false variants caused by vector contamination, which has not been explored by previously reported methods. we predicted vector-originated reads based on unique mapping patterns at exon junctions, and identified the false variants based on skewness of mutant alleles to predicted vector reads. validation with simulated and experimental contamination datasets not only showed the outperformance of vecuum against conventional assessment of vector contamination, but also showed reliable performance for false variant detection. occurrence of false somatic calls from external contamination has been occasionally reported. however, researchers often experience that many of the initial mutations from somatic variant analysis are not reproduced in confirmation steps such as sanger sequencing, targeted deep sequencing and/or mass spectrometry-based panels without a prominent feature of failure, and therefore remain unreported. such publication bias suggests a good chance that contamination may exist more frequently than shown. moreover, high-depth sequencing is necessary to identify small amounts of contamination. the rapid decline of sequencing costs and popularization of low-frequent somatic mutation analysis will call more attention to contamination issues, where vecuum is a good fall-back option.application to public datasets showed the utility of vecuum for various sources of contamination. in addition to external contamination that we demonstrated here, vecuum even detected false variants caused by inherent pseudogenes. all types of genomic data generated by hybrid capture-based sequencing would be applicable by vecuum including wes, wgs and chip-seq data. to our knowledge, vecuum is the first tool that performs an overall inspection of false variants. judging from the perfect precision of the false variant detection achieved upon validations, the false variants identified by vecuum can be considered as artifacts with high confidence regardless of their origin, which makes it applicable for robust quality control of somatic variant analyses.  
