genome analysis vega: variational segmentation for copy number detection motivation: genomic copy number (cn) information is useful to study genetic traits of many diseases. using array comparative genomic hybridization (acgh), researchers are able to measure the copy number of thousands of dna loci at the same time. therefore, a current challenge in bioinformatics is the development of efficient algorithms to detect the map of aberrant chromosomal regions. methods: we describe an approach for the segmentation of copy number acgh data. variational estimator for genomic aberrations (vega) adopt a variational model used in image segmentation. the optimal segmentation is modeled as the minimum of an energy functional encompassing both the quality of interpolation of the data and the complexity of the solution measured by the length of the boundaries between segmented regions. this solution is obtained by a region growing process where the stop condition is completely data driven. results: vega is compared with three algorithms that represent the state of the art in cn segmentation. performance assessment is made both on synthetic and real data. synthetic data simulate different noise conditions. results on these data show the robustness with respect to noise of variational models and the accuracy of vega in terms of recall and precision. eight mantle cell lymphoma cell lines and two samples of glioblastoma multiforme are used to evaluate the behavior of vega on real biological data. comparison between results and current biological knowledge shows the ability of the proposed method in detecting known chromosomal aberrations.recent biological studies show the close relationship between chromosomal regions aberrant in copy number (cn) and diseases like tumor and mental retardation . high resolution cn estimation makes use of comparative genomic hybridization arrays. dna from a test sample and normal reference sample are labeled differentially, using different fluorophores, and hybridized to several thousand probes. the ratio of the fluorescence intensity of the test to that of the reference dna is then calculated, to measure the cn changes for a particular location in the genome. in particular, the logr ratio (llr) gives an indirect measure of cn of each probe by plotting the ratio of observed to expected hybridization intensity. after a microarray has been constructed and hybridized, the corresponding image can be acquired and additional analysis steps can be used both to reduce noise and to increase the statistical confidence of the observations (generally each probe is spotted in several copies) . the output of this process is a list of lrr values with the respective genomic positions. the so called segmentation algorithms use this list of measurements to compute the features (breakpoint positions and kind of mutation) of the aberrant regions along the genome. the availability of efficient segmentation algorithms plays an important role in the mapping of aberrant chromosomal regions. accurate aberration mapping can be used to extract new insight on the mechanisms leading to genetic diseases. for this reason in literature, several segmentation approaches have been proposed. in likelihood function-based approaches , breakpoint positions are estimated by using a maximum likelihood criterion in which penalty terms are used to limit the complexity of the solution. often penalty terms are controlled by weights which can be chosen adaptively to the data . an interesting likelihood function-based approach is dnacopy which is based on a modification of the original binary segmentation proposed by. dnacopy segments the chromosome into contiguous regions of equal cn using a non-parametric permutation reference distribution which takes in account the effect of noise. in particular, the authors model cn data as a sequence of random variables and the maximum likelihood is used recursively to look for change points where adjacent random variables have a different distribution function. in addition, dnacopy uses a pruning algorithm to control the number of regions. willenbrock and fridlyand (2005) andshowed that dnacopy algorithm performs well in terms of sensitivity and false discovery rate both on synthetic and real data. other statistical models frequently used for cn segmentation are bayesian approaches and hidden markov models. in the bayesian framework, the prior distributions are combined with some posterior distribution functions to construct the most plausible hypothesis concerning the data segmentation . in hidden markov model-based approaches, hidden states represent the underlying cn of probes. in fridlyand et al.page: 3021 30203027in order to evaluate the performance of our approach, we use both synthetic and real data. we compare our results with the ones obtained by dnacopy , ultrasome and smap  
