vhog, a multispecies vertebrate ontology of homologous organs groups motivation: most anatomical ontologies are species-specific, whereas a framework for comparative studies is needed. we describe the vertebrate homologous organs groups ontology, vhog, used to compare expression patterns between species. results: vhog is a multispecies anatomical ontology for the vertebrate lineage. it is based on the hogs used in the bgee database of gene expression evolution. vhog version 1.4 includes 1184 terms, follows obo principles and is based on the common anatomy reference ontology (caro). vhog only describes structures with historical homology relations between model vertebrate species. the mapping to species-specific anatomical ontologies is provided as a separate file, so that no homology hypothesis is stated within the ontology itself. each mapping has been manually reviewed, and we provide support codes and references when available. availability and implementation: vhog is available from the bgee download site (http://bgee.unil.ch/), as well as from the obo foundry and the ncbo bioportal websites. contact:one of the main approaches to understand biological objects has long been comparative studies, from comparative anatomy in the 18th century to comparative genomics in the last decade. comparative analysis can notably help identify adaptation, as well as functional or structural constraints . many of the data which we would like to compare, such as gene expression or phenotypes, need to be mapped to anatomy and development of organisms to be of use. to facilitate the automatic manipulation of this data, there has been an important effort to build ontologies, which describe the anatomy of human and of animal model organisms . these ontologies have tended to be species-specific, resulting in an increasing number of ontologies corresponding to different projects (see the obo foundry and the ncbo). this makes the comparison between species difficult, since differences in representational schemes and in vocabulary are added to the differences in biology. yet automatic comparisons are increasingly necessary, with large amounts of functional data generated in diverse model organisms. an integrated view is advantageous both for a fundamental understanding of animal biology and evolution, and for the efficient transfer of information from model organisms to human or veterinary medicine. multispecies integration within anatomical ontologies poses a number of challenges. one is the criterion of comparison. while comparative studies can be performed in diverse frameworks, homology is the most widely recognized criterion . this raises further problems. first, homology is always a hypothesis , which according to the principle of reality followed by the obo foundry should not be included within an ontology (although see). second, there exist structures which will not be included in a homology comparison between a given pair of species, because they are specific to one or the other, and have no homolog. third, the exclusion of analogous structures might be limiting for some studies (e.g. comparing insect and vertebrate eye development). fourth, homologous structures can diverge in function or structure, to an extent that representing them together in an ontology might be difficult. finally, there can be differences between species in the relationships among structures . there are several ongoing efforts to create multispecies ontologies for animal groups, which have chosen different answers to the challenges outlined above. the teleost anatomy ontology (tao) is a multispecies ontology for teleost fishes. the tao is based on the zebrafish anatomy ontology (zfa) (from the zfin database,), and uses general (higher level) terms from the common anatomy reference ontology (caro) . the caro was created to provide a common basis for all future anatomy ontologies and facilitate their interoperability. several other efforts follow the same model as the tao, and include the amphibian anatomy ontology and the hymenoptera anatomy ontology. in each of these cases, there is an effort to describe the morphological diversity of the clade. consequently, each ontology will include terms that are found in several species of the clade. the use of a term for several species in the tao does not imply homology . a species-specific ontology (e.g. zfa) is considered a subset of the multispecies ontology (e.g. tao).all terms of the vhog ontology were manually curated, to verify that they correspond to groups of homologous organs between vertebrate species, linked by relations of strict historical homology, as defined in the hom ontology . when the structures are homologous but divergent, we use a combination of terms, such as limb-fin bud (vhog:000125). relations between the terms were also manually curated (see algorithm in), and set either to is_a or to part_of. we aim to provide exactly one is_a relation for each term, according to obo foundry guidelines. as noted in the tao publication , it is at present difficult to implement this guideline in practice for anatomical ontologies. in future versions of the vhog, we will continue working toward this aim. the terms and relations thus generated were incorporated into the framework of the caro . we were careful to implement this in a manner consistent with other anatomical ontologies using caro: tao, xao and zfa. this especially concerns the relations between vhog terms derived from species-specific ontology alignments and higher level caro terms, e.g. digit is_a anatomical cluster. the vhog ontology version 1.4 has 1184 terms, 506 is_a relations and 1181 part_of relations. there are 664 synonyms; 547 terms have definitions; 67 of terms have only one parent, 25 have two parents, and the others have three or more. there are 493 cross-references (xref) to other multispecies obo ontologies. these do not include the mappings to speciesspecific ontologies, as we consider that mappings from multispecies ontologies to species-specific ontologies should not be treated as xrefs, but should be encoded separately in an association file, similar to the gene ontology annotation mapping . this differs from the approach of uberon, which includes crossreferences to the source ontologies in the multispecies ontology itself . all mappings of terms from the species-specific ontologies to the vhog terms were manually curated. there are 5129 terms from species-specific ontologies mapped to 1169 vhog terms, which represent 2259 hypotheses of homology between vertebrates (i.e. 2259 pair-wise relations between structures in different species). there are 15 vhog terms with no mappings, which correspond to higher level caro terms (e.g. material anatomical entity). the semantics of the mapping is treat-xrefs-as-equivalent for caro, and equivalent to treat-xref-as-genus-differentia for the mapping to species-specific ontologies. the mappings were annotated with support codes to provide confidence information . means to provide confidence metadata information in support of annotations are currently being discussed in the framework of the evidence code ontology (eco) and of the international society for biocuration. our objective is to rely on the use of the eco, once a standard to address the issue of confidence has emerged in the biocuration and ontology communities. in practice, the support codes obvious and inferred are essentially used for homology between the two mammals considered in our ontology: 97 of all mappings with the code inferred are for human and mouse. all mappings with the code obvious are for human and mouse, except whole organism which has the code obvious for all ontologies. among the vhog groups noted debated, several concern bones and the skeletal system, due to citations such as the following: whether this biomineralization toolkit of genes reflects a parallel co-option of a common suite of genes or the inheritance of a skeletogenic gene regulatory network from a biomineralizing common ancestor remains an open debate (more references in the association file). another case of debate is the vomeronasal organ (vhog:0000665). none of the three bibliographical references cited in the association file is conclusive concerning the existence and homology of thisthe total is more than the number of vhog terms, because different mappings to a same vhog term can have different support. c a consensus is chosen and presented, but the debate is documented. d either there is a reference in which the homology is discussed as uncertain, and it is provided; or this code is used when well-established or obvious relations between closely related species (e.g. human and mouse) are extended to other species (e.g. zebrafish). organ in different tetrapodes (; kardong, 2006 p. 669;), and doving and trotier (1998) specify: the opinions concerning the presence and functioning of the vomeronasal organ in humans are controversial. conversely, 87 of all mappings for zebrafish, the most divergent species included in vhog, are well established in the literature. still, 7 are uncertain, as for example the ovary (zfa:0000403 mapped to vhog:0000251): (...) while it is likely that urbilateria lacked a complex somatic reproductive system, it is at present impossible to speculate on whether or not it possessed a true gonad (full citation in the association file) (see also). finally, it should be noted that terms which represent different developmental stages of the same organ are mapped together. for example, presumptive midbrain (zfa:0000148) and midbrain (zfa:0000128) are both mapped to midbrain (vhog:0000069). this leads to some loss of information concerning developmental relations, and notably the relation develops_from is not implemented in the vhog. but it provides a simpler description of vertebrate anatomy, which has proven relevant and useful to studying gene expression patterns (e.g. it is used in the prosite database) . this has proven especially useful for human and mouse, for which different ontologies describe anatomy during development, and in the adult; vhog (and the hogs in bgee) provide a high-quality mapping between these ontologies. of note, for queries on gene expression in bgee, a developmental stage can be specified, which then recovers only data from the correct structure.fine-grained yet large-scale comparisons between model organisms, especially vertebrates such as mouse or zebrafish and humans, is increasingly important. in addition to providing a framework for evolutionary studies, the vhog provides a unique tool for relating humans and model organisms. additionally, the association files of vhog and hog are unique resources in providing detailed judgments of homology between anatomical structures, with supporting evidence from the literature.  
