systems biology viewing cancer genes from co-evolving gene modules motivation: studying the evolutionary conservation of cancer genes can improve our understanding of the genetic basis of human cancers. functionally related proteins encoded by genes tend to interact with each other in a modular fashion, which may affect both the mode and tempo of their evolution. results: in the human ppi network, we searched for subnetworks within each of which all proteins have evolved at similar rates since the human and mouse split. identified at a given co-evolving level, the subnetworks with non-randomly large sizes were defined as co-evolving modules. we showed that proteins within modules tend to be conserved, evolutionarily old and enriched with housekeeping genes, while proteins outside modules tend to be less-conserved, evolutionarily younger and enriched with genes expressed in specific tissues. viewing cancer genes from co-evolving modules showed that the overall conservation of cancer genes should be mainly attributed to the cancer proteins enriched in the conserved modules. functional analysis further suggested that cancer proteins within and outside modules might play different roles in carcinogenesis, providing a new hint for studying the mechanism of cancer.studying the evolutionary conservation of disease/cancer genes can improve our understanding of the genetic basis of human diseases. however, current results on this topic are still inconsistent. some studies suggested that disease genes related to morbid phenotypes evolve more slowly than other genes . other studies indicated that disease genes may evolve faster than other genes and thus are under weaker negative selection. notably, most of these studies treated disease/cancer genes and the rest genes as if they were completely isolated and uncorrelated. however, it is known that proteins encoded by genes tend to perform functions by interacting with each other in a modular fashion , which may affect both the mode and tempo of molecular evolution to whom correspondence should be addressed. by reducing pleiotropy and enabling protein modules to be co-opted for new functions (;). thus, studying the evolutionary patterns of cancer genes in the context of protein (gene) modules may provide us new clues to understand the genetic basis of human cancer. in this study, in the human ppi network, we firstly searched for ppi subnetworks within each of which all proteins have evolved at similar rates since the human and mouse split. at a given co-evolving level, the identified ppi subnetworks with significantly large sizes were selected as co-evolving modules, which could be highly cohesive fragments of some co-evolving functional units. comparing proteins within and outside modules, we found that genes encoding proteins within modules tend to be conserved, evolutionarily old and enriched with housekeeping genes , while genes encoding proteins outside modules are less-conserved, evolutionarily younger and enriched with genes expressed in specific tissues. then, for proteins encoded by cancer genes collected in cancer gene census database , we showed that the cancer proteins within modules tend to be evolutionarily old and conserved, while the cancer proteins outside modules tend to be evolutionarily younger and less conserved. thus, the overall conservation of cancer proteins in comparison with other proteins should be mainly attributed to the cancer proteins enriched in co-evolving modules. these results suggested that cancer proteins with different evolutionary patterns may play different functional roles in carcinogenesis. in fact, we found that cancer proteins together with their co-evolving neighbors within modules tend to participate in some essential biological processes such as nuclear mrna splicing, via spliceosome and post-translational protein modification, while cancer proteins outside modules tend to be enriched in functions such as dna damage response and dna repair.  
