vipr: variant identification in pooled dna using r motivation: high-throughput-sequencing (hts) technologies are the method of choice for screening the human genome for rare sequence variants causing susceptibility to complex diseases. unfortunately, preparation of samples for a large number of individuals is still very cost-and labor intensive. thus, recently, screens for rare sequence variants were carried out in samples of pooled dna, in which equimolar amounts of dna from multiple individuals are mixed prior to sequencing with hts. the resulting sequence data, however, poses a bioinformatics challenge: the discrimination of sequencing errors from real sequence variants present at a low frequency in the dna pool. results: our method vipr uses data from multiple dna pools in order to compensate for differences in sequencing error rates along the sequenced region. more precisely, instead of aiming at discriminating sequence variants from sequencing errors, vipr identifies sequence positions that exhibit significantly different minor allele frequencies in at least two dna pools using the skellam distribution. the performance of vipr was compared with three other models on data from a targeted resequencing study of the tmem132d locus in 600 individuals distributed over four dna pools. performance of the methods was computed on snps that were also genotyped individually using a maldi-tof technique. on a set of 82 sequence variants, vipr achieved an average sensitivity of 0.80 at an average specificity of 0.92, thus outperforming the reference methods by at least 0.17 in specificity at comparable sensitivity. availability: the code of vipr is freely available via: http://sourceforge.net/projects/htsvipr/ contact: altmann@mpipsykl.mpg.degenome-wide association studies (gwass) have been extremely successful in identifying relevant loci under the common diseasecommon variant (cdcv) hypothesis. studies conducted in recent years identified hundreds of loci associated with complex traits. for many of those traits, however, the associated variants explain only a small fraction of the heritability of common traits . human height, for instance, can be explained very well by the average height of the individuals parents and thus its genetic heritability is estimated with around 80 . gwass for human height indeed identified a large number of associated loci that, however, explain only about 5 of this heritability . a reason for this discrepancyor the case of the missing heritability is the inherent to whom correspondence should be addressed. drawback of gwas: the genome-wide chips focus on common variations, i.e. rare alleles are not tested for at all. thus, in recent years, the efforts for finding clinically relevant genetic markers for many common diseases began also to include the common diseaserare variant (cdrv) hypothesis. here, multiple rare mutations (ideally in the same genetic region) underly susceptibility to the disease. clearly, in this quest for the missing heritability high-throughputsequencing (hts) technologies play a pivotal role. these technologies led to a dramatic drop in costs per sequenced base pair compared to capillary-based sequencing , and thereby provide the necessary sequencing power required for finding rare variants. the major obstacle with hts is that sequencing the genomes of thousands of people as it was carried out in gwass is currently beyond the scopefinancially and bioinformatically of single research institutes. however, although initially designed to be a tool for sequencing whole genomes, hts also provides the sequencing power required for investigating all exonic regions or more clearly defined genetic regions in a large number of individuals. these targeted resequencing studies are well within the scope of single laboratories . hts platforms support multiplexing for facilitating the sequencing of multiple isolates in one physical compartment. all multiplexing strategies are based on small dna fragments termed barcodes that are attached to the fragments to be sequenced, and thereby enables the allocation of every single read to each sample. for instance, the abi solid 4 supports 96 multiplexing. furthermore, the platform allows to partition its slide into eight equally sized compartments. hence, theoretically allowing to sequence (a short defined genetic region of) 768 individuals at a time. a downside of this strategy is that sample preparation, i.e. amplification of the target region and attaching of the barcodes, has to be carried out separately for every sample. thus, generating non-negligible costs and work load. a more labor-and cost-effective strategy is the sequencing of dna pools. here, equimolar amounts of dna are mixed into one sample prior to the amplification and sequencing steps. the major disadvantage of sequencing dna pooling is the loss of the information about which read originates from which individual. however, once rare variants are detected using the pooling approach, individual genotyping can be used to assign these variants to the respective individuals. the major obstacle when sequencing dna pools is the sequencing error rate of the hts platform. the sequencing error rate is the major factor that limits the size of dna pools (i.e. the number of individuals in one pool) in which a single heterozygous allele remains detectable. for instance, in a pool of 50 individuals, and a sequencing error rate of 1, one cannot decide whether an observed minor allele frequency (maf) of 1 is due to a true variant in the pool or simply due to sequencing errors at that position. in the following section, we review related work in the domain of variant detection in hts data from dna pools. in section 2, we introduce our method vipr that makes use of data from multiple dna pools for achieving a higher sensitivity in detecting variants in large dna pools. furthermore, we introduce the data used for validating vipr. in section 3, we present the results of a power study and the performance of vipr and three reference methods on a validation dataset. section 4 and 5 discuss the results and conclude the article, respectively.we presented vipr, a tool for variant detection in dna pools that uses sequence information from multiple sequenced dna pools in parallel for improving the sensitivity of variant detection. in our evaluation, vipr performed with the highest specificity and precision at a sensitivity superior to a poisson-based model and comparable to two more methods. moreover, vipr was the fastest tool among the evaluated methods; just requiring 20 min for all four dna pools, opposed to 9.5 days required by crisp the slowest tool. the source code of vipr can be obtained via http://sourceforge.net/projects/htsvipr/.  
