viralpro: a tool to identify viral capsid and tail sequences motivation: not only sequence data continue to outpace annotation information, but also the problem is further exacerbated when organisms are underrepresented in the annotation databases. this is the case with non-human-pathogenic viruses which occur frequently in metagenomic projects. thus, there is a need for tools capable of detecting and classifying viral sequences. results: we describe viralpro a new effective tool for identifying capsid and tail protein sequences, which are the cornerstones toward viral sequence annotation and viral genome classification. availability and implementation: the data, software and corresponding web server are available from http://scratch.proteomics.ics.uci.edu as part of the scratch suite.as of april 2015, 77 of the protein sequences referenced in uniprotkb/trembl are predicted protein sequences. for the non-predicted sequences, only 2 have been confirmed through biological evidence while the remaining 21 is inferred by homology and this imbalance will continue to worsen in the foreseeable future. the situation is even worse for specific classes of important organisms, in particular viruses the majority of which lack proper annotation. for instance, it is typical to encounter only 10 of annotated sequences in marine viral samples , although these viruses play key roles in the ecosystem. it is for instance estimated that marine viruses kill up to 20 of the living biomass in the oceans daily, and this organism turnover may play a major role in the global carbon cycle . in short, new computational tools are needed to help identify and annotate unknown viral sequences. one criterion for virus classification is the genomic organization and sequence of the genes coding for structural proteinsi.e. the proteins that compose the virion, in particular capsid and tail proteins. capsid proteins in particular are present in all viral genomes and, as suggested in, the capsid genes may be used as an equivalent of 16s rrna for prokaryote identification in genomes and metagenomes. previously, a tool called ivireons has been introduced to detect structural proteins in phagesi.e. viruses that infect bacteria. the tool uses a single inputthe average amino acid composition of the query sequencewhich is fed into three classification neural networks: one for all structural proteins, one for tail proteins and one for capsid proteins. as stated by the authors, the tool performs well at detecting phage capsids, but its performance degrades when used to detect capsids in other viruses. the structural protein predictor has a reasonable sensitivity to all capsids, but its specificity is too low. to address these problems we develop viralpro  
