sequence analysis virome: an r package for the visualization and analysis of viral small rna sequence datasets rna interference (rnai) is known to play an important part in defence against viruses in a range of species. second-generation sequencing technologies allow us to assay these systems and the small rnas that play a key role with unprecedented depth. however, scientists need access to tools that can condense, analyse and display the resulting data. here, we present virome, a package for r that takes aligned sequence data and produces a range of essential plots and reports. availability and implementation: virome is released under the bsd license as a package for r available for both windows and linux http://virome.sf.net. additional information and a tutorial is available on the ark-genomics website: http://www.ark-genomics.org/ bioinformatics/rna interference (rnai) is mediated by small rnas, such as micornas (mirnas) of 2122 nt , small interfering rnas (sirnas) of 2122 nt and piwi-interacting rnas (pirnas) of 2430 nt , and these molecules regulate many biological processes. these pathways are also a major part of the antiviral response in both insects and plants, including a variety of important mosquito-borne diseases of humans and animals, such as west nile virus, dengue virus and chikungunya virus. in arthropods, these are characterized by the production of 2122 nt virus-derived small interfering rnas (virnas) or 2430 nt viral pirna-like molecules . second-generation sequencing allows scientists to assay these systems in unprecedented depth, and short reads capture both the 2122 nt sirnas and the 2430 nt pirnas. however, there is a need for scientists to be able to summarize, analyse and visualize the results of such experiments. here, we present virome, a package for r, which takes aligned sequencing data in the bam format and produces a variety of plots and reports that are essential to the analysis of data from viral sirna datasets. software packages to analyse viral sirna data exist. paparrazi is designed to reconstruct viral genomes from sirna data and produces some similar plots to virome. alternatively, visitor , an informatic pipeline for analysing short-read virna data, also produces several similar plots. however, both are implemented in perl and are limited to the linux/unix operating system; they include alignment as part of the analysis; therefore, using an alternative aligner would require programming skills; finally, the plots are generated in batch mode; hence, there is no interaction between the user and the software. as a package for r, virome improves on these software packages in several ways, including (i) virome allows interaction between the user and the software during report and graph generation, (ii) virome is available on any operating system that supports r and has been tested on microsoft windows and several linux distributions, (iii) virome separates visualization from alignment; therefore, the user is free to use any alignment software they wish and (iv) as an r package, virome integrates seamlessly with other r packages from the bioconductor project .  
