genome analysis virusseq: software to identify viruses and their integration sites using next-generation sequencing of human cancer tissue we developed a new algorithmic method, virusseq, for detecting known viruses and their integration sites in the human genome using next-generation sequencing data. we evaluated virusseq on whole-transcriptome sequencing (rna-seq) data of 256 human cancer samples from the cancer genome atlas. using these data, we showed that virusseq accurately detects the known viruses and their integration sites with high sensitivity and specificity. virusseq can also perform this function using whole-genome sequencing data of human tissue.about 12 of all human cancers are known to be caused by viruses ; thus, the detection of viruses in human cancer tissue has significant clinical implications in oncology. the advent of next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies using paired-end (pe) reads allows for the detection of viruses in human cancer tissue at unprecedented levels of efficiency and precision. several groups have developed computational tools for pathogen/virus discovery by exploiting the great amount of ngs data obtained from human tissue . these groups have implemented a computational subtraction analysis, which has also been used to discover a new polyomavirus associated with most cases of merkel cell carcinoma . although detecting viruses in human tissue is important in clinical oncology, investigating virus integration sites in host cell chromosomes is equally valuable, as insertional mutagenesis is one of the most critical steps in the pathogenesis of hepatitis b virus (hbv)mediated hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc;). ngs data have been used to map the hbv integration sites in hcc samples . however, no software tool is currently available for detecting viral integration sites by ngs data. we present virusseq, which starts with computational subtraction on ngs data and subsequently identifies viruses and their potential integration sites in the human genome with high specificity and sensitivity.  
