genome analysis vista region viewer (rviewer)—a computational system for prioritizing genomic intervals for biomedical studies current genome browsers are designed for linear browsing of individual genomic regions, but the high-throughput nature of experiments aiming to elucidate the genetic component of human disease makes it very important to develop user-friendly tools for comparing several genomic regions in parallel and prioritizing them based on their functional content. we introduce vista region viewer (rviewer), an interactive online tool that allows for efficient screening and prioritization of regions of the human genome for follow-up studies. the tool takes as input genetic variation data from different biomedical studies, determines a number of various functional parameters for both coding and non-coding sequences in each region and allows for sorting and searching the results of the analysis in multiple ways. availability and implementation: the tool is implemented as a web application and is freely accessible on the web atthe recent technological advances have allowed researchers to discover a wide range of variations on the scale of a complete human genome . the role of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) and genomic copy number variations (cnvs) in human disease is becoming increasingly evident , but it is often difficult to move from associations to the identification of causative variations. the number of genes in cnvs may be large, and non-coding regions may also contribute to the phenotype. on the other hand, the identification of functional snps requires predicting what impact a certain polymorphism might have on gene function. this is relatively straightforward with sequence variants leading to amino acid changes in protein coding regions, since these are more likely to disrupt gene function. however, a clear result of genome wide association studies (gwass) is that functional snps with association to disease are as likely to be found in the non-coding to whom correspondence should be addressed. portion of the genome . thus data obtained by several types of studies require an informatics approach to organize biological knowledge and prioritize genomic intervals for further analysis. the current, widely used genome browsers, such as ucsc browser . ensembl and gbrowse use individual intervals on a reference genome to display the tracks of functional elements such as genes or rna. investigating genomic intervals obtained through cnv or other experiments requires looking at each interval individually, while comparison of functional features in multiple intervals can bring new insights into genome studies. we describe an interactive online genome analysis tool vista rviewer, a new addition to the vista suite of tools for comparative genomics . rviewer is designed to accept datasets produced by clinical geneticists [either cnvs identified in copy number array comparative genomic hybridization (acgh) studies or genomic neighborhoods of snps of interest from. it calculates a set of important parameters for both coding and non-coding regions, and provides investigators with capabilities to compare the intervals and identify those that are likely to be significant in a particular study. this tool also links to mouse phenotype and gene expression data, thus allowing for comparisons and prioritization of significant genes and non-coding regions across a region. rviewer presents several functionalities not found in currently available tools. first, multiple genomic intervals are displayed simultaneously, allowing for quicker visual inspection. second, direct links to gene ontology, pathway and mouse phenotype data allow for more rapid prioritization of genes and regions of likely biological significance. and third, the annotation of highly conserved non-coding intervals brings an important component into the analysis, and is likely to be useful for whole genome sequencing studies. to our knowledge, software providing such functions is not currently available.  
