data and text mining visualization and phospholipid identification (valid): online integrated search engine capable of identifying and visualizing glycerophospholipids with given mass motivation: establishing phospholipid identities in large lipidomic data-sets is a labour-intensive process. where genomics and proteomics capitalize on sequence-based signatures, glycerophospholipids lack easily definable molecular fingerprints. carbon chain length, degree of unsaturation, linkage, and polar head group identity must be calculated from mass to charge (m/z) ratios under defined mass spectrom-etry (ms) conditions. given increasing ms sensitivity, many m/z values are not represented in existing prediction engines. to address this need, visualization and phospholipid identification is a web-based application that returns all theoretically possible phospholipids for any m/z value and ms condition. visualization algorithms produce multiple chemical structure files for each species. curated lipids detected by the canadian institutes of health research training program in neu-rodegenerative lipidomics are provided as high-resolution structures.the past 10 years have seen remarkable advances in high performance liquid chromatography, electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ms). coupled with careful biochemistry enabling the separation of membranes and, in some cases, membrane microdomains, adaptation of these technologies to the study of lipids is permitting comprehensive phospholipid profiling at the molecular level. the emerging field of lipidomics faces three main analytical challenges: (i) a paucity of bioinformatic tools for spectral analysis; (ii) the need for accurate lipid prediction algorithms before experimenters can proceed to empirical validation; (iii) a requirement for visual tools capable of displaying all theoretically possible lipid conformations in 2d and 3d. the most comprehensive tool kit has been developed by the lipid maps consortium representing 437 000 lipid species. the majority of their curated ms data has been generated using mouse leukemic monocyte-macrophage cells and, while extensive, does not yet represent all biological lipids. to our knowledge, none of the existing open-access web-based engines have capacity to predict identity of every m/z value detected in different ms spectra (supplementary). visualization and phospholipid identification (valid) is a comprehensive, simple to use, resource enabling rapid prediction of these tissue-specific lipid unknowns.valid is a web-based application linking a convenient search engine, a phospholipid database and multiple visualization features for identification and dissemination of large-scale lipidomic datasets. valid returns all theoretically possible species based on m/z and user-defined ms conditions. the user is cautioned that valid includes lipids (and isomeric bond configurations) that may not be biologically relevant. investigators are encouraged to mine these lists for species most relevant to their specific biological system for subsequent validation. to assist in decision-making, a best guess feature is available to focus on lipids predicted to be common based on the prevalence of the fatty acid chains in mammalian cells. every theoretical conformation (in cis configuration) for each species can be viewed in 2d and 3d. curated species can also be downloaded in multiple high-resolution representations for further visualization and model production.  
