sequence analysis visualization of protein sequence features using javascript and svg with pviz.js pviz.js is a visualization library for displaying protein sequence features in a web browser. by simply providing a sequence and the locations of its features, this lightweight, yet versatile, javascript library renders an interactive view of the protein features. interactive exploration of protein sequence features over the web is a common need in bioinformatics. although many web sites have developed viewers to display these features, their implementations are usually focused on data from a specific source or use case. some of these viewers can be adapted to fit other use cases but are not designed to be reusable. pviz makes it easy to display features as boxes aligned to a protein sequence with zooming functionality but also includes predefined renderings for secondary structure and post-translational modifications. the library is designed to further customize this view. we demonstrate such applications of pviz using two examples: a proteomic data visualization tool with an embedded viewer for displaying features on protein structure, and a tool to visualize the results of the variant_effect_predictor tool from ensembl. availability and implementation: pviz.js is a javascript library, available on github at https://github.com/genentech/pviz. this site includes examples and functional applications, installation instructions and usage documentation. a readme file, which explains how to use pviz with examples, is available as supplementary material a.visualization of protein features such as protein domains, posttranslational modifications or sequence polymorphisms is critical for interpretation and analysis of proteomic data. interactive visualization of multiple sources of protein features allows for integrated data analysis and hypothesis generation. a number of tools have previously been developed that enable visualization of protein features. some web sites include custom views that are tightly integrated with the web site [ex. nextprot , interpro , pfam , protein data bank (pdb) and jalview offer limited flexibility to customize the view or data sources, as data needs to be served by a das server or uploaded by the user. most others tools, like protter , are java tools that have dependency on a particular version of java, require servers for hosting the application and are not designed to be customized or incorporated into a third-party web site. tools for customizing the data sources, user interactions or styling of protein features are limited for developers of web-based visualizations. pviz.js (pviz) makes it easy to display protein sequence features on a web page. knowledge of html and basic javascript is all that is required to use the library. basic usage involves including the library within a script tag in html, and writing a few lines of code. given a sequence and a list of positioned features, the library displays the sequence and the features aligned to it. features are laid out, so as not to overlap each other, allowing zoom, interaction and customization. developing pviz as a core library allows it to be used as a component of other third-party libraries or web pages allowing for application specific customization.there has been a lack of tools for developing interactive protein feature visualizations that are easy to embed in a web page. pviz is an open-source library that addresses this problem and makes it easy to integrate within larger applications. by using javascript, it renders visualization on the client side, thereby avoiding the need for a separate server or a dependency on java. the library provides basic interactivity like zoom and mouse-over information out of the box with additional hooks for interactions for the developer to implement. multiple working examples of these, ranging from simple features to highly customized visualizations are available on github.  
