gene expression vizprimer: a web server for visualized pcr primer design based on known gene structure the visualization of gene structure plays an important role in polymerase chain reaction (pcr) primer design, especially for eukaryotic genes with a number of splice variants that users need to distinguish between via pcr. here, we describe a visualized web server for primer design named vizprimer. it utilizes the new information technology (it) tools, html5 to display gene structure and javascript to interact with the users. in vizprimer, the users can focus their attention on the gene structure and primer design strategy, without wasting time calculating the exon positions of splice variants or manually configuring complicated parameters. in addition, vizprimer is also suitable for the design of pcr primers for amplifying open reading frames and detecting single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps). availability: vizprimer is freely available at http://biocompute.bmi.ac .cn/czlab/vizprimer/. the web server supported browsers: chrome (5.0), firefox (3.0), safari (4.0) and opera (10.0).alternative splicing is widely found for eukaryotic genes, and it plays important roles in biological processes, such as increasing protein diversity. the variant-specific pcr technique requires a unique region of a transcript variant for the primer design to distinguish between the specific variant from other isoforms. existing programs, such as primer3 , perlprimer and primer premier , usually require users to enter or paste the dna template sequence and to specify the unique region manually. another program, primegens-v2, added a new algorithm, hspd , to design homolog-specific pcr primers without any prior information of the splice variants, but the algorithm requires much longer search times to generate homolog-specific primers. importantly, none of these programs supports the graphic display of the splice variants of eukaryotic genes. however, the visualizationthe design of pcr primers for eukaryotic genes in the identification of splice variants is a complex and tedious task. the currently available primer design programs do not have a function of graphically displaying the gene structure to help users locate the unique regions among the splice variants. using html5 and javascript for adding interactivity to a web page is a new paradigm of web computing nowadays. this combination is also encouraged by scientific applications due to the fast progress in the performance of javascript engines and html5-compatible browsers. there are already several scientific applications relying on the javascript and html5 canvas element and which are currently available, including anno-j and chemdoodle (http://web.chemdoodle.com/). therefore, by integrating these new technologies, the widely used primer design program, primer3, and the specificity-checking program, mfeprimer, vizprimer will be a beneficial visual pcr primer design tool. in the future, we will add the function of visualized multiple pcr primer design to vizprimer.  
