von bertalanffy 1.0: a cobra toolbox extension to thermodynamically constrain metabolic models motivation: in flux balance analysis of genome scale stoichiometric models of metabolism, the principal constraints are uptake or secretion rates, the steady state mass conservation assumption and reaction directionality. here, we introduce an algorithmic pipeline for quantitative assignment of reaction directionality in multi-compartmental genome scale models based on an application of the second law of thermodynamics to each reaction. given experimental or computationally estimated standard metabolite species gibbs energy and metabolite concentrations, the algorithms bounds reaction gibbs energy, which is transformed to in vivo ph, temperature, ionic strength and electrical potential. results: this cross-platform matlab extension to the constraint-based reconstruction and analysis (cobra) toolbox is computationally efficient, extensively documented and open source.ludwig von) sought a theory encompassing universal principles applying to systems in general (von) and emphasized the role of thermodynamics in understanding biological systems. in modeling the overall behavior of a genome scale stoichiometric model of metabolism, one of the key constraints is reaction directionality, which is required to follow the second law of thermodynamics. at constant temperature, pressure, ph and ionic strength, this requirement means that the stoichiometrically weighted sum of transformed gibbs energy of net substrates must exceeds that of net products . with experimentally derived or computationally estimated standard reactant gibbs energy of formation , if one assumes a typically narrow physiological range of reactant concentrations, one may constrain reaction directionality on a genome scale . the constraint-based reconsruction and analysis (cobra) toolbox is a growing suite of matlab functions for quantitative prediction of cellular metabolism. here, to whom correspondence should be addressed.we introduce an extension of the cobra toolbox for quantitative assignment of stoichiometric model reaction directionality via integration of experimentally derived and group contribution estimates of standard gibbs energies of formation and reactant concentrations. encoded in a single extensively documented pipeline is a thorough thermodynamic treatment of the necessary transformation of such data to in vivo temperature as well as compartment specific ph, ionic strength and electrical potential for multi-compartment models. the pipeline automatically generates extensive statistics and figures, focusing on quantitative reaction directions that disagree with reconstruction directions, manually assigned from literature . the cobra toolbox supports model exchange via the sbml and libsbml , thereby the extension reported herein may be applied to an arbitrary mass and charge-balanced metabolic reconstruction.this pipeline facilitates the quantitative thermodynamic assignment of reaction directionality using experimentally derived standard metabolite species gibbs energies of formation together with group contribution estimates . the code is appropriate for reaction thermodynamics at biochemically relevant ph, ionic strength and electrical potential ranges. the stoichiometric metabolic reconstruction can be multicompartmental, but should pass certain quality controls , such as elemental and charge balance of each reaction.  
