w4cseq: software and web application to analyze 4c-seq data circularized chromosome conformation capture followed by deep sequencing (4c-seq) is a powerful technique to identify genome-wide partners interacting with a pre-specified genomic locus. here, we present a computational and statistical approach to analyze 4c-seq data generated from both enzyme digestion and sonication fragmentation-based methods. we implemented a command line software tool and a web interface called w4cseq, which takes in the raw 4c sequencing data (fastq files) as input, performs automated statistical analysis and presents results in a user-friendly manner. besides providing users with the list of candidate interacting sites/regions, w4cseq generates figures showing genome-wide distribution of interacting regions, and sketches the enrichment of key features such as tsss, ttss, cpg sites and dna replication timing around 4c sites. availability and implementation: users can establish their own web server by downloading source codes at https://github.com/wglab/w4cseq. additionally, a demo web server is available at http://with the development of microscopy and genomic technologies, it has been shown that three-dimensional genome architecture within nucleus tremendously affects gene function and cell property . the underlying component of genome architecture is chromatin interactions that occur at the genomewide scale. the specific long-range genomic segments contacts are achieved by chromatin looping and usually mediated by transcription factors. most of the interactions are between enhancer and promoter, leading to well-regulated gene expression patterns . originated from 3c (chromosome conformation capture) , 4c-seq (van de) is specifically developed to assess the long-range dna-dna interactions where one of the dna segments is the locus of present a web application named w4cseq, and show the results generated with w4cseq by analyzing real biological datasets.we describe w4cseq, a web application for analyzing 4c-seq data in an automated manner, with rich visualization functionalities. w4cseq will be a valuable tool to unveil the functional genome organization.  
