waggawagga: comparative visualization of coiled-coil predictions and detection of stable single a-helices (sah domains) waggawagga is a web-based tool for the comparative visualization of coiled-coil predictions and the detection of stable single a-helices (sah domains). overview schemes show the predicted coiled-coil regions found in the query sequence and provide sliders, which can be used to select segments for detailed helical wheel and helical net views. a window-based score has been developed to predict sah domains. export to several bitmap and vector graphics formats is supported. availability and implementation: http://waggawagga.coiled coils are a-helical structural domains common to all domains of life and present in 212 of the proteins of a proteome . the classical coiled coils comprise dimerising long a-helices that wind around each other forming superhelices as found in structural proteins such as a-keratins, muscle myosins and tropomyosin (kmts). in the last years, this view has shifted to defining coiled-coil segments based on the presence of knobs-into-holes packing of side chains between a-helices resulting in many different architectures and topologies . the basis for a coiled coil is an amino acid heptad (abcdefg), in which the a and d positions are occupied by hydrophobic residues. coiled coils were among the first structural domains to be predicted by algorithms . in this method a query sequence is compared with a database of known coiled-coil sequences, which were the kmts available at that time. subsequently, a similarity score is computed and a probability to form a coiled-coil calculated. in principle, this is an implementation of the basic ideas already presented nine years before, that residues show an asymmetric distribution within the heptad repeats and that this statistical data can be used to predict coiled coils in other proteins . this position-specific scoring matrix (pssm) approach has been improved both on the database site and on the feature site trying to disfavor the assignment of high coiled-coil probabilities to hydrophilic sequences. another approach to predict coiled coils is based on the pairwise residue probabilities as implemented in paircoil and paircoil2 . here, pairwise frequencies of heptad residues are calculated from known coiled-coil sequences and the probability of a pair of amino acids in a given sequence for a certain combination in the heptad is scored. with this approach better predictions for long coiled-coil regions could be obtained compared to pssm predictions. improvement of the prediction of short coiled coils has been reached by using a hidden markov model as in marcoil , and, recently, markov random fields as used in multicoil2 . these general coiled-coil prediction approaches have been extended by software to predict different oligomerization states as scorer , procoil , and logicoil . however, all these approaches provide different results and fail to distinguish between coiled coils and stable single a-helices (sah domains). a special case of sah). waggawagga is designed to provide a direct schematic comparison of many coiled-coil prediction tools. users can inspect the predictions in classical helical wheel and helical net representations. visualization of the coiled-coil predictions in helical wheel schemes provides the possibility to fast and easily identify potential hydrophobic seams in a and d and oppositely charged residues in e and g positions, respectively. in contrast, sah domains have patterns of highly charged residues only occasionally interrupted by hydrophobic or hydrophilic amino acids. therefore, charged residues are highly enriched in the a and d positions. the hydrogen-bonded and charged interaction network in sah domains is best seen in helical net representations showing the potential interactions along the helix. waggawagga provides layouts that can easily be used in presentations and manuscripts.  
