wavelet-based image fusion in multi-view three-dimensional microscopy motivation: multi-view microscopy techniques such as light-sheet fluorescence microscopy (lsfm) are powerful tools for 3d + time studies of live embryos in developmental biology. the sample is imaged from several points of view, acquiring a set of 3d views that are then combined or fused in order to overcome their individual limitations. views fusion is still an open problem despite recent contributions in the field. results: we developed a wavelet-based multi-view fusion method that, due to wavelet decomposition properties, is able to combine the complementary directional information from all available views into a single volume. our method is demonstrated on lsfm acquisitions from live sea urchin and zebrafish embryos. the fusion results show improved overall contrast and details when compared with any of the acquired volumes. the proposed method does not need knowledge of the systems point spread function (psf) and performs better than other existing psf independent fusion methods. availability and implementation: the described method was implemented in matlab (the mathworks, inc., usa) and a graphic user interface was developed in java. the software, together with two sample datasets, is available atwe propose a novel methodology to fuse multi-view images, such as those obtained from light-sheet-based fluorescence microscopy, but not limited to that particular technique. almost any imaging technique in which several volumes of the same object are acquired, each of one providing incomplete and complementary information, could benefit from the proposed fusion scheme, including recent light-sheet techniques like dslm using structured illumination . our method is based on wavelet multi-scale and multi-orientation decomposition of the input volumes, and does not rely on a priori knowledge of the system psf. while psf-aware methods have more potential for reducing psf-related artifacts, the proposed method can be used on those situations in which such knowledge is not available as is the case with lsfm acquisition where the psf varies over the volume due to light sheet shape and to distorsion caused by the specimen itself. with respect to the other psf-independent method mentioned in this work, content-based weighted averaging, the new method  
