gene expression w-chipeaks: a comprehensive web application tool for processing chip-chip and chip-seq data chip-based technology is becoming the leading technology to globally profile thousands of transcription factors and elucidate the transcriptional regulation mechanisms in living cells. it has evolved rapidly in recent years, from hybridization with spotted or tiling microarray (chip-chip), to pair-end tag sequencing (chip-pet), to current massively parallel sequencing (chip-seq). although there are many tools available for identifying binding sites (peaks) for chip-chip and chip-seq, few of them are available as easy-accessible online web tools for processing both chip-chip and chip-seq data for the chip-based user community. as such, we have developed a comprehensive web application tool for processing chip-chip and chip-seq data. our web tool w-chipeaks employed a probe-based (or bin-based) enrichment threshold to define peaks and applied statistical methods to control false discovery rate for identified peaks. the web tool includes two different web interfaces: pelt for chip-chip, belt for chip-seq, where both were tested on previously published experimental data. the novel features of our tool include a comprehensive output for identified peaks with gff, bed, bedgraph and .wig formats, annotated genes to which these peaks are related, a graphical interpretation and visualization of the results via a user-friendly web interface.chip-based technology is becoming the leading technology to globally profile thousands of transcription factors and elucidate the transcriptional regulation mechanisms in living cells . it has evolved rapidly in recent years, from hybridization with spotted or tiling microarray (chip-chip) , to pair-end tag sequencing (chip-pet) , to current massively parallel sequencing (chip-seq) . despite the fact that microarray-based chromatin immuneprecipitation (chip) method, chip-chip, is gradually being replaced by the emerging sequencing-based method such as chip seq, both methods are currently being used in many laboratories as to whom correspondence should be addressed. a major tool to survey transcription factor binding patterns, study various histone modifications in an unbiased manner. currently available tools for the chip-chip data are exemplified and comprehensively compared in the spike-in data . chip-seq technology and related computational tools are also reviewed in park (2009). cisgenome provided an integrated analyzing software system for both technologies . while we appreciate the accuracy and efficiency of these tools, few of them are available as easy-accessible online web tools for processing both chip-chip and chip-seq data for the chip-based user community. as such, we have developed a comprehensive web application tool for processing chip-chip and chip-seq data. our web tool w-chipeaks employed a probe-based (or bin-based) enrichment threshold to define peaks and applied statistical methods to control false discovery rate for identified peaks. the web tool includes two different web interfaces: probebased enrichment threshold level (pelt) for chip-chip and belt (bin-based enrichment threshold level) for chip-seq, where both were tested on previously published experimental data.  
