databases and ontologies webprot eg e: a collaborative web-based platform for editing biomedical ontologies webprot eg e is an open-source web application for editing owl 2 ontologies. it contains several features to aid collaboration, including support for the discussion of issues, change notification and revision-based change tracking. webprot eg e also features a simple user interface, which is geared towards editing the kinds of class descriptions and annotations that are prevalent throughout bio-medical ontologies. moreover, it is possible to configure the user interface using views that are optimized for editing open biomedical ontology (obo) class descriptions and metadata. some of these views are shown in the supplementary material and can be seen in webprot eg e itself by configuring the project as an obo project. availability and implementation: webprot eg e is freely available for use on the web at http://webprotege.stanford.edu. it is implemented in java and javascript using the owl api and the google web toolkit. all major browsers are supported. for users who do not wish to host their ontologies on the stanford servers, webprot eg e is available as a web app that can be run locally using a servlet container such as tomcat. binaries, source code and documentation are available under an open-source license atontologies are important artefacts in bioinformatics and life sciences. many biomedical ontologies, such as the ones made available in the bioportal , the open biomedical ontology (obo) library and the ontobee platform are published and exchanged as owl 2 ontology documents. furthermore, biomedical ontologies are typically developed collaboratively by groups of experts who may receive incremental input from the end-user community. however, although there have been some domain-specific wiki-based tools for the collaborative editing of biomedical knowledge , web-based tool support for community-based owl ontology development is severely lacking. in this article, we present webprot eg ea web-based tool for the collaborative development of owl 2 ontologies. although the latest version of this tool supports the complete owl 2 language , the default configuration of its customizable user interface (ui) is primarily geared towards lightweight ontology editing [it is possible to configure the user interface with owl 2-specific views. please see the webprot eg e user guide for more details (http://tinyurl.com/ webprotege-editing-owl)]. in particular, webprot eg e provides out-of-the-box views that support a fragment of the language that is useful for capturing biomedical knowledge and is traditionally catered for by tools such as oboedit . moreover, webprot eg e supplies user interface views that are optimized for editing the rich obo-term metadata and definitions that are commonly associated with biomedical ontologies. we believe that these obo-tailored ui views along with collaborative development functionality make webprot eg e an attractive tool for the community-based development of biomedical ontologies.  
