webpsn: a web server for high-throughput investigation of structural communication in biomacromolecules we developed a mixed protein structure network (psn) and elastic network model-normal mode analysis (enm-nma)-based strategy (i.e. psn-enm) to investigate structural communication in biomacromolecules. the approach starts from a protein structure graph and searches for all shortest communication pathways between user-specified residues. the graph is computed on a single preferably high-resolution structure. information on systems dynamics is supplied by enm-nma. the psnenm methodology is made of multiple steps both in the setup and analysis stages, which may discourage inexperienced users. to facilitate its usage, we implemented webpsn, a freely available web server that allows the user to easily setup the calculation, perform post-processing analyses and both visualize and download numerical and 3d representations of the output. speed and accuracy make this server suitable to investigate structural communication, including alloster-ism, in large sets of bio-macromolecular systems. availability and implementation: the webpsn server is freely available at http://webpsn.hpc. unimore.it.concepts and methods borrowed from graph theory are being increasingly used to study several aspects of structural biology, including structural communication that comprises allosterism. the graph-based approach defined as protein structure network (psn) has been implemented in the freely available wordom software . it computes network features (e.g. nodes, hubs, links, etc.) and shortest communication pathways on ensembles of structures generally derived from molecular dynamics (md) simulations. with this approach, information on systems dynamics participates both in building the protein structure graph (psg) and in searching for the shortest communication pathways. in a recent development of the method intended for highthroughput investigations, the psg is computed on a single highresolution structure rather than an md trajectory and information on systems dynamics (i.e. cross-correlation of atomic motions) is supplied by elastic network model-normal mode analysis (enmnma) (see supplementary methods for detailed information). the approach, hereafter indicated as psnenm, is powerful and fast but complex in the setup and analysis steps. to foster wide usage, the method was therefore implemented in a web server (webpsn) that provides the user with a friendly graphical interface for setting the input and visualizing the output, while hiding all computation and data management steps.  
