genetics and population analysis asafe: ancestry-specific allele frequency estimation in a genome-wide association study (gwas) of an admixed population, such as hispanic americans, ancestry-specific allele frequencies can inform the design of a replication gwas. we derive an em algorithm to estimate ancestry-specific allele frequencies for a bi-allelic marker given genotypes and local ancestries on a 3-way admixed population, when the phase of each admixed individuals genotype relative to the pair of local ancestries is unknown. we call our algorithm ancestry specific allele frequency estimation (asafe). we demonstrate that asafe has low error on simulated data.genome-wide association studies (gwass) in humans have focused on populations of european origin. hispanic americans however, have descended from ancestral africans, europeans and native americans. hispanics exemplify an admixed population, one that has descended from multiple ancestral populations. after discovering that an allele is significantly associated with a trait in a gwas of admixed individuals, it would be useful to know the alleles ancestry-specific frequencies. for a sample of hispanic individuals, an ancestry-specific allele frequency would be the frequency of the allele amongst the chromosomes in the sample that have a particular ancestral origin (either african, european, or native american) at the marker. such frequencies provide information about which populations the discovered association might also be present in, thereby informing the choice of study population for replication. to obtain estimates of ancestry-specific allele frequencies, one might find the allele frequency in each reference panel. however, this approach is impossible for a marker that is present in the admixed sample, but absent from a reference panel. this situation arises when the reference panels are genotyped on a snp array and when the admixed individuals have sequence data. even for a marker that is typed in the reference panels, this approach suffers when the reference panels do not exactly match the ancestral populations. for example, none of the populations in the 1000 genomes project (the 1000 genomes project consortium, 2015) are nonadmixed native american. the admixture and structure programs can use admixed genotypes to estimate ancestry-specific allele frequencies, but require genotypes from reference individuals of known ancestry in order to identify the frequencies with particular ancestries. furthermore, admixture assumes linkage equilibrium amongst markers, and structures linkage model assumes linkage equilibrium amongst markers descended from the same ancestral population. in contrast, we utilize estimates of local ancestry, such as those from the rfmix program . estimates of local ancestry from such programs utilize haplotype frequencies, and thus make use of linkage disequilibrium. at markers genotyped in all the reference panels, one can directly obtain ancestry specific allele frequencies from the phased genotypes and corresponding phased local ancestry estimates. however, atmarkers not genotyped in a reference panel, the phasing of the local ancestries relative to the genotypes is unknown and further methodology is needed to obtain ancestry specific allele frequency estimates. here, we derive an em algorithm (asafe) to estimate ancestryspecific allele frequencies at a bi-allelic marker in a three-way admixed diploid population, given admixed local ancestries and genotypes at the marker, with each admixed individuals genotype allele order relative to ancestry order unknown. the major advantage of asafe over alternative ancestry-specific allele frequency estimation approaches is that asafe is applicable to markers in the admixed sample that are absent from a reference panel. furthermore, asafe takes advantage of linkage-disequilibrium based information by using local ancestry calls.describe a somewhat similar algorithm to asafe, but only for two-way admixture, and in the slightly different setting of estimating the ancestral allele frequency in several closely related ancestral populations (such as the native american ancestors of columbians, puerto ricans and mexicans). they do not provide a publicly available implementation of their method. we provide a publicly available implementation of our algorithm, and a description of its performance on simulated hispanic data. our algorithm applies to any diploid admixed population descended from three ancestral populations, so our method is not restricted to human populations.as more gwass are performed in admixed populations such as hispanics, it is becoming increasingly important to estimate ancestry-specific allele frequencies for bi-allelic markers. we derived an em algorithm to estimate ancestry-specific allele frequencies given data on a 3-way admixed population and provide a publicly available implementation of the algorithm.  
