sequence analysis wessim: a whole-exome sequencing simulator based on in silico exome capture we propose a targeted re-sequencing simulator wessim that generates synthetic exome sequencing reads from a given sample genome. wessim emulates conventional exome capture technologies , including agilents sureselect and nimblegens seqcap, to generate dna fragments from genomic target regions. the target regions can be either specified by genomic coordinates or inferred from in silico probe hybridization. coupled with existing next-generation sequencing simulators, wessim generates a realistic artificial exome sequencing data, which is essential for developing and evaluating exome-targeted variant callers. availability: source code and the packaged version of wessim with manuals are available atgeneration of simulated next-generation sequencing (ngs) reads serves the essential gold standard in developing and evaluating variant detection algorithms. many tools, including wgsim , have been developed for artificial ngs read generation. recent studies, such as art , pirs and gemsim , have accomplished more realistic simulation by reproducing known biases coming from sequence context and empirical platform-dependent errors. although the current simulators mainly focus on realistic ngs read generation, we address another important problem on specifying target regions. whole-exome sequencing (wes) is currently being regarded as a superior option for disease variant finding studies; it is cost-effective, much smaller in size and easier to interpret results. as typical statistics of whole-exome sequencing data (e.g. coverage, read distribution and bias) are distinct from that of whole-genome sequencing data, variant detection tools are usually required to calibrate their algorithms for practical use of exome data . this naturally demands more realistic simulation of exome sequencing to promote accuracy of variant calling tools by providing a statistical base for performance evaluation. wessim emulates the exome capture procedure that forms the basis of major commercial solutions (such as agilents sureselect and roche/nimblegens seqcap) by implementing(i) dna shearing to generate random fragments, (ii) probe capture by hybridization and (iii) single-or paired-end sequencing of the selected fragments. other important features including fragment length and gc-content were rigorously considered to reproduce more accurate coverage biases. we compared our synthetic data with real wes data to confirm the similarity of major statistics. the exome capture process is highly optimized so that the overall running time is only bounded by the ngs read generation step.  
