wgbssuite: simulating whole-genome bisulphite sequencing data and benchmarking differential dna methylation analysis tools motivation: as the number of studies looking at differences between dna methylation increases, there is a growing demand to develop and benchmark statistical methods to analyse these data. to date no objective approach for the comparison of these methods has been developed and as such it remains difficult to assess which analysis tool is most appropriate for a given experiment. as a result, there is an unmet need for a dna methylation data simulator that can accurately reproduce a wide range of experimental setups, and can be routinely used to compare the performance of different statistical models. results: we have developed wgbssuite, a flexible stochastic simulation tool that generates single base resolution dna methylation data genome-wide. several simulator parameters can be derived directly from real datasets provided by the user in order to mimic real case scenarios. thus, it is possible to choose the most appropriate statistical analysis tool for a given simulated design. to show the usefulness of our simulator, we also report a benchmark of commonly used methods for differential methylation analysis. availability and implementation: wgbs code and documentation are available under gnu licence atthe methylation of dna is an important epigenetic modifier that is known to play a role in both development and disease. a growing number of studies are using whole-genome bisulphite sequencing (wgbs) to study the differences in methylation between samples and conditions . the number of statistical methods that have been developed to detect these differences from the data has grown considerably in recent years. however, it is difficult to judge the differences between these methods as they are not reliably benchmarked against each other. here, we present both a novel simulator of wgbs data and a benchmark of existing differential methylation techniques. existing methods for simulating methylation data have been developed but these lack the complexity of real data or have been developed with reduced representation bisulphite sequencing in mind . by using two dependent hidden markov models (hmm)wgbssuite assists in the study of dna methylation by supplying simulated dna methylation datasets that are highly parameterisable based on real data provided by the user. the software has three sections which first allow a user to analyse their own experimental data (in order to find suitable parameters for the simulator) and then produce (and save) a simulated dataset of any size. finally, the simulated datasets can be used to benchmark existing methods for differential methylation analysis, allowing the user to identify a suitable approach for their dataset. we acknowledge that this simulatordoes not deal with sample mixtures, an experimental setup that is common when methylation profiles are generated from complex heterogenous tissues (i.e. where the underlying signal is likely to originate from multiple cell-types). future extensions will include a mixture distribution to model the probability of success of the nonhomogenous discrete-state hmm emission distribution. this will allow the generation of single-base resolution dna methylation data from complex heterogeneous tissues experiments such as those that arise from whole blood samples. although this extra level of random variation can be easily included in our code, developing a simple estimator procedure for the parameters of the mixture distribution is not straightforward and it will be addressed in a future extension of wgbssuite. beyond providing an efficient tool to simulate wgbs datasets, our wgbssuite will enable fast and efficient methods benchmarking, therefore facilitating the choice of the optimal analysis tool for differential methylation.  
