wge: a crispr database for genome engineering the rapid development of crispr-cas9 mediated genome editing techniques has given rise to a number of online and stand-alone tools to find and score crispr sites for whole genomes. here we describe the wellcome trust sanger institute genome editing database (wge), which uses novel methods to compute, visualize and select optimal crispr sites in a genome browser environment. the wge database currently stores single and paired crispr sites and pre-calculated off-target information for crisprs located in the mouse and human exomes. scoring and display of off-target sites is simple, and intuitive, and filters can be applied to identify high-quality crispr sites rapidly. wge also provides a tool for the design and display of gene targeting vectors in the same genome browser, along with gene models, protein translation and variation tracks. wge is open, extensible and can be set up to compute and present crispr sites for any genome. availability and implementation: the wge database is freely available at www.sanger.ac.uk/htgt/crispr-cas technology is a powerful tool for genome editing that can be applied to virtually any species, from viruses to plants to mammals . the crispr-cas system, exemplified by cas9 from streptococcus pyogenes, is an rna-guided endonuclease that can be targeted to specific sequences by watson-crick base pairing between a guide rna (grna) molecule and a 20 bp target sequence adjacent to an obligate ngg protospacer adjacent motif (pam). by replacing the first 20 bp of the grna with the desired target sequence cas9 can be re-programmed to induce a double-stranded break at any n (20) ngg site in the genome. the cas9 endonuclease will tolerate some mismatches in the alignment between the grna and target dna sequence and offtarget damage can occur at other sites in the genome with high sequence similarity to the crispr site . therefore, when designing grnas for genome editing, it is important to consider potential off-target sites as well as the position of the grna site within a gene. many web-delivered software solutions are available for choosing highly specific crispr sites in vertebrate genomes (supplementary). some require the input of target or grna sequences (; http://www. benchling.com). others provide a basic genome browser (http://hori zon.deskgen.com;). one can be run locally , and a few have more involved scoring schemes, both for grnas and off-targets (e.g.; http:// www.benchling.com). some use a heuristic short-read aligner such as bowtie to compute grna specificity . here we describe wge (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/htgt/wge). in contrast to existing websites, wge guides the genome editing  
