what handedness and angles between helices has the studied three-helical protein domain? we have created a new server foldhandedness. using this server it is possible: (i) to define the regions of helices from two issues (from the pdb file and using the last version of the dssp program), (ii) to determine the handedness for any chosen three helices and (iii) to calculate the angle and sign between the chosen pairs of the helices for large proteins and complexes of proteins with dna or rna.recently, the role of a mirror image conformation as a subtle effect in protein folding has been considered . the understanding of chirality both in protein structures and amyloid suprastructures is an important issue in molecular biology now . chiral amino acids form chiral helices that selfassemble into structural domains. the left-handed beta helix was a dogma during 20 years . it should be noted that the left-handed beta helix has a more regular structure than the right-handed helix, and the first may be implicated in the formation of amyloid aggregates, for example, the prion protein . we are the first who have demonstrated that folding optimization depends not only on the secondary structure but also on the handedness of a-helices. left-handed three-helical domains have the fastest folding rates in comparison with right-handed threehelical domains among eight proteins with known experimental folding rates . when studying the mechanical properties of these eight domains, under stretching at a constant speed and at a constant force on the atomic level, it has been demonstrated using molecular dynamics simulations that the right-handed three-helix domains are more resistant mechanically than the lefthanded domains . we explained this fact by that the right-handed domains have a larger number of contacts per residue than the left-handed domains. moreover, from our analysis we have revealed that bacterial three-helix proteins have some advantages in packing over eukaryotic right-handed three-helix proteins, which should result in faster folding . identification of protein handedness raises the question how to determine this value. for some domains this value is not evident. here, we present a server able to calculate this value, the packing angle and the sign between all helices for any large protein consisting of alpha helices. for prediction of handedness the user should choose a 3d structure using a standard 4-symbol pdb code or use a home pdb file from md simulations and choose three helices from the same chain.  
