systems biology when the web meets the cell: using personalized pagerank for analyzing protein interaction networks motivation: enormous and constantly increasing quantity of biological information is represented in metabolic and in protein interaction network databases. most of these data are freely accessible through large public depositories. the robust analysis of these resources needs novel technologies, being developed today. results: here we demonstrate a technique, originating from the pagerank computation for the world wide web, for analyzing large interaction networks. the method is fast, scalable and robust, and its capabilities are demonstrated on metabolic network data of the tuberculosis bacterium and the proteomics analysis of the blood of melanoma patients. availability: the perl script for computing the personalized pagerank in protein networks is available for non-profit research applications (together with sample input files) at the address:the problem of finding important nodes in a large network emerged in several fields, but the best solutions to date were appeared in conjunction of the world wide web graph. here the nodes are the web pages, and directed edges are the hyperlinks between the web pages. the web search engine techniques gave motivations to this question, since the important web pages, related to a web search, need to be returned first to the users of the web search service. the most natural measure of importance of a vertex, the degree (i.e. the number of connected edges, in the case of an undirected graph) or the in-degree (i.e. the number of incoming edges, in the case of directed graphs) is historically well established, and corresponds, e.g. in scientometry, to the number of citations to a published article. however, in the case of the web graph, the degree proved to be easy to manipulate, by simply inserting artificially a large number of referring edges into the graph. kleinbergs hits algorithm assigns quality scores to the nodes, and the quality of the referring nodes is inherited by the referred nodes, so low-quality manipulations can be filtered out. it turned out, however, that the hits algorithm is also prone to more sophisticated manipulations, and it is not robust enough .  
