databases and ontologies a sample storage management system for biobanks establishment of large-scale biobanks of human specimens is essential to conduct molecular pathological or epidemiological studies. this requires automation of procedures for specimen cataloguing and tracking through complex analytical processes. the international agency for research on cancer (iarc) develops a large portfolio of studies broadly aimed at cancer prevention and including cohort, casecontrol and case-only studies in various parts of the world. this diversity of study designs, structure, annotations and specimen collections is extremely difficult to accommodate into a single sample management system (sms). current commercial or academic sms are often restricted to a few sample types and tailored to a limited number of analytic workflows [voegele et al. (2007) a laboratory information management system (lims) for a high throughput genetic platform aimed at candidate gene mutation screening. bioinformatics, 23, 25042506]. thus, we developed a system based on a three-tier architecture and relying on an oracle database and an oracle forms web application. data are imported through forms or csv files, and information retrieval is enabled via multi-criteria queries that can generate different types of reports including tables, excel files, trees, pictures and graphs. the system is easy to install, flexible, expandable and implemented with a high degree of data security and confidentiality. both the database and the interface have been modeled to be compatible with and adaptable to almost all types of biobanks.the first requirement of single sample management system (sms) is to harness the inherent variability and heterogeneity in the types of storage units and in the storage levels. at the inception of the project, a review of collections and facilities was conducted, providing a basis for defining extensive specifications incorporating the whole range of iarc sample diversity. the storage infrastructure is made up of three main categories of containers: liquid nitrogen tanks, freezers and fridges and dedicated humidity-controlled rooms, at various temperatures and each including several subtypes of containers. a comprehensive and strict hierarchy from single tube up to room defines the precise position of each sample location within the system. the exact capacity of each storage level is determined in order to monitor unused storage capacity. these hierarchies are relatively stable but the system has the capacity to evolve by incorporating new hierarchical levels, new storage devices within each level as well as movements and transfer of samples within each hierarchical level (see supplementary material: sd-1). the second requirement for sms is to keep track of all samples or containers movements and status changes, including the management of dynamic processes from specimen retrieval to extraction and aliquoting of by-products and transfer to in-house analytical platforms as well as shipment to other research centers. the third requirement for sms is to allow for simple and rapid import of existing information from various databases, documents and sheets and to accommodate the full range of information available for each particular specimen collection. in this way, sms does not replace the study-specific databases developed by clinicians and epidemiologists but interfaces with them to provide a dynamic sample and data management system. finally, the sms needs to comply with levels of data safety and confidentiality compatible with the high ethical standards of research conducted on human biospecimens. in this article, we describe how our sms addresses all these requirements, and how it operates to handle large datasets through a simple and user-friendly interface.we have developed a freely available and platform-independent sample management system (sms) tailored to handle a wide variety of biospecimens and of storage conditions within an integrated  
