gene expression whole-genome rvista: a tool to determine enrichment of transcription factor binding sites in gene promoters from transcriptomic data we have developed a web-based query tool, whole-genome rvista (wgrv), that determines enrichment of transcription factors (tfs) and associated target genes in sets of co-regulated genes. wgrv enables users to query databases containing pre-computed genome coordinates of evolutionarily conserved transcription factor binding sites in the proximal promoters (from 100 bp to 5 kb upstream) of human, mouse and drosophila genomes. tf binding sites are based on position-weight matrices from the transfac professional database. for a given set of co-regulated genes, wgrv returns statistically enriched and evolutionarily conserved binding sites, mapped by the regulatory vista (rvista) algorithm. users can then retrieve a list of genes from the query set containing the enriched tf binding sites and their location in the query set promoters. results are exported in a bed format for rapid visualization in the ucsc genome browser. flat files of mapped conserved sites and their genomic coordinates are also available for analysis with stand-alone software.methods for transcriptome analysis (e.g. microarray and rna sequencing) have revolutionized our ability to identify global changes in mrnas during cellular remodeling. a continuing challenge for such analyses is identifying the key signaling events that mediate the observed gene expression changes. transcription of mrna is a dynamic process controlled by many factors, including chromatin states, cofactors, rna polymerase and the dynamic regulation of transcription factors (tfs). the gene ontology consortium has classified 1030 human tf genes that encode for proteins with sequence-specific dna-binding activity. tfs, by their very nature, are key regulators of the observed transcriptional changes during cellular remodeling. tfs can be regulated post-transcriptionally (e.g. by phosphosphorylation and/or changes in intracellular location), and thus may not be altered in expression alongside their target genes. the enrichment of tf binding sites (tfbs) near target genes, however, can be used as a surrogate for predicting altered tf activity. thus, we developed whole-genome rvista (wgrv), a web-based tool for finding overrepresented evolutionarily conserved tfbs within the proximal promoter regions of a set of differentially expressed genes. searching proximal promoters for tfbs often results in many false positives. this is because the positional weight matrices that are used to computationally predict tfbs are often short in length and degenerate at specific positions. the use of phylogenetic footprinting to filter tfbs that are conserved in gene promoters between two relatively closely related species has been shown to significantly reduce false positive sites . chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-content sequencing (chip-seq) has emerged as the method of choice for determining bona fide tfbs . chip-seq studies, however, require a priori knowledge of the tf for which binding sites are to be determined. moreover, such studies require a validated antibody and can be costly and time-consuming. wgrv queries are fast compared with chip-seq experiments, and the queries can be carried out simultaneously for all tfbs stored in the database at no cost. we believe wgrv is an excellent method to computationally identify potentially relevant tfs that drive tissue and cellular remodeling, which can then be followed up with chip-seq for further validation.  
