genome analysis whopgenome: high-speed access to whole-genome variation and sequence data in r the statistical programming language r has become a de facto standard for the analysis of many types of biological data, and is well suited for the rapid development of new algorithms. however, variant call data from population-scale resequencing projects are typically too large to be read and processed efficiently with rs built-in i/o capabilities. whopgenome can efficiently read whole-genome variation data stored in the widely used variant call format (vcf) file format into several r data types. vcf files can be accessed either on local hard drives or on remote servers. whopgenome can associate variants with annotations such as those available from the ucsc genome browser, and can accelerate the reading process by filtering loci according to user-defined criteria. whopgenome can also read other tabix-indexed files and create indices to allow fast selective access to fasta-formatted sequence files. availability and implementation: the whopgenome r package is available on cran at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ whopgenome/. a bioconductor package has been submitted. contact:population-scale whole-genome sequencing projects produce information on single-nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), indels and structural variations across thousands of individuals. these projects commonly use the variant call format (vcf) (1000 genomes project analysis) text files for data storage. the resulting files often contain millions of variant sites and may fill tens of gigabytes. the environment for statistical computing r (r core) has established itself as a de facto standard for general statistics and for the analysis of different types of sequencing data, and has efficient functions to process large vectorized data. however, routinely reading gigabyte-sized vcf files into r is not realistic with rs built-in i/o capabilities. vcf files are typically compressed and then indexed with tabix . tabix produces an index file for appropriately formatted data files; the index can be used to quickly locate, decompress and extract selected portions of the data. although several r packages are capable of reading vcf files), seqminer (http:// cran.r-project.org/web/packages/seqminer/), rplinkseq (https:// atgu.mgh.harvard.edu/plinkseq/)], these lack the desirable speed, ease of use or completeness of support for tabix files. further, these implementations post-process the text returned by tabix in r, which incurs a sizeable overhead especially for repeated and large-scale processing. here, we present whopgenome, an r package for fast, straightforward and flexible processing of genomic variation data in vcf format. whopgenome is also capable of compressing files with bgzf and indexing any suitably formatted file with tabix, allowing efficient selective access. indexing is possible on any data organized and sorted into entries uniquely identifiable by index pairs: a group name (e.g. a chromosome) and a number (e.g. a chromosomal position). with whopgenomes generic tabix interface, users can process, for example, gff or bed files to access them efficiently from within r. the same selective access functionality exists also for fasta files through whopgenomes interface to faidx (the indexing solution included in samtools) (1000 genome project data processing). using this interface to preprocess fasta files facilitates quick selective retrieval of dna or amino acid sequence regions. whopgenome can thus efficiently integrate information from associated sequence, genome annotation and population-scale variation files for a given chromosomal region for joint processing.  
