gene expression wigwams: identifying gene modules co-regulated across multiple biological conditions motivation: identification of modules of co-regulated genes is a crucial first step towards dissecting the regulatory circuitry underlying biological processes. co-regulated genes are likely to reveal themselves by showing tight co-expression, e.g. high correlation of expression profiles across multiple time series datasets. however, numbers of up-or downregulated genes are often large, making it difficult to discriminate between dependent co-expression resulting from co-regulation and independent co-expression. furthermore, modules of co-regulated genes may only show tight co-expression across a subset of the time series, i.e. show condition-dependent regulation. results: wigwams is a simple and efficient method to identify gene modules showing evidence for co-regulation in multiple time series of gene expression data. wigwams analyzes similarities of gene expression patterns within each time series (condition) and directly tests the dependence or independence of these across different conditions. the expression pattern of each gene in each subset of conditions is tested statistically as a potential signature of a condition-dependent regulatory mechanism regulating multiple genes. wigwams does not require particular time points and can process datasets that are on different time scales. differential expression relative to control conditions can be taken into account. the output is succinct and non-redundant, enabling gene network reconstruction to be focused on those gene modules and combinations of conditions that show evidence for shared regulatory mechanisms. wigwams was run using six arabidopsis time series expression datasets, producing a set of biologically significant modules spanning different combinations of conditions. availability and implementation: a matlab implementation of wigwams, complete with graphical user interfaces and documentation , is available at:elucidating the regulatory mechanisms mediating biological processes is a key challenge in many eukaryotic organisms. much regulation occurs at the transcriptional level; however, despite our ability to profile genome-wide gene expression and the availability of bioinformatics tools to analyze sequence information, our understanding of gene regulatory networks underlying biological processes is still relatively basic. regulatory interactions are often common, meaning that the ability to understand the regulation of a response requires a mathematical or computational network model. underlying these network models is the knowledge of regulatory mechanisms. techniques to identify regulatory mechanisms, such as genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing and matrixbased yeast one-hybrid (y1h) , have improved, but these techniques are not high-throughput. therefore, it is crucial to be able to make high-quality predictions of regulatory mechanisms using existing data; these predictions can then be tested in focused experimental and modelling efforts. time series experiments are often used to examine the dynamics of gene expression , and with the decreasing cost of profiling techniques, more datasets covering multiple time series showing how an organism responds to different conditions are becoming available. such data offer the opportunity to study shared regulatory mechanisms that are used to regulate genes under more than one condition. such shared regulatory mechanisms may drive gene expression in the same way in each time series, or they may be modified to drive expression on a different time scale or to change the direction of regulation (activation versus repression). to facilitate gene network reconstruction, it is important to develop tools that can map out which gene modules are coregulated in what combinations of conditions. it is a long-standing assumption that co-expression may reflect co-regulation , and using data from multiple conditions can improve the correlation between the two . however, in noisy biological systems, co-regulated genes may still show some differences in their expression, and there may be more than one regulatory mechanism that can drive genes with a particular expression pattern. following a perturbation, such as infection or treatment with a chemical stimulus, many genes change in expression and even with high-resolution time series, large numbers of genes can to whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. z present address: nihr biomedical research centre for mental health, south london and maudsley nhs foundation trust, london se5 8af, uk. present address: department of infectious disease epidemiology, imperial college, london w2 1pg, uk. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.show a similar expression profile . as a result, it can be challenging to distinguish between dependent co-expression indicative of coregulation and independent co-expression of genes that achieve a similar expression pattern in different ways. it is important to note that both dependent and independent co-expression may pass statistical tests that are geared towards testing the similarity of expression patterns and/or the tightness of a gene cluster relative to other clusters. therefore, tools that solely aim to detect clusters of similarly expressed genes may not discriminate informative dependent co-expression from uninformative independent co-expression. multiple high-resolution time series of gene expression for a single organism under different conditions provide a powerful approach for identifying dependent co-expression of genes likely to be controlled by a common upstream regulator. however, while an increasing number of time series would help to improve the specificity of co-expression (i.e. co-expression across more time series is more likely to be dependent coexpression), it is unlikely that a single group of genes will be co-expressed across all the datasets. for example, it is known that there is significant cross-talk between signalling networks for different plant hormones in arabidopsis, but not all of the components are playing a role in the response to every hormone . furthermore, some of the detected co-expression across multiple datasets may still be independent co-expression due to the abundance of particular expression profiles rather than due to a shared regulatory mechanism. hence, there is a need for an algorithm that can identify modules of genes dependently co-expressed across subsets of time series data, combining the increased specificity of multiple time series datasets with biological reality. a myriad of clustering algorithms have been developed to assign genes into clusters based on the similarity of their expression profiles across a single time series or multiple static (i.e. single or few time points) datasets . a few algorithms have also been developed to specifically cluster genes using two or more time series datasets, such as bhc and splinecluster . however, these algorithms partition genes into clusters and do not enable identification of genes co-expressed across subsets of the data. a few methods are capable of identifying co-expression across subsets of the data, but these come with their own drawbacks. tensor methods require the timescale of the experiments to be uniform throughout. edisa does not require the same timescale across all of the datasets, but it is non-deterministic. none of these methods is able to incorporate differential expression relative to control time series into the analysis, and crucially, none statistically evaluates dependent co-expression versus independent co-expression. enigma can account for genes differential expression, but the method was designed for a series of static expression data. ccc-biclustering tests biclusters for statistical significance against a null hypothesis of independent expression profile evolution, but the method is only capable of analyzing a single time course experiment. wigwams (wigwams identifies genes working across multiple situations) is a simple, deterministic and efficient method capable of identifying groups of dependently co-expressed genes, termed gene modules, spanning subsets of the available time series datasets. wigwams is a comprehensive method; all potential dataset combinations are scanned for gene modules by rigorously testing putative gene modules around each gene differentially expressed in a dataset. wigwams evaluates each putative module for statistical significance and provides a non-redundant output of gene modules showing significant co-expression across varying combinations of the time series data. each gene may be assigned to one or more gene modules or to no module at all. wigwams requires little user input (further aided by easy-to-use graphical user interfaces) and is computationally inexpensive and relatively fast, making it a useful method to analyze multiple time series experiments for evidence of co-regulation. we demonstrate that gene modules identified by wigwams are often enriched for gene ontology (go) terms and known transcription factor (tf) binding motifs indicating biological relevance. we also provide experimental evidence of potential co-regulation. wigwams is a powerful tool to utilize the resolution of time series expression data in a statistically rigorous approach for identification of co-regulated gene modules. it can make a direct contribution to gene regulatory network analysis and computational prediction of regulatory mechanisms.wigwams is a simple deterministic method capable of identifying groups of genes exhibiting statistically significant dependent coexpression across subsets of time series datasets, and using that information to construct larger non-redundant modules capturing broader transcriptional phenomena. its comprehensive nature minimizes the odds of missing evidence of co-regulation, and the redundancy removal procedures provide the researcher with a succinct biologically informative output. in some cases, when examining the expression plots of gene modules, the module appears to exhibit co-expression in conditions that are not deemed significant. this demonstrates the power of wigwams to select modules with statistically significant dependent co-expression. in these non-significant conditions, the given expression profile may have been abundant and/or the module members are not de in that time series (i.e. expression profile in the control samples was similar). when comparing wigwams with other methods capable of identifying groups of genes co-expressed across different subsets of time series data, its main advantages are flexibility, statistical significance testing and relevance of the provided output. additionally, wigwams is able to account for differential expression of genes in each of the time series, and ensure that gene profiles are only tested for statistically significant dependent co-expression in relevant conditions. the value of testing the statistical significance of detected co-expression can be seen when comparing wigwams with the edisa algorithm . when run on a permuted dataset, edisa identified several co-expressed gene modules, whereas wigwams did not identify any. furthermore, we have shown the value of the comprehensive nature of wigwams; it is capable of detecting dependent co-expression that edisa misses (see supplementary material for details on this analysis). to our knowledge, wigwams is the only algorithm capable of mining multiple time series (on varying time scales) for dependent co-expression across subsets of the time series. the modules produced by wigwams were demonstrated to be biologically relevant due to enrichment of go terms and known tf binding sites, suggesting shared function and regulation between module members. we also provide experimental evidence for co-regulation showing that in yeast, a set of similar tfs bind to the promoters of multiple genes from a single wigwams module. although y1h does not indicate the conditions under which these tfs bind to the gene promoters, or whether they bind in planta, it does indicate the potential for coregulation. the wigwams tool is easy to use, with intuitive graphical user interfaces, comprehensive documentation and output provided in a clear manner that can be readily analyzed by tools such as bingo and meme-lab . the algorithm is flexible, and intuitive parameters can be used to tailor the output as desired. additionally, the module lists are saved as matlab cell structures, enabling access to intermediate stages of wigwams analysis, e.g. to identify the most statistically significant original smaller gene modules. a more computationally tractable version of the modified hypergeometric test could enable modification of the wigwams method. to obtain the p-values for an overlap spanning k sets, all the p-values for 2,3,. .. ,k-1 sets need to be generated. if the tests were more efficient, the algorithm could be modified to use correlation thresholds instead of pre-defined set sizes when evaluating overlaps, and non-de genes could be excluded from any analysis without large adverse effects on run time due to varying universe size between dataset combinations. owing to the time and cost of experimental approaches to genome-wide network elucidation, computational inference of regulatory networks from time series expression data is a useful approach. however, despite the multitude of inference methods available, these methods are still only capable of inferring moderately large dynamic networks . wigwams provides output that can be used to extend network models built with a subset of genes (e.g. using tfs only). integrating wigwams modules with a transcriptional network model can also provide condition-dependent information, such as indicating network neighbourhoods active during particular conditions. wigwams modules can be viewed as the footprint of flux through regulatory networks under different conditions, and examining the abundance and functionality of modules for various combinations of conditions can provide insight into the commonality between the responses to different conditions at a more nuanced level than simple differential expression. identification of modules showing contradictory expression under different  
