workflow4metabolomics: a collaborative research infrastructure for computational metabolomics the complex, rapidly evolving field of computational metabolomics calls for collabora-tive infrastructures where the large volume of new algorithms for data pre-processing, statistical analysis and annotation can be readily integrated whatever the language, evaluated on reference datasets and chained to build ad hoc workflows for users. we have developed workflow4metabolomics (w4m), the first fully open-source and collaborative online platform for computational metabolomics. w4m is a virtual research environment built upon the galaxy web-based platform technology. it enables ergonomic integration, exchange and running of individual modules and workflows. alternatively, the whole w4m framework and computational tools can be downloaded as a virtual machine for local installation. availability and implementation: http://workflow4metabolomics.org homepage enables users to open a private account and access the infrastructure. w4m is developed and maintained by the french bioinformatics institute (ifb) and the french metabolomics and fluxomics infrastructure (metabohub).metabolomics, the high throughput analysis of small molecules in biological samples, heavily depends on data pre-processing, statistical analysis and chemical and biological annotation, which are complex, transdisciplinary processes involving both computation and interpretation . since analytical technologies and protocols evolve rapidly, computational metabolomics is a field of intensive methodological research, resulting in a large volume of proposed algorithms written in various languages, making their evaluation by the bioinformatics community (including reviewers) and their chaining within ad hoc workflows by experimenters difficult . a few user-oriented online platforms for metabolomics data preprocessing and analysis have been described recently, including meltdb , metaboanalyst and xcms online . there is, however, an v c the author 2014. published by oxford university press.the w4m infrastructure enables both experimental users with no specific programming skills and advanced developers to perform cutting-edge and reproducible computational analyses from raw data to metabolite annotation. w4m can be further extended to integrate external workflows running on desktop platforms (e.g. taverna, knime), or acquisition instruments. the statistical modules from w4m can be used to analyse other omics data, or can be combined with existing galaxy workflows (e.g. in transcriptomics), thus enabling multi-omics analyses in a global systems-biology approach. in the coming months, modules for nmr data preprocessing will be integrated into w4m and the infrastructure will be connected to metexplore for genome-scale network analysis. w4m is therefore an innovative open-source computational vre bridging the data-intensive bioinformatics and metabolomics communities.  
