wormexp: a web-based application for a caenorhabditis elegans-specific gene expression enrichment analysis motivation: a particular challenge of the current omics age is to make sense of the inferred differential expression of genes and proteins. the most common approach is to perform a gene ontol-ogy (go) enrichment analysis, thereby relying on a database that has been extracted from a variety of organisms and that can therefore only yield reliable information on evolutionary conserved functions. results: we here present a web-based application for a taxon-specific gene set exploration and enrichment analysis, which is expected to yield novel functional insights into newly determined gene sets. the approach is based on the complete collection of curated high-throughput gene expression data sets for the model nematode caenorhabditis elegans, including 1786 gene sets from more than 350 studies. availability and implementation: wormexp is available at http://wormexp.high-throughput molecular technologies have greatly enhanced our understanding of biological processes by characterizing expression changes of genes (microarray and rna-seq data) and proteins (proteomics data) or transcription factor targets and epigenetics states (chip-chip and chip-seq data). these technologies usually yield hundreds or thousands of differentially regulated genes or proteins that are not always easy to interpret. validation of the numerous differentially expressed genes is usually not possible. uncovering the underlying organizational principles from such large gene lists requires computational and statistical approaches as well as precise biological reference information. gene set enrichment analysis represents a powerful tool to link the identified differentially expressed gene lists to biological processes and functions. they are based on the statistical evaluation of the overlap between the generated gene set and a specified reference list of genes. these enrichment analyses are usually based on public functional genomic analyses. several applications such as gsea and ease have been developed to permit performance of enrichment analyses with curated gene sets, derived for example from published expression studies in the same organism. yet, a systematic assessment of the value of taxon-specific enrichment analyses is still missing. wormexp provides a web resource to explore such an approach for the nematode c.elegans. this nematode has a well annotated genome sequence and is widely used as a powerful model organism in biological research. over the last decade, more than 350 high-throughput expression studies have been published, covering a large variety of research themes, such as immunity, aging, development and stress responses. the resulting lists of differentially expressed genes are publicly available and can be related to a specific experimental design, environmental condition and/or gene defect. because they capture a variety of inducible expression responses of this particular organism, they might be highly useful in interpreting new c.elegans gene lists or predicting candidates for downstream analysis (. in this manuscript, we present wormexp, a web-based application for gene set enrichment analysis in c.elegans. we collated nearly all published highthroughput expression data sets of c.elegans from public databases and also the available literature. we classified these gene sets in nine categories according to the experimental designs or specific condition used. wormexp accepts wormbase identifiers (ids), sequence names, gene names or a mixture of these as input. it offers tools for performing an enrichment analysis based on the taxon-specific 1786 gene sets, searching specific gene lists and downloading complete data sets.  
