asbench: benchmarking sets for allosteric discovery allostery allows for the fine-tuning of protein function. targeting allosteric sites is gaining increasing recognition as a novel strategy in drug design. the key challenge in the discovery of allosteric sites has strongly motivated the development of computational methods and thus high-quality, publicly accessible standard data have become indispensable. here, we report benchmarking data for experimentally determined allosteric sites through a complex process, including a core set with 235 unique allosteric sites and a core-diversity set with 147 structurally diverse allosteric sites. these benchmarking sets can be exploited to develop efficient computational methods to predict unknown allosteric sites in proteins and reveal unique allosteric ligandprotein interactions to guide allosteric drug design. availability and implementation: the benchmarking sets are freely available at http://allostery is a major regulatory mechanism that is of fundamental importance in a wide variety of biological phenomena. the propagation of allosteric signals from allosteric sites induced by effectors binding to different, often distant, functional sites allows for exquisite control of protein functional activity . the structural diversity of allosteric sites endows allosteric effectors with the benefits of higher selectivity and lower toxicity. targeting allosteric sites, as a novel tactic in drug design, has therefore prompted intense interest in the development of allosteric drugs . despite the enticing advantages of allosteric regulation, modern allosteric drug discovery faces considerable challenges. in particular, the vast majority of allosteric sites in proteins are as-yet undiscovered as a result of the difficulty in identifying such sites experimentally. this difficulty has led to a paucity of structural and mechanistic insights into the characterization of allosteric sites, and it has also impeded computational development for the identification of allosteric sites . to address this issue, we recently constructed the allosteric database (asd;), which is a collection of experimentally determined allosteric proteins, and modulators to provide a platform for the application and discovery of allosteric sites. nevertheless, the collection of raw allosteric sites suffers from redundancy and the inclusion of low quality sites. it is therefore imperative to offer a more stringent set of allosteric sites for the development of viable computational approaches for allosteric site prediction and to reveal the unique characteristics of allosteric ligandprotein interactions for drug design. to this end, two benchmarking sets of allosteric sites were compiled through a complex process, designated as a core set and a core-diversity set. the former totally contains 235 unique allosteric site, and the latter encompasses 147 structurally diverse allosteric sites. these high-quality benchmarking sets can be), and they contain representative specific allosteric ligandprotein interactions that can guide structure-based allosteric drug discovery.the benchmarking sets in asbench provide the high-quality data of allosteric sites for the development of efficient computational methods on the prediction of unknown allosteric sites and the exploration of unique allosteric ligandprotein interactions. it is thus expected to provide valuable avenues for allosteric drug discovery.  
