xdia: improving on the label-free data-independent analysis xdia is a computational strategy for analyzing multiplexed spectra acquired using electron transfer dissociation and collision-activated dissociation; it significantly increases identified spectra (250) and unique peptides (30) when compared with the data-dependent etcad analysis on middle-down, single-phase shotgun proteomic analysis. increasing identified spectra and peptides improves quantitation statistics confidence and protein coverage, respectively.label-free approaches (e.g. spectral counting) for the relative quantitation of complex peptide mixtures have gained popularity because of their low cost, reasonable accuracy and simplicity. however, in accuracy they still fall behind the approaches that measure abundance by comparing peptides to an internal, chemically identical standard enriched with a heavy stable isotope. the latter, in turn, are expensive and laborious. but regardless of the strategy, quantitation and identification, efficiency and accuracy are constrained by limitations from the data acquisition method. the widely adopted data-dependent acquisition (dda) relies on a full-range survey scan (ms1) to select peptide ions for fragmentation. peptides are then identified by submitting their tandem mass spectra (ms2) to a protein database search engine such as sequest or mascot . in general, dda selects the most abundant peaks in the ms1 for individual fragmentation, and the peaks for which ms2 is acquired are excluded for a short period of time from further ms2 acquisition. if there are many co-eluting ions, however, there may be insufficient time to acquire ms2 data for all ion species and thus some low-abundance ions may never be identified. poor sampling of low-abundance ions affects overall sampling statistics, thereby impacting the accuracy of quantitation, especially for the lowest abundance peptides.this process is repeated until a desired m/z range is covered. then the xdia processor is used to enable for protein identification.page: 848 847848  
