xenome—a tool for classifying reads from xenograft samples motivation: shotgun sequence read data derived from xenograft material contains a mixture of reads arising from the host and reads arising from the graft. classifying the read mixture to separate the two allows for more precise analysis to be performed.xenograft models are an important tool for many areas of biomedical research, including oncology, immunology and hiv pathology. a typical scenario, drawn from oncology research, is that of a human prostate cancer grown in an immunocompromised mouse model. doing so allows researchers to investigate aspects of the cancer that are not necessarily preserved in cell lines, and it allows investigations into the interactions between the cancer and the surrounding stromal tissue. the mouse may be biopsied or harvested and samples of cancer and/or stroma collected at various time points during an experiment. difficulties arise, when sequencing the genome or transcriptome of the samples because host (mouse) material (i.e. dna/rna) will inevitably comingle with the graft (human) material. if a sufficiently careful section is taken, it has been generally assumed that the level of host contamination is low enough that it may be ignored. this may be a dangerous assumption, however, since the level of gene expression is non-uniform. if the overall level of host contamination in a graft sample is measured to be 10 overall, it may still be the case for a given gene that the host homologue accounts for most or all of the expression. contamination may be minimized by physical or biochemical techniques such as conservative sectioning, cell sorting or laser capture micro-dissection, but these techniques can be a significant source of technical bias, or in some cases may require infeasibly large amounts of starting material. further, in the case of transcriptomic investigation, classifying host and graft in vitro may fail to adequately capture the interactions between them. an alternative strategy is to sequence an acknowledged mixture of host and graft, then use in silico methods to classify the individual sequence reads. this is the approach discussed here. we demonstrate a simple technique, based on an analysis of sequence to whom correspondence should be addressed. reads using tophat, and a more precise technique based on a k-mer decomposition of the host and graft reference sequences, xenome. in both cases, the primary goal of the analysis is to classify reads into four classes: reads attributable to the host, reads attributable to the graft, reads which could be attributed to both and reads which are attributable to neither. to the best of our knowledge, there are no results in the literature examining the classification of high-throughput sequencing short reads from xenograft models. the studies we know of are concerned with microarray expression profiles or alternative methods for estimating the amount of host material or cell types in the samples. for example,investigate the use of species-specific variation in gene length and a multiplex pcr to ascertain the relative amount of mouse and human dna.use microarray gene profiling data and in silico techniques to estimate the quantity of various tissue components. in, there is an analysis of a mouse xenograft model using microarray data. they conclude that if there is more than 90 human dna then the expression profiles are not unduly skewed. they also describe an experimental method for removing homologous genes based on cross-hybridization analysis of the probes.use short read sequencing to study a cancer genome and identify mutations/deletions. they estimate tumour cellularity using pathological assessment, and state that their xenograft is 90 tumour cells. they also map nod/scid (mouse) genomic data to human and mouse genomes, reporting 3.17 and 95.85 mapping rates, respectively, and so apply no correction for the murine cells. we note that in the context of non-uniform rnaseq data ignoring the contribution of the murine expression can lead to biases. tools such as tophat serve a different purpose than that of xenome. the former aligns reads to a reference, and we can use those alignments for a variety of purposes, including the classification task we present here. in contrast, xenome only performs the classification task itself. this is an important distinction, since an alignment must assign the read to zero or more positions in the genome; the classification merely has to decide if the read was more likely to arise from the genome than not. for the remainder of the article, we will assume, unless otherwise stated, that sequence reads arise from rna-seq. however, the techniques we present are applicable to genomic dna sequences (including chip-seq and medip-seq) and also to other mixtures of dna species.our analysis examines two questions: whether or not it is technically feasible to separate host and graft reads in silico; and whether or not the fast technique we have proposed (xenome) yields a worthwhile improvement over the mapping (tophat) based technique. in the first experiment, we take a sample of human cdna sequence data (srr342886), and a sample of mouse cdna sequence data (srr037689) and analyse them both with tophat and xenome, and compare the results. this allows us to evaluate the degree to which sequences are misclassified (assigned to human rather than mouse or vice versa), and the specificity of the classificationthe proportion of sequences which are not classified as both. the use of pure human or mouse cdna gives an experiment where the correct assignment of reads is known. the second experiment runs the same analysis on sequence data from a human prostate cancer xenograft growing in a mouse host. in this case, however, we not only classify the reads, but use the tophat mappings to compute approximate levels of gene expression [measured in fragments per thousand bases of transcript per million mapped reads, or fpkm] and use human species-specific quantitative rt-pcr (qrt-pcr) on selected genes to validate the results. in this instance, we have no gold standard by which we can judge the(xenome), only by the tophat analysis (tophat) or by both xenome and the tophat analysis (results, but the qrt-pcr will give some degree of validation, and known aspects of the biology of the cancer can give some qualitative corroboration. tophat uses a global analysis, combining the results of all the read mappings to locate exons, junctions and so on. in contrast, xenome performs pre-computation on the two reference genomes, then classifies each read independently. therefore, for each of the three sets of reads, we ran tophat with the human reference genome and again with the mouse reference genome, then, as described in section 2.1, the mappings were post-processed to determine which reads belonged to each of the four classes. each of the four partitions of the sets of reads was then partitioned with xenome to allow us to easily determine which reads were classified as the same by both procedures, and which were classified differently. figures 2, 3 and 4 summarize the results. for the three samples, the proportion of reads receiving the same classification were 82, 87 and 84, respectively. as can be seen from the human and mouse only figures, both techniques are accurate, in as much as they misclassify only a small proportion of the reads (the worst case being the tophat-based analysis of the human cdna which misclassified 1.2 of the readsall the other analyses misclassified 0.20.3). the main difference between the tophat-based and xenome analyses is that the latter yields better specificitythe fraction of reads classed as both is significantly smaller in the xenome analysis. to check for false positives for the human cdna dataset, we also used blat to map the 1.1 million reads which xenome classed as human but which were not mapped to either genome by tophat. most of them were successfully mapped with high quality to the human reference by blat (about 90). blat also mapped about 18 of them, with very variable quality, to the mouse reference. this supports our confidence in the accuracy of the xenome algorithm. from this we can conclude that the in silico classification of sequences is feasible and accurate.we have presented a simple read classification method based on tophat, and our refined classification approach, xenome. xenome can be used to efficiently and effectively partition the read set for subsequent processing by tools such as tophat. what is not apparent from the results above is the relative behaviour at the level of a single gene. it should be expected that the distribution of ambiguously mapped reads (classed as both) should be non-uniform, since some genes in the two genomes are more highly conserved than others.the first result we present inon this point is an in silico analysis showing the proportion of each human gene (ignoring introns) covered by k-mers that are not classed as human. it is clear that the vast majority of genes contain few or no k-mers that are not classed as human. the fraction of k-mers which are ambiguous gives a worst-case view of how xenome might be expected to perform. in order for a read to be classified as both, all of its k-mers must be of the both class, or there must be at least one k-mer from each of the two genomes (which happens less than 2 of the time in the samples we have tried). conversely, a single host or graft k-mer is sufficient to classify the read into the respective class. therefore for a read to be classified as both, the reference must contain a sufficiently long run of consecutive k-mers of class both and/or snps and sequencing errors must eliminate all the distinctively host or graft k-mers. the second result we report on this point, presented inis the relative proportion of reads which are classified as both on a per-gene basis. what is evident in this figure is that although there are many genes for which the proportion of both reads is tightly correlated between tophat and xenome, there are a large number of genes for which the tophat-based analysis has significantly more both reads. there are 15 591 genes for which there were at least 20 mapped reads in the bm18 xenograft sample. of these, there were 65 for which xenome assigned both or ambiguous to at least half the reads mapping to the gene; there were 498 for which the tophatbased analysis assigned both to at least half the reads mapped to the gene. for the most highly conserved genes, there is not much that can be done with this data directlyfurther signal processing or other data would be required to determine the relative expression in the host and graft. while we have developed xenome with rna-seq on human/ mouse xenografts in mind, we anticipate it will be an effective tool for other similar mixtures. for example, capturing the differential methylation around genes between host and graft using medip-seq may shed light on the interraction between the two.. a plot showing the distribution of human genes with respect to the proportion of xenograft reads which are classed as both by the tophat-based analysis and the xenome analysis. the reads considered are only those mapped by tophat since xenome does not yield mappings, so cannot be used to assign reads to genes. only genes for which at least 20 reads mapped were considered. the horizontal axis corresponds to the number of reads classified as both or ambiguous by xenome as a proportion of all the reads that might possibly be human (i.e. both, ambiguous or human). the vertical axis corresponds to the number of reads classified as both by the tophatbased analysis, once again, as a proportion of all the reads that might possibly be human  
