systems biology xlinkdb 2.0: integrated, large-scale structural analysis of protein crosslinking data motivation: large-scale chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometry (xl-ms) analyses are quickly becoming a powerful means for high-throughput determination of protein structural information and proteinprotein interactions. recent studies have garnered thousands of cross-linked interactions, yet the field lacks an effective tool to compile experimental data or access the network and structural knowledge for these large scale analyses. we present xlinkdb 2.0 which integrates tools for network analysis, protein databank queries, modeling of predicted protein structures and modeling of docked protein structures. the novel, integrated approach of xlinkdb 2.0 enables the holistic analysis of xl-ms protein interaction data without limitation to the cross-linker or analytical system used for the analysis. availability and implementation: xlinkdb 2.0 can be found here, including documentation and help: http://xlinkdb.gs.washington.edu/.large-scale structural characterization of interactions within proteins and protein complexes is a major goal of structural proteomics. recent efforts have generated datasets featuring thousands of peptidepeptide links used to build networks of proteinprotein interactions (ppis). yet, the full depth of these datasets is often unrealized as (i) the structural data inherent to chemical crosslinking-mass spectrometry (xl-ms) networks remains untapped on a network-wide scale, particularly for proteins lacking empirically derived structures and (ii) there is currently no centralized platform to host these large-scale networks. to address the lack of network level structural information we present xlinkdb 2.0 (hereafter xlinkdb), a web resource designed to integrate xl-ms data with databases of protein structures, enable generation of protein structure models for proteins lacking known structures, and generate automated proteinprotein docking models. protein structures are derived from empirical data when available (protein databank, pdb) or through high-quality structural prediction (modeller). similarly, structures of docked interacting proteins are queried from the pdb or docked with patchdock. xlinkdbs automation allows for the first, cross-platform, streamlined structural analysis of large xl-ms datasets and provides a curated, ever-growing reference database of cross-linked protein interactions for the general community. features), and relatively low runtime make imp ideal for highthroughput analyses . the user input for xlinkdb is a tab-delimited text file with only six columns to identify crosslinked peptides and protein accessions: peptide sequence 1, protein uniprot accession 1, the relative position of the crosslinked residue within peptide 1, peptide sequence 2, protein uniprot accession 2 and the relative position of the crosslinked residue within peptide 2. xlinkdb has been preloaded with publicly-available, example xl-ms datasets from previous analyses. importantly, as demonstrated by the publicly accessible datasets within xlinkdb, data from any xl-ms pipeline can be used as the input, including that generated by plink , xlinkx , or react . xlinkdb generates proteinprotein interaction networks and queries the uniprot database to determine the amino acid sequences for all input proteins (supplementary). xlinkdb then queries the pdb to determine if a pdb structure exists for the protein and maps identified crosslinked residues to these structures. if no pdb structure exists xlinkdb generates a homology model using modeller. through the pdb query or modeller prediction, xlinkdb seeks to establish an associated pdb structure or structural model for each protein from the original input. for cross-linked relationships identified between two proteins (multi-protein complexes) xlinkdb will automatically query the pdb again, this time searching for co-protein structures that contain both input proteins. if no co-protein structures are identified, xlinkdb initiates imps integrative docking to determine interaction interfaces of these proteins using sites of crosslinking as empirical distance constraints. finally, xlinkdb retains the top-ranked docked model for each protein complex. modeling and docking jobs are scheduled and initiated via a jenkins server and job queueing is performed via a centralized sun grid engine. in this manner, the docking and modeling platforms are maintained separately from network analysis. all associated structures, models, docked models and crosslinked residues therein can be visualized using jmol directly within the users web browser.  
