xpiwit—an xml pipeline wrapper for the insight toolkit the insight toolkit offers plenty of features for multidimensional image analysis. current implementations, however, often suffer either from a lack of flexibility due to hard-coded c pipelines for a certain task or by slow execution times, e.g. caused by inefficient implementations or multiple read/write operations for separate filter execution. we present an xml-based wrapper application for the insight toolkit that combines the performance of a pure c implementation with an easy-to-use graphical setup of dynamic image analysis pipelines. created xml pipelines can be interpreted and executed by xpiwit in console mode either locally or on large clusters. we successfully applied the software tool for the automated analysis of terabyte-scale, time-resolved 3d image data of zebrafish embryos. availability and implementation: xpiwit is implemented in c using the insight toolkit and the qt sdk. it has been successfully compiled and tested under windows and unix-based systems. software and documentation are distributed under apache 2.0 license and are publicly available for download at https://bitbucket.org/jstegmaier/xpiwit/downloads/.automated analysis of large-scale multidimensional image data has become an integral part of current biological research. particularly, 3d imaging techniques like confocal, light-sheet or electron microscopy easily produce terabytes of image data that cannot be assessed manually . although many comprehensive and user-friendly graphical user interfaces (guis) for the automation of image analysis problems have been presented in the past, their applicability to terabyte-scale data remains limited . on the other hand, tools that are usable for large-scale analyses are mostly single-purpose command-line tools with a substantial lack of flexibility. the insight toolkit (itk), for instance, often serves as a basis for such specialized highperformance implementations, as it offers plenty of features for multidimensional image analysis and has an active community in the biomedical field that constantly improves and extents the functionality of itk . however, many available solutions based on itk require advanced programming skills, are limited to a certain task due to specialized c pipelines or suffer from slow execution times, e.g. caused by multiple i/o operations for separate filter execution or inefficient implementations. to overcome these limitations, we developed xpiwit, an xml-based wrapper application for itk that allows a graphical setup and rapid prototyping of image analysis pipelines while preserving the performance of a pure c implementation (supplementary). created xml pipelines can directly be used to interface xpiwit on large clusters, and the current version of xpiwit already incorporates about 70 different filters, including i/o filters, preprocessing filters, edge detectors, morphological operators and segmentation filters (supplementary). we also integrated our recently published algorithm for the efficient segmentation of fluorescently labeled cellular nuclei as an exemplary pipeline (xpiwit can be constantly extended with new functionality, we created template files that facilitate the implementation of new filters for xpiwit. filters that are already implemented as image-to-image filters in itk can be added to xpiwit in a matter of minutes and are instantly accessible via the xml interface. because of the flexible design, literally any additional c code can be encapsulated as an xpiwit filter, as long as the input and output images are appropriately casted to itk-internal types. the platform-independent opensource software tool was successfully applied to automatically analyze multiple terabytes of time-resolved 3d microscopy image data in embryomics using a hadoop cluster (, supplementary section s2).  
