xqtl workbench: a scalable web environment for multi-level qtl analysis xqtl workbench is a scalable web platform for the mapping of quantitative trait loci (qtls) at multiple levels: for example gene expression (eqtl), protein abundance (pqtl), metabolite abundance (mqtl) and phenotype (phqtl) data. popular qtl mapping methods for model organism and human populations are accessible via the web user interface.modern high-throughput technologies generate large amounts of genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic data. however, existing open source web-based tools for qtl analysis, such as webqtl and qtlnetwork , are not easily extendable to different settings and computationally scalable for whole genome analyses. xqtl workbench makes it easy to analyse large and complex datasets using state-of-the-art qtl mapping tools and to apply these methods to millions of phenotypes using parallelized big data solutions . xqtl workbench also supports storing of raw, intermediate and final result data, and analysis protocols and history for reproducibility and data provenance. use of molgenis helps to customize the software. all is conveniently accessible via standard internet browsers on windows, linux or mac (and using java, r for the server). to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their option, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors.xqtl workbench provides a total solution for web-based analysis: major qtl mapping routines are integrated for use by experienced and inexperienced users. researchers can upload raw data, run analyses, explore mapped qtl and underlying information, and link-out to important databases. new algorithms can be flexibly added, immediately available to all users. large analyses can be easily executed on a cluster or in the cloud. future work include visualizations and search options to explore the results. we also had an eu-sysgenet workshop that envisioned further integration of xqtl with analysis tools like happy, databases like genenetwork, and the workflow manager tiqs .  
