xtalk: a path-based approach for identifying crosstalk between signaling pathways motivation: cells communicate with their environment via signal transduction pathways. on occasion, the activation of one pathway can produce an effect downstream of another pathway, a phenomenon known as crosstalk. existing computational methods to discover such pathway pairs rely on simple overlap statistics. results: we present xtalk, a path-based approach for identifying pairs of pathways that may cross-talk. xtalk computes the statistical significance of the average length of multiple short paths that connect receptors in one pathway to the transcription factors in another. by design, xtalk reports the precise interactions and mechanisms that support the identified crosstalk. we applied xtalk to signaling pathways in the kegg and nci-pid databases. we manually curated a gold standard set of 132 crosstalking pathway pairs and a set of 140 pairs that did not crosstalk, for which xtalk achieved an area under the receiver operator characteristic curve of 0.65, a 12 improvement over the closest competing approach. the area under the receiver operator characteristic curve varied with the pathway, suggesting that crosstalk should be evaluated on a pathway-by-pathway level. we also analyzed an extended set of 658 pathway pairs in kegg and to a set of more than 7000 pathway pairs in nci-pid. for the top-ranking pairs, we found substantial support in the literature (81 for kegg and 78 for nci-pid). we provide examples of networks computed by xtalk that accurately recovered known mechanisms of crosstalk. availability and implementation: the xtalk software is available atcells communicate with their environment through signal transduction pathways. typically, a signaling pathway contains a welldefined set of receptors and transcription factors (tfs). upon activation of the pathways receptors, a series of signaling interactions activate the tfs in that pathway, thereby regulating the expression of target genes as a down-stream response. on occasion, these intra-cellular signal cascades result in off-target responses, commonly known as pathway crosstalk. more specifically, crosstalk occurs when the activation of the receptors of a specific signaling pathway results in the down-stream response being executed by the tfs of a different pathway . such a down-stream response manifests itself through changes in the expression of the second pathways target genes. signaling pathway crosstalk may lead to several cancers and has also been implicated in host defense against pathogens in plants .computational methods have been developed to systematically predict crosstalk. the simplest approach, which we call nodes-incommon or nic in this article, asks if two pathways share any proteins based on the observation that shared proteins may mediate crosstalk . hsu and yang (2012) estimated pathway crosstalk based on similarities in gene ontology annotations. interactionbased methods try to identify crosstalk by quantifying the connectivity between pathway pairs. given a proteinprotein interaction network,linked two pathways a and b if more edges connected the proteins in a to the proteins in b than expected by chance in a randomly wired network. in the case when two pathways are known to crosstalk,developed a method that used a combined signaling network to identify the protein(s) responsible for crosstalk. a similar approach, biological process linkage networks (bpln), linked two processes a and b if the proteins annotated to a were connected to more proteins annotated to b than expected by chance . in this article, we selected bpln as an exemplar of the interaction-based techniques. these approaches have several drawbacks. the nic methods cannot identify crosstalk when the two pathways have very few or no common proteins. for example, mapk pathway and the hippo pathway crosstalk but share only a few proteins. more importantly, these methods treat a pathway simply as a set of proteins. while the edge-based approaches do use interactions between proteins, they fail to identify crosstalk when the members of pathway a do not interact with the members of pathway b, as in the case of crosstalk from the hif-1 pathway to the wnt pathway . more importantly, they do not consider the canonical structure of a pathway: a set of receptors connected via regulatory, signaling and physical interactions to a set of tfs. therefore, they are unlikely to discover the mechanisms or the sequence of interactions that underlie pathway crosstalk. to develop our method xtalk, we started by considering the biological definition of crosstalk. crosstalk occurs between two signaling pathways a and b when the stimulation at the receptors of pathway a causes a cellular response downstream of pathway b, usually carried out by the tfs in b. we reasoned that there must be at least one directed path of signaling and regulatory interactions along which a signal can traverse from some receptor of pathway a to some tf in pathway b. we expected these paths to be short, so that the signal could travel rapidly to affect the response. crosstalk can also be asymmetric: a may crosstalk with b (i.e. stimulation of as receptors controls at least one of bs tfs) but b may not crosstalk with a (i.e. stimulation of bs receptors has no effect on any of as tfs) as in the case of crosstalk from the insulin-like growth factor-i pathway to the leptin pathway . using these guiding principles, we developed xtalk to identify the k shortest paths from any receptor in pathway a to each tf in pathway b , where k is a user-defined parameter. we implemented an efficient dynamic-programming based approach to exactly compute the statistical significance of the crosstalk. by design, xtalk reports the precise sequences of interactions and mechanisms that support the identified crosstalk between pathways. to the best of our knowledge, databases of pathway crosstalk are currently unavailable for validation of methods such as xtalk.to overcome this challenge, we created a gold-standard set of directed pathway pairs that crosstalk. to create this dataset, we restricted our definition of crosstalk to only those events that occur when an interaction (e.g. activation, inhibition or binding) between two proteins mediates the crosstalk. we acknowledge that several other mechanisms of crosstalk exist, including proteinprotein interaction events, feedback loops and when members of pathway b are downstream targets of tfs in pathway a. we plan to incorporate these mechanisms in the future. we studied over 400 publications for evidence of crosstalk between 272 pairs of pathways in the kegg database. we found literature support for crosstalk between 132 pairs. these pairs formed our gold standard dataset. we evaluated xtalk in several ways. 1. we used receiver operator characteristic (roc) curves to compare xtalk, nic and bpln for the 272 pathway pairs that we had explicitly considered for inclusion in the gold standard (section 3.1). xtalk achieved an area under the roc (auc) of 0.65, which was an improvement of 12 over its closest competitor bpln. 2. we observed that the auc of xtalk varied from one pathway to another (section 3.2). therefore, we studied the three pathways with the lowest aucs. we found support in the literature for 9 out of 15 (60) false-positive pathway pairs (section 3.3). 3. we also considered xtalk s results from an experimentalists perspective by examining the top-three highest ranking pairs for each pathway. xtalk had a precision of 0.75 for these ranks. we were able to find support in the literature for seven false positives. notably, in both this and the previous analysis, we were able to find the appropriate publications only after including proteins in xtalk s crosstalk networks in our pubmed queries. 4. we expanded our analysis by applying xtalk to a comprehensive set of 658 signaling-related pathway pairs in the kegg. finally, we highlight the utility of the xtalk networks in recovering the known mechanisms of crosstalk and assisting in the manual curation of pathway pairs.we studied the kegg and nci-pid databases. we divided all the pathway pairs we analyzed into three sets (supplementary sections 2.32.5): (i) the kegg curated set containing the 272 pathway pairs we considered for inclusion in the gold standard; (ii) the kegg test set containing 678 other pathway pairs and (iii) the nci-pid test set containing 7254 pathway pairs. we performed several types of evaluations. kegg curated set: first, we used it to compute auc values for each algorithm (section 3.1). we also computed the auc values for each pathway individually (section 3.2). second, for the pathways with the lowest aucs, we used xtalks crosstalk networks to search the literature for support for false-positive predictions (section 3.3). third, in a complementary evaluation, we studied the false-positive pairs among the highest ranking results for each pathway, since an experimentalist is likely to be interested in following such predictions for validation (section 3.4). test sets: we considered the highest-ranked pairs of pathways computed by xtalk for each of the two test sets (section 3.5). we estimated the precision of xtalk by determining which pairs contained support in the literature for crosstalk. for these analyses, we only considered xtalk since it outperformed nic and bpln on the first analysis, as we show in section 3.1. finally, we discuss the crosstalk networks for specific top-ranked pathway pairs (sections 3.6 and 3.7).we have developed xtalk, a novel path-based approach to identifying pathway crosstalk. xtalk identifies crosstalk by computing several short paths along which an external signal can be transduced from the receptors of one pathway to the tfs of the other. when evaluated upon a literature-curated gold standard set of pathway pairs, xtalk achieved an auc of 65, a value much higher than node-and edge-based approaches (nic and bpln, respectively). we observed a high variance in auc from one pathway to another. focusing on the three pathways with the lowest aucs, we succeeded in finding support in the literature for 60 (9 out of 15) falsepositive pairs involving these pathways. conversely, taking an experimentalists perspective, we focused on false positives among highly ranked pairs and found support in the literature for 59 (7 out of 12) pairs. it is notable that search queries yielded the relevant publications only when we augmented the pathway names with key proteins that mediated the crosstalk. we learnt the identities of these proteins only after examination of the crosstalk networks. these results underscore both the considerable difficulties and subtleties in constructing a gold standard database of pathway crosstalk and the value of xtalk in discovering crosstalk events. in the second analysis, we evaluated crosstalk on two test sets of pathway pairs, one from kegg and the other from nci-pid, that we did not consider for inclusion in the gold standard. the literature contained evidence for approximately 80 of pairs ranked highly by xtalk for each dataset. these results suggest that an experimentalist interested in a poorly studied pathway or one that is not in our gold standard may benefit from focusing experiments on the topranked predictions made by xtalk. moreover, crosstalk networks can provide useful suggestions on the underlying mechanisms. for the analysis of kegg pathways, we used a signaling network derived from all relations in the kegg database. we analyzed two versions of this signaling network: kegg-family and keggprotein. the value of k for each pathway in the kegg-protein was on average 14 times larger than that for the kegg-family. during the construction of the kegg-protein network, we expanded each interaction between two nodes in the kegg-family network into a complete bipartite graph between the member proteins from each node in the kegg-family (supplementary sectionare considering extensions of xtalk that explicitly take into account the information on whether an interaction is activating or. crosstalk network constructed by xtalk from the nfjb pathway (a) to the neurotrophin pathway (b) using the kegg-family network. seefor details on node and edge colors and shapes. supplementarydisplays the complete network inhibitory. it is also important to consider cell and tissue specificity. xtalk and its future versions promise to serve as powerful analytic methods to discover novel pairs of crosstalking pathways and the underlying mechanisms.  
