genetics and population analysis zcall: a rare variant caller for array-based genotyping zcall is a variant caller specifically designed for calling rare single-nucleotide polymorphisms from array-based technology. this caller is implemented as a post-processing step after a default calling algorithm has been applied. the algorithm uses the intensity profile of the common allele homozygote cluster to define the location of the other two genotype clusters. we demonstrate improved detection of rare alleles when applying zcall to samples that have both illumina infinium humanexome beadchip and exome sequencing data available.array-based genotyping has been a cost-effective method to capture common variation in the population and has led to the discovery of genetic risk factors for a wide variety of diseases . in most instances, the significantly associated single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) is not known to be causal but rather likely tags the causal variants through linkage disequilibrium. in contrast, the mapping of mendelian diseases has been successful at identifying not only the gene of interest but also the specific variant or variants that are likely causal. most of the causal alleles for mendelian diseases have been found in the coding region of the human genome (i.e. the exome) . with recent developments in sequencing, the human genetics community has aggregated an extensive list of coding region variants for the purposes of designing array-based genotyping platforms that capture these variants (e.g. the illumina infinium humanexome beadchip and the affymetrix axiom exome array plate). the overwhelming majority of variation assayed on the exome chip has a minor allele frequency 51. existing genotype callers were primarily designed for common variation . for rare variation, however, only the common allele homozygote cluster is well populated limiting the efficacy of clustering algorithms. to address this need, we developed a new method to accurately call rare variation for array-based genotyping called zcall.we genotyped 9380 samples from a prior swedish schizophrenia association study and 90 hapmap samples on the illumina infinium humanexome beadchip. as described in the supplementary methods, we used illuminas gencall algorithm to generate two sets of genotype calls and illuminas genomestudio software to normalize raw intensities. first, we used linear regression (r development core team, 2010) to find the relationship between the means and standard deviations of the x and y intensities from 10 538 autosomal, common sites using 4643 samples with genotype calls from a 9479 sample cluster file and found they were correlated (r 2 0.069, r 2 0.027, p52 10 16 ) (supplementary). next, we found that z 7 performed well to classify common variation (supplementary). finally, new genotypes were assigned based on thresholds calculated from the linear regression model with z 7 and means and standard deviations calculated from 947 samples with gencall genotype calls from a 90-sample cluster file. to test how well zcall works for rare variation, we compared both gencall and zcall exome chip genotype calls to whole-exome sequencing genotypes in 947 swedish samples (supplementary methods). to assess rare variant performance, we used the snp-wise concordance (swc), which is calculated by dividing passing sites by the total number of sites. a snp is considered passing when the only error is a common homozygote being called a no call. for example, when considering singletons (i.e. one heterozygote), the heterozygote is called correctly as a heterozygote and no common homozygotes are called as heterozygotes. for 10 075 autosomal, singleton sites, the swc between gencall and whole-exome sequencing was 92.49 and 96.84, respectively, for zcall. the main error mode of gencall was calling the singleton heterozygote as a no call (6.61) while the main error mode of zcall is calling common allele homozygotes as heterozygotes (2.32). by restricting zcall to missing genotype calls, we observed a swc improvement to 99.12 (supplementary). we also tried using genotype calls from a larger cluster file (9479 samples), but the performance of zcall was slightly worse. even though more singletons were called correctly when using a larger cluster file (swc 94.65 versus 92.49), more genotype errors were made that cannot be recovered when only calling no calls (swc 98.60 versus 99.12). therefore, zcall performs more effectively using a smaller cluster file. we also assessed the effect of sample size on threshold definition. we used three sample sizes for threshold definition: 90, 947 and 9479. we found that 90 samples were insufficient to define the thresholds (swc 98.86), but that there was no difference in swc between 947 samples and 9479 samples (99.12 for both). to provide an unbiased evaluation, we compared gencall and zcall genotype calls to whole-exome sequencing data from 369 samples from the arra autism sequencing consortium. for 10 712 singletons, we found the swc using gencall to be 93.12 and using zcall restricted to no calls to be 99.27 (supplementary). we also compared our method with opticall and found for 10 705 singletons, the swc of opticall was 98.21 versus 99.27 for zcall (supplementary).  
