structural bioinformatics zdock server: interactive docking prediction of protein–protein complexes and symmetric multimers proteinprotein interactions are essential to cellular and immune function, and in many cases, because of the absence of an experimentally determined structure of the complex, these interactions must be modeled to obtain an understanding of their molecular basis. we present a user-friendly protein docking server, based on the rigid-body docking programs zdock and m-zdock, to predict structures of proteinprotein complexes and symmetric multimers. with a goal of providing an accessible and intuitive interface, we provide options for users to guide the scoring and the selection of output models, in addition to dynamic visualization of input structures and output docking models. this server enables the research community to easily and quickly produce structural models of proteinprotein complexes and symmetric multimers for their own analysis.proteinprotein interactions are responsible for a wide range of key biological processes such as cell signaling, enzyme inhibition and immune recognition. a high-resolution structure of a protein complex provides the atomic details of the interaction, and enables rational design of therapeutic molecules that inhibit or improve binding. although many structures of protein complexes have been determined by x-ray crystallography, many have not been characterized experimentally due in part to cost and experimental limitations. this has led to the development of proteinprotein docking algorithms, of which the top-performing methods often produce models with atomic-level accuracy. these approaches are distinct from those developed for proteinsmall molecule docking, which are often used to dock ligands (or sets thereof, for virtual screening) to a known binding pocket. to facilitate proteinprotein docking prediction, web-based servers have been developed for rigid-body docking , flexible docking and refinement , clustering and symmetric multimer docking (schneidman). the rigid-body proteinprotein docking program zdock was developed in our laboratory 410 years ago . it uses the fast fourier transform algorithm to enable an efficient global docking search on a 3d grid, and utilizes a combination of shape complementarity, electrostatics and statistical potential terms for scoring. zdock achieves high predictive accuracy on proteinprotein docking benchmarks, with 470 success in the top 1000 predictions for rigid-body cases in the most recent benchmark version , and consistent success (acceptable or better predictions for 22 of the last 35 submitted targets) in the international proteinprotein docking experiment, critical assessment of predicted interactions (capri) . to provide the research community with a simple interface to predict structures of protein complexes using zdock, we developed the zdock server. since its initial implementation, the zdock server has undergone major changes to improve its docking performance, functionality and user interface. the improvements were motivated by valuable user suggestions as well as our own initiatives and algorithm development. these include upgrading the docking algorithm from zdock 2.3 to zdock 3.0.2, resulting in greater accuracy and highly efficient searching. a portal for running the program m-zdock to predict the structures of symmetric multimers was recently added. also, various aspects of the user interface have been improved, integrating viewing of structures and descriptions during submission and analysis of results.  
