databases and ontologies a self-updating road map of the cancer genome atlas motivation: since 2011, the cancer genome atlas (tcga) files have been accessible through http from a public site, creating entirely new possibilities for cancer informatics by enhancing data discovery and retrieval. significantly, these enhancements enable the reporting of analysis results that can be fully traced to and reproduced using their source data. however, to realize this possibility, a continually updated road map of files in the tcga is required. creation of such a road map represents a significant data modeling challenge, due to the size and fluidity of this resource: each of the 33 cancer types is instantiated in only partially overlapping sets of analytical platforms, while the number of data files available doubles approximately every 7 months. results: we developed an engine to index and annotate the tcga files, relying exclusively on third-generation web technologies (web 3.0). specifically, this engine uses javascript in conjunction with the world wide web consortiums (w3c) resource description framework (rdf), and sparql, the query language for rdf, to capture metadata of files in the tcga open-access http directory. the resulting index may be queried using sparql, and enables file-level provenance annotations as well as discovery of arbitrary subsets of files, based on their metadata, using web standard languages. in turn, these abilities enhance the reproducibility and distribution of novel results delivered as elements of a web-based computational ecosystem. the development of the tcga roadmap engine was found to provide specific clues about how biomedical big data initiatives should be exposed as public resources for exploratory analysis, data mining and reproducible research. these specific design elements align with the concept of knowledge reengineering and represent a sharp departure from top-down approaches in grid initiatives such as cabig. they also present a much more interoper-able and reproducible alternative to the still pervasive use of data portals. availability: a prepared dashboard, including links to source code and a sparql endpoint, is available at http://bit.ly/tcgaroadmap. a video tutorial is available at http://bit.ly/tcgaroadmaptutorial.the cancer genome atlas (tcga) is a joint project of the national cancer institute (nci) and the national human genome research institute (nhgri) to comprehensively apply genome analysis technology to the study of the biomolecular basis of cancer (nci). concretely, this project has analyzed tumor and normal samples from over 6000 patients, which resulted in the collection and public availability of 37 types of genomic and clinical data for 33 cancers. these data types include gene expression, single-nucleotide polymorphism, mirna, copy number, dna methylation and somatic mutations, along with tissue slide images and clinical outcomes. since 2011, this data has been available via an http repository (http://1.usa.gov/otmjac). this report details the creation and study of a road map of the tcgas http repository, created to enable the use of this unprecedented biomolecular data resource in the creation of web 3.0 applications, and enhance the reproducibility of biomolecular research delivered as elements of a computational ecosystem. in a previous report , the authors have identified a resource description framework (rdf) data model describing the contents of tcga file repository. the resulting rdf map of the tcga contents is available (http:// rdf.s3db.googlecode.com/hg/tcga.rdf), and can be efficiently traversed by a sparql engine to quickly discover which files document results that satisfy any number of the constraints recognized by the model. for example, as illustrated in a webcast accompanying that manuscript (http://youtu.be/bi5bf-tagu4), one could identify which files describe patients from a specific cancer center that provided samples that were profiled for dna copy number variation. since then, the tcga initiative has greatly expanded the number of patients, the volume of data and the diversity of analytical platforms used. the complexity of the data available has also increased: each cancer type has a unique, only partially overlapping, subset of available data types. more importantly, in 2011, there was a momentous change in the level of data interoperability of the tcga data repository: data files are now available directly through http calls to a central directory, located at http://1.usa.gov/otmjac. this opens entirely new opportunities for interactive reproducible data analysis and visualization. indeed, as the tcga and other collaborative initiatives of this scope evolve and expand, it is not reasonable to expect that they will conform to a narrowly defined format or structure for the to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author(s) 2013. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.in large data-gathering exercises, such as the tcga, the degree of conservation in the structure of the data decreases with distance to the biological signal. in the case of the tcga, this effect is manifest in the increased fluidity of metadata about files (e.g. their location, the protocols by which they are accessed) relative to the contents of those files, which remains static. to capture this fluidity in a queryable fashion, the tcgas open-access http site is scraped into a collection of rdf triples describing the locations of, and relationships between, individual files.by capturing the date first seen, the date last seen and the date last modified, reproducible resolution of sets of files in the tcga is enabled. querying for all files first seen before a given date allows reproduction of an analysis done in the past, assuming none of the files have been removed. similarly, reproducing analyses performed before the initial scrape of the tcga can be accomplished by querying by last-modified date rather than date first seen. files that have been removed can be detected by looking for those with a last-seen date earlier than the latest last-seen date in the repository. their existence in the repository indicates they at. snapshot of a dashboard element showing the results of querying the tcga contents for relationships between platforms and disease studies, shown here as a bipartite graph. in this figure, lines between disease studies (on the left) and data analysis platforms (on the right) indicate that the disease study contains files generated by the linked platform. uterine corpus endometrioid carcinoma (coded ucec in tcga) is highlighted, as well as the lines for the 17 platforms used to process samples within that study. the query used to retrieve this data is available at http://bit.ly/platformsbydisease, with an interactive version of the visualization of the data available at http://bit.ly/tcgaroadmapone time existed in the tcga, while their out-of-date last-seen date indicates they were not present during a subsequent scrape.  
