gene expression a simple and fast method to determine the parameters for fuzzy c–means cluster analysis motivation: fuzzy c-means clustering is widely used to identify cluster structures in high-dimensional datasets, such as those obtained in dna microarray and quantitative proteomics experiments. one of its main limitations is the lack of a computationally fast method to set optimal values of algorithm parameters. wrong parameter values may either lead to the inclusion of purely random fluctuations in the results or ignore potentially important data. the optimal solution has parameter values for which the clustering does not yield any results for a purely random dataset but which detects cluster formation with maximum resolution on the edge of randomness. results: estimation of the optimal parameter values is achieved by evaluation of the results of the clustering procedure applied to randomized datasets. in this case, the optimal value of the fuzzifier follows common rules that depend only on the main properties of the dataset. taking the dimension of the set and the number of objects as input values instead of evaluating the entire dataset allows us to propose a functional relationship determining the fuzzifier directly. this result speaks strongly against using a predefined fuzzifier as typically done in many previous studies. validation indices are generally used for the estimation of the optimal number of clusters. a comparison shows that the minimum distance between the centroids provides results that are at least equivalent or better than those obtained by other computationally more expensive indices.new experimental techniques and protocols allow experiments with high resolution and thus lead to the production of large amounts of data. in turn, these datasets demand effective machinelearning techniques for extraction of information. among them, the recognition of patterns in noisy data still remains a challenge. the aim is to merge the outstanding ability of the human brain to detect patterns in extremely noisy data with the power of computer-based automation. cluster analysis allows to group high-dimensional data to whom correspondence should be addressed.points that exhibit similar properties and so to discover a possible functional relationship within subsets of data. nowadays, cluster analysis is in widespread use for the analysis of microarray data to discover genes with similar expression changes. recently, large datasets from quantitative proteomics, for instance measuring the peptide/protein expression by means of mass spectrometry, became available. for this data, cluster analysis is a powerful tool to identify or to confirm pathways of interacting proteins. different approaches to the problem of cluster analysis exist, such as hierarchical clustering , k-means clustering and self-organizing maps . noise or background signals in collected data normally come from different sources, such as intrinsic noise from variation within the sample and noise coming from the experimental equipment. an appropriate method to find clusters in this kind of data is based on fuzzy c-means clustering due to its robustness to noise . although this method has been modified and extended many times [for an overview see, the original procedure remains the most commonly used to date. in contrast to k-means clustering, the fuzzy c-means procedure involves an additional parameter, generally called the fuzzifier. a data point (e.g. a gene or protein, from now on called an object) is not directly assigned to a cluster but is allowed to obtain fuzzy memberships to all clusters. this makes it possible to decrease the effect of data objects that do not belong to one particular cluster, for example objects located between overlapping clusters or objects resulting from background noise. these objects, by having rather distributed membership values, now have a low influence in the calculation of the cluster center positions. hence, with the introduction of this new parameter, the cluster analysis becomes much more efficient in dealing with noisy data. the value of the fuzzifier defines the maximum fuzziness or noise in the dataset. whereas the k-means clustering procedure always finds clusters independently on the extent of noise in the data, the fuzzy method allows first to adapt the method to the present amount of noise and second to avoid erroneous detection of clusters generated by random patterns. therefore, the challenge consists in determining an appropriate value of the fuzzifier. to our knowledge, only few methods exist to determine an optimal value of the fuzzifier. in, the fuzzifier is obtained with an empirical method calculating the coefficient of variation of a function of the distances between all objects of the entire dataset. another approach searches for a minimalpage: 2842 28412848  
