a simple statistical test to infer the causality of target/phenotype correlation from small molecule phenotypic screens motivation: cell-based phenotypic screens using small molecule inhibitors is an important technology for early drug discovery if the relationship between the disease-related cellular phenotype and inhibitors biological targets can be determined. however, chemical inhibitors are rightfully believed to be less specific than perturbation by biological agents, such as antibody and small inference rna. therefore, it is often a challenge in small molecule phenotypic screening to infer the causality between a particular cellular phenotype and the inactivation of the responsible protein due to the off-target effect of the inhibitors. results: in this article, we present a roche in-house effort of screening 746 structurally diverse compounds for their cytotoxicity in hela cells measured by high content imaging technology. these compounds were also systematically profiled for the targeted and off-target binding affinity to a panel of 25 pre-selected protein kinases in a cell-free system. in an effort to search for the kinases whose activities are crucial for cell survival, we found that the simple association method such as the chi-square test yields a large number of false positives because the observed cytotoxic phenotype is likely to be the result of promiscuous action of less specific inhibitors instead of true consequence of inactivation of single relevant target. we demonstrated that a stratified categorical data analysis technique such as the cochranmantelhaenszel test is an effective approach to extract the meaningful biological connection from the spurious correlation resulted from confounding covariates. this study indicates that, empowered by appropriate statistical adjustment, small molecule inhibitor perturbation remains a powerful tool to pin down the relevant biomarker for drug safety and efficacy research. contact:in the past, drug discovery heavily relied upon cell-based phenotypic screening in which the drug candidates that induce the to whom correspondence should be addressed. desired cellular phenotype are discovered first and the molecular mechanism of action (mmoa) is identified later . the completion of the human genome project and the emergence of omic type technologies such as rna microarrays greatly increase the expectation of disease target oriented drug discovery. however, the productivity of the pharmaceutical industry keeps declining despite all these technological innovations. as a result, we have recently seen phenotypic screening regain the momentum in delivering promising drug candidates. the challenge, however, lies on the elucidation of molecular mechanism by which the candidate compounds elicit the cellular phenotype of interest, which is always important for understanding disease and medicine and serve as the basis for the further pre-clinical development . in recent years, pharmaceutical industries have keen interest in developing therapeutic small molecules targeting protein kinases, a gene family implicated in cancer and inflammation. however, it is proven difficult to determine the crucial targets responsible for pathological phenotype in a protein kinase-focused phenotypic screen due to the off-target behaviors of small molecules. many kinase inhibitors demonstrate broad cross-reactivity to the family of protein kinases which share a conserved atp binding pocket prone to competitive interaction . in this study, we described the profiling of 746 structurally diverse compounds for their in vitro kinase inhibiting properties and cytotoxicity, a cellular phenotype regarded as a typical surrogate for early safety and efficacy assessment. we devised a three-step statistical framework to facilitate the identification of protein kinases whose inactivation is responsible for compound-induced cytotoxicity. general association methods that correlate blockage of kinases with cytotoxicity such as the chi-square test was first performed to generate a potential target list. then a logistic regression model is conducted to confirm the suspected covariate that confounds with the inhibitors targeted effect, therefore, may interfere with causal inference. finally, a stratified categorical analysis such as the cochranmantelhaenszel (cmh) test is conducted across the entire level of confounding covariates to identify the causal target whose significance is independent of an inhibitors cross-reactivity. we are also able to use literature knowledge and experimental data to validate the resulting targets unveiled by the cmh test. this study demonstrates the necessity for a rigorous statistical correction in order to make accurate inference from data sources influenced by latent confoundingbesides gene knock-out models and small interference rna technology, gene function can be studied by chemical genetics using small molecule intervention in the format of phenotypic screening . nevertheless, chemical perturbation studies are vulnerable to the bias caused by the cross-reactivity of compound. this is particularly true for kinase inhibitors because the targets of inhibitors share a highly conserved substrate binding pocket. in this study, we show that this issue can be at least partially tackled by following a three-step statistical correction: association identification confounding factor confirmation confounding factor adjustment in order to infer causality of cytotoxicity by the inhibition of house-keeping kinases (supplementary). stratifying compound library based on the overall inhibitor cross-reactivity is an effective strategy to reduce the type i errors for target identification arising from grossly promiscuous action of non-specific inhibitors. yet, it does not entirely solve the causality issue for a relatively specific inhibitor, which binds to both the real target and a small number of non-relevant kinases. currently, this adjustment invalidates the majority of kinases that have been listed to be significant for cell homeostasis by regular association methods such as the chi-square test. consistent with this result, our survey of biological literature also indicates that many kinases on the list indeed should not be essential to the basic homeostasis of cells. for instance, c-src knock-out mice exhibit largely normal phenotype except in osteoblast most likely owing to the compensatory roles played by lyn and yes, the two close homologs of c-src . on the other hand, kdr gene knockout in mice is embryonic lethal due to the defect in early hematopoiesis and endothelial development . however, it is in doubt whether these angiogenesis-related functions would be crucial for the survival of hela cells, a human cervical carcinoma cell line. more revealingly, all the highly specific potent inhibitors against c-src and kdr identified in this compound library only show mild toxic phenotype measured by cytotoxicity index. conversely, the specific potent inhibitors for aurora a and par-1b kinase, both of which remain significant after the cmh adjustment, lead to much higher degrees of toxicity. besides the strong experimental evidences, aurora a kinase is well known for its essential role in mitosis and the kinase null mice die at very early embryonic stage due to the compromised spindle assembly . danusertib, a potent inhibitor for aurora a, is currently in phase i clinical trials for the treatment of various advanced solid tumors . the experimental evidence for the role of par-1b is less clear because the most potent and selective par-1b inhibitor (ic50 1 m) we identified in this study also inhibits seven other kinases with low affinity. the combinatorial knock-out of par-1b and par-1a, its closely homologous gene, is embryonic lethal, raising the possibility of inhibitors cross-reactivity to par-1a that is not included in our kinase panel . this approach has limitations. it foremost demands the extensive off-target profile be generated for all compounds before it can be statistically adjusted, which is not always available. however, our analysis offers compelling evidence that a snapshot of cross-reactivity index from a restricted panel of targets can serve as a good surrogate for a more comprehensive screen, which might have prohibitive cost. meanwhile, the public database such as pubchem may also serve as an important resource for information on the interaction profiles of interested chemicals to various biological entities . secondarily, our approach requires large numbers of compounds with high diversity to be screened in order to gain sufficient statistical power. the pool of potent inhibitors with toxicity also needs to be large enough so that they can be stratified in order for adjustment of covariates. another downside of protein family focused screen is that the interaction of inhibitors with random targets outside the targeted protein family is overlooked. this limitation can only be circumvented by using more compounds in that the general pattern drawn from a large library is less likely to be influenced by the opportunistic off-target effects outside the gene family that have been screened.  
