a spectral graph theoretic approach to quantification and calibration of collective morphological differences in cell images motivation: high-throughput image-based assay technologies can rapidly produce a large number of cell images for drug screening, but data analysis is still a major bottleneck that limits their utility. quantifying a wide variety of morphological differences observed in cell images under different drug influences is still a challenging task because the result can be highly sensitive to sampling and noise. results: we propose a graph-based approach to cell image analysis. we define graph transition energy to quantify morphological differences between image sets. a spectral graph theoretic regularization is applied to transform the feature space based on training examples of extremely different images to calibrate the quantification. calibration is essential for a practical quantification method because we need to measure the confidence of the quantification. we applied our method to quantify the degree of partial fragmentation of mitochondria in collections of fluorescent cell images. we show that with transformation, the quantification can be more accurate and sensitive than that without transformation. we also show that our method outperforms competing methods, including neighbourhood component analysis and the multi-variate drug profiling method by loo et al. we illustrate its utility with a study of annonaceous acetogenins, a family of compounds with drug potential. our result reveals that squamocin induces more fragmented mitochondria than muricin a. availability: mitochondrial cell images, their corresponding feature sets (sslf and wslf) and the source code of our proposed method are available at http://aiia.iis.recently, high-throughput image-based assay technologies, or highcontent analysis, have become a useful tool for drug discovery , small molecule screen , subcellular localization , etc. these technologies make it possible to visualize, trace and quantify cellular morphological changes in high resolution and play an increasingly crucial role to the understanding of biological processes.since the cost of acquiring a large number of microscopic cell images is decreasing, the analysis tools must be powerful. consider a study aiming at correlating drug influences to morphological changes of mitochondria. this topic has become increasingly important mainly because of its relation to apoptosis and aging process.shows some representative cell images with different levels of fragmentation of mitochondria. as we can see, intact or completely fragmented mitochondria are relatively easy to recognize, but it is difficult to quantify partial fragmentation. in fact, in addition to fragmentation, mitochondria may become tubular, shortened, elongated or swollen. all these morphological changes are important biological indicators . however, off-the-shelf analysis software only distinguishes morphological patterns at cellular level. no partial change or mixture of patterns at subcellular level can be readily detected. quantification requires human inspection, which is infeasible for high-throughput screening . our goal is to derive an objective and reliable quantification tool to correlate drug influences and morphological differences at cellular or subcellular levels. we assume that cell images are characterized. given two sets of cell images with extremely different morphology patterns as training examples; our method transforms the feature space so that regularized graph transition energy between the two sets is minimized. then we can quantify the morphological difference of cells by computing their graph transition energy with the training examples in the transformed feature space. by a feature set extracted from the images and can be considered as a data point in the feature space. a straightforward quantification is to measure the euclidean distance between data points or apply other sophisticated similarity metrics. however, there are key challenges that must be addressed. @bullet a wide variety of morphological categories must be considered. @bullet influence of a drug is a random variable, the difference must be estimated between pairs of cell-image collections. averaging pairwise differences of single images is not appropriate here because of the presence of noise and outliers.in the end, we summarize our contributions as follows:@bullet we defined graph transition energy to quantify morphological difference of two cell-image collections under different perturbations. @bullet we applied a spectral graph theoretic regularization to reweight the feature space according to training examples of extremely different cases. experimental results show that our feature space transformation method actually improves the quality of classification and quantification. the method also allows for calibration by providing a confidence score of the quantification.@bullet we demonstrated how to quantify morphological difference of collections of cell images in our approach and showed that our approach has a higher discrimination power than a competing approach by@bullet we showed that after applying our feature space transformation method, the performance of a semi-supervised learning method byfor subcellular localization can be improved significantly.@bullet coupling with a k-nn regression method, we demonstrated that our transformation method improves the accuracy of the estimation of partial fragmentation of mitochondria in cell images, and that our method is more effective than nca. @bullet in section 4.3, we demonstrated a case study of two annonaceous acetogenin compounds and their effects to mitochondrial fragmentation.our approach is not specific to any particular morphological differences and can potentially be applied to quantify any difference with an appropriate set of features. therefore, it has the potential to rapidly screen many drug candidates and understand their effects. in our future work, we will apply this approach to continue our study of annonaceous acetogenins and their various effects to mitochondria.  
