accurate estimation of isoelectric point of protein and peptide based on amino acid sequences downloaded from motivation: in any macromolecular polyprotic systemfor example protein, dna or rnathe iso-electric pointcommonly referred to as the pican be defined as the point of singularity in a titra-tion curve, corresponding to the solution ph value at which the net overall surface chargeand thus the electrophoretic mobilityof the ampholyte sums to zero. different modern analytical biochemistry and proteomics methods depend on the isoelectric point as a principal feature for protein and peptide characterization. protein separation by isoelectric point is a critical part of 2-d gel electrophoresis, a key precursor of proteomics, where discrete spots can be digested in-gel, and proteins subsequently identified by analytical mass spectrometry. peptide fractionation according to their pi is also widely used in current proteomics sample preparation procedures previous to the lc-ms/ms analysis. therefore accurate theoretical prediction of pi would expedite such analysis. while such pi calculation is widely used, it remains largely untested, motivating our efforts to benchmark pi prediction methods. results: using data from the database pip-db and one publically available dataset as our reference gold standard, we have undertaken the benchmarking of pi calculation methods. we find that methods vary in their accuracy and are highly sensitive to the choice of basis set. the machine-learning algorithms, especially the svm-based algorithm, showed a superior performance when studying peptide mixtures. in general, learning-based pi prediction methods (such as cofactor, svm and branca) require a large training dataset and their resulting performance will strongly depend of the quality of that data. in contrast with iterative methods, machine-learning algorithms have the advantage of being able to add new features to improve the accuracy of prediction.in a titration curve, the isoelectric point (pi) is the value at which the overall net surface charge of a macromolecular polyprotic species equals zero. protein pi values are amongst the most widely determined and widely reported quantities in all of biochemistry and proteomics. the pi is obtained as essentially incidental information during isoelectric focusing (ief) experiments, free flow electrophoresis (ffe), capillary electrophoresis, and in-gel electrophoresis experiments using ipg strips . electrophoresis-based separation of proteins and peptides in both free-flow and gel systems has been adapted to a wide variety of proteomics platforms in order to reduce the complexity of the studied proteome . in addition to the resolution and dynamic range of the fractionation technique, combining the electrophoretic separation of proteins with mass spectrometry analysis provides an orthogonal analytical method for improving protein identification in different workflows . assuming a protein to be denatured, theoretical calculation of the pi is typically rapid, requiring only the sequence as input . most techniques exploit tabulated pk a values for the different ionizable amino acid residues; such values are assumed to be constant regardless of structural context . many authors have reported different values for the pk a s of protein side chains and most of them are derived from measurements of side chains in isolated amino acids or from model compounds; as well as values derived from ionizable side chains in situ . as many such alternative theoretical methods have been proposed, the calculation of protein pi values is in urgent need of benchmarking, since its accuracy remains largely untested. extant comparison has been exiguous, using very small datasets , peptides rather than proteins or has reported poor accuracy . we have previously described the database pip-db , a collection of proteins, with associated experimentally determined pi values, as collated from the literature (. in this paper, we use pip-db as a gold standard reference for comparison, and describe the benchmarking of protein pi prediction. we also include a peptide dataset to evaluate the performance of pi prediction methods when estimating peptide pis, due to the importance of properly assessing the accuracy of such prediction. as previously we combine different methods with different parameter values. specifically, we evaluated five isoelectric point prediction algorithms: iterative , bjellquivst , cofactor , svm and branca ; using, where appropriate, a set of alternate values for ionizable amino acid side chain pk a s.our benchmarking comparison constitutes a strong blind test, since no method is in any way optimized for this particular data set and all the proteins and corresponding isoelectric points were collected from different sources and correspond to distinct analytical settings. the present study demonstrates that the algorithms from bjellqvist et al. and perez-riverol et al. represent the most accurate algorithms overall for computing protein isoelectric points. the results also demonstrate that when other pk a sets are employed no significant differences were seen for the bjellqvist et al. approach, and most of the small differences observed can be related to specific analytical conditions specific to the experiment. the poor performance of all evaluated algorithms for the single value protein dataset is alarming. there are several possible explanations for this behaviour. the dataset was evaluated using a variety of methods over many decades. thus the intrinsic variation will arise both from true biological variation (the presence of unknown processed or truncated proteins or proteins with charged post-translational modifications, etc.) and other errors introduced by a gallimaufry of different experimental protocols, each with distinct and incommensurable calibration. the low correlation between experimental and predicted values throws serious doubt on the veracity of many theoretical studies of isoelectric point distributions in whole proteomes, such as the studies by, and any arguments made on that basis. an alternative exegesis posits that pip-db must contain a large number of annotation errors, as introduced during database construction, which seriously contaminates the result. this is clearly possible, if highly unlikely. in ief gels or sds-page experiments, it is common to find the same polypeptide instance through multiple experimental fractions, due to diffusion phenomena, or from uneven cutting during band excision across of the gel. in addition, the peptides or proteins could have precipitated out of solution during migration from the well to the appropriate ph in the gel. possible aggregation and degradation could contribute to enhance inappropriate focalization, making it difficult to correctly interpret the results obtained. it has also been shown that not only the amino acid composition but also its subsequent modification can influence the accurate estimation of the isoelectric point, e.g. common modifications such as phosphorylation and acetylation which might lead to the shielding of surface charges (as previously described in section 3.3). pip-db illustrates this complex scenario as shown in the table 3. it contains multiple proteins that may be detectable in both acid and basic region, showing a wide focalization zone. most pi prediction methods do not take into account such artifacts and will thus fail to make accurate estimates. these results also highlight the need for a complete and customizable tool that can provide all available algorithms and pk a sets for isoelectric point analysis. the machine-learning algorithms, especially the svm-based algorithm, showed a superior performance when studying peptide mixtures. in general, learning-based pi prediction methods (such as cofactor, svm and branca) require a large training dataset and their resulting performance will strongly depend of the quality of that data. even though cofactor and branca algorithms are based on learning approaches, it is not possible to retrain these algorithms with different datasets. in this sense, the svm approach shows more flexibility in pi computation, and this feature can improve prediction accuracy. in contrast with iterative methods, machine-learning algorithms have the advantage of being able to add new features to improve prediction. considering the amount of pk a sets reported to date, use of the iterative approach provides a good opportunity to find some variant that fits well with particular experimental conditions. in the near future, new algorithms and bioinformatics tools should be able to provide a way of choosing different pk a sets and thus obtain more accurate prediction for a given analytical setting. the svm and cofactor methods should only be used where a high number of sequences are studied and can thus be used to train the algorithms. we observed notable fluctuations in pi predictions for iterative methods on a small dataset, showing this method to be sensitive to small changes in the amino acid pk a values used. moreover, the algorithm fails when certain pk a values are missing. we envisage that more algorithms based on machine learning, including new additional features, should be explored allowing the development of fast, accurate and reliable pi calculation algorithms for use in future protein and peptide proteomic analysis. defined by the difference between the maximal and minimal pi experimental value found for the protein in pip-db.  
