assessing allele-specific expression across multiple tissues from rna-seq read data motivation: rna sequencing enables allele-specific expression (ase) studies that complement standard genotype expression studies for common variants and, importantly, also allow measuring the regulatory impact of rare variants. the genotype-tissue expression (gtex) project is collecting rna-seq data on multiple tissues of a same set of individuals and novel methods are required for the analysis of these data. results: we present a statistical method to compare different patterns of ase across tissues and to classify genetic variants according to their impact on the tissue-wide expression profile. we focus on strong ase effects that we are expecting to see for protein-truncating variants, but our method can also be adjusted for other types of ase effects. we illustrate the method with a real data example on a tissue-wide expression profile of a variant causal for lipoid proteinosis, and with a simulation study to assess our method more generally. availability and implementation:advancements in sequencing technologies are enabling unprecedented possibilities to study the transcriptome . in rna-sequencing studies, it is possible to distinguish between transcripts from the two haplotypes of an individual using heterozygous sites. this approach, called allelespecific expression (ase) analysis, allows an alternative way to quantify cis-regulatory variation, complementary to eqtl analysis.in addition, ase has been utilized to analyze transcriptome effects of nonsense-mediated decay (nmd) triggered by predicted lossof-function variants . the genotype-tissue expression (gtex) project is establishing a resource database and tissue bank for the scientific community to study the relationship between genetic variation and gene expression in human tissues , with an aim to). to date, some methods have been proposed for the analysis of ase data, but these methods largely focus on a single tissue although some could be applied also to multiple tissues . the multi-tissue aspect is important for interpreting disease association findings since eqtl and early ase studies suggest widespread tissue-specific effects of cis-regulatory variants . currently, more sophisticated methods for cross-tissue eqtl analysis are emerging . however, eqtl analysis requires large sample sizes, while ase analyses can be conducted with significantly smaller datasets. in this article, we present novel statistical methods for analyzing ase patterns from rna-seq data across multiple tissues. our main motivation is phenomena such as nmd that can lead to a substantial imbalance of transcripts from the two alleles (in) and can vary considerably between cell types . from a statistical point of view, an advantage of prominent ase is that it can be detected even with a single individual and with as small a read count as 10. (see middle panel offor the first question, a standard frequentist version of the binomial test is commonly used. however, an interpretation of such a test depends on factors like the read count and simultaneous analysis of multiple tissues is very challenging. hence, we require that our statistical framework allow a simultaneous comparison between several cross-tissue models for observed data. for example, we want to weigh relative support of the model where all tissues show ase to the models where only a single tissue shows ase and to the null model where none of the tissues show ase. for this purpose, we adopt a bayesian model comparison framework. among its favorable properties are natural ways to compare models with differing number of parameters and to fully account for the amount of available data when evaluating relative support of the models.we first assess performance of gtm on simulated data and compare it with a standard heterogeneity measure. second, we illustrate gtm on a real data example taken from the gtex project. results of gtm are presented in supplementary information.. the reference allele read count for each tissue s was sampled from binn s ; h s , where h s is 0.5 for group n , 0.75 for group m and 0.99 for group s.we have introduced a statistical framework to assess similarities and differences in ase between tissue types. a motivation for our work comes from ongoing rna-sequencing projects such as the gtex project that generates data on up to 30 tissue types per individual with read counts per tissue and per site starting from around 10. we have chosen a bayesian approach because it leads to a consistent probabilistic quantification of the support that the data provide for each of the competing models. we see this as an advantage over a series of separate analyses, such as, for example, would be needed by an approach that first assessed heterogeneity using the qstatistic and if no (statistically significant) heterogeneity was observed, would further classify the dataset into one of the homogeneous states. previously, two excellent studies on bayesian models for expression data have been published byconsider a three-stage hierarchical model for allele read counts from genome-wide rna-seq data of one individual. they observe allele counts at each heterozygous snv (1st level) which are assigned to genes (2nd level) whose common properties are controlled by genome-wide parameters (3rd level). their model would be directly applicable also to multi-tissue rna-seq data where tissue-specific allele counts replace snv-specific allele counts and sites replace genes at the second level of the model. suppose, for example, that we had multi-tissue rna-seq data on a set of individuals who are heterozygous for at least one ptv. the model ofwould produce posterior distribution on the global proportion of the ptvs that show ase in at least one tissue type, as well as variant-specific posterior probability of ase. however, it would not give as refined characterization of ase at each ptv as our hierarchical model gtm (supplementary information) and it would not do inference on tissue-specific group indicator parameters (c s ) that allow probabilistic model comparison between different patterns of ase.developed a method for a joint eqtl analysis across multiple tissues. they work with micro-array expression data using a linear model that is not directly applicable to the datasets we have in mind: read count data from several tissues of a single individual. they use tissue-specific binary indicator parameters that tell whether a variant is an eqtl in each tissue and introduce three ways to assign prior probabilities to different configurations of the indicators. their lite model gives positive prior on only those configurations whose distance from homogeneity is at most 1. their bma model is similar to what we have used in that the prior of a configuration depends only on its distance from homogeneity and that the total prior probability corresponding to each value of distance is the same. finally, their most complex bma-hm model treats the weights of the configurations as random variables and estimates them across genes using a hierarchical model. similar hierarchical model, that would learn joint ase patterns between tissues by a simultaneous analysis of a set of genetic variants (e.g. ptvs) is also an important topic for further development of our hierarchical model gtm. even though hierarchical models, such as our gtm and those of, are conceptually attractive, we believe that gtms ability to analyze one ptv at a time has its merits from a practical point of view: it is quick to run, easy to understand and requires read count data on only one variant. heterogeneity measures. our model assumes that all tissues in a same group have the same reference allele read frequency h. in practice, we expect that our model is robust to some heterogeneity within each group, since the priors for different groups are so clearly separable from each other (and supplementary). our main interest is to assign tissue types into (three) broad categories of ase, and consequently we call a dataset heterogeneous only if some pair of tissues show fairly strong difference in the non-reference allele frequency. standard heterogeneity measures, such as q, ask a slightly different question of whether parameters h s have exactly the same value across the tissues. a frequentist answer to this latter question is given by an empirical p-value of heterogeneity measures q or phetjy estimated under the null hypothesis that all tissues have the same value for h parameter which is estimated from the data. by this approach, heterogeneity p-values in the ecm1 example ofare 0.011 and 0.006 by using q and phet0jy, respectively, as a test statistic. while these p-values point to general heterogeneity between the tissue types, our gtm analysis leads to more detailed information considering the type of heterogeneity: we see heterogeneity where at least one tissue type escapes ase (our het0 state). our heterogeneity probabilities are based on a lower bound of the true marginal likelihoods of the heterogeneity states. we showed that in a large majority of our datasets (with 10 tissues) the approximation is accurate, but the approximation may not always work as well with larger number of tissues. therefore, in addition to the heterogeneity probabilities, we also compute, for each pair of tissues, a posterior expectation of the distance between them. here we define the distance between two tissues to be 0 if they belong to a same group and 1 otherwise. maximum of all pairwise distances gives an indication whether there is heterogeneity between tissues. by further defining the distance between the ase groups m and s to be 0, we have a measure for particular kind of heterogeneity (het0) where at least one tissue belongs to the no ase group n .  
