genome analysis assessing gene-level translational control from ribosome profiling motivation: the translational landscape of diverse cellular systems remains largely uncharacterized. a detailed understanding of the control of gene expression at the level of messenger rna translation is vital to elucidating a systems-level view of complex molecular programs in the cell. establishing the degree to which such post-transcriptional regulation can mediate specific phenotypes is similarly critical to elucidating the molecular pathogenesis of diseases such as cancer. recently, methods for massively parallel sequencing of ribosome-bound fragments of messenger rna have begun to uncover genome-wide translational control at codon resolution. despite its promise for deeply characterizing mammalian proteomes, few analytical methods exist for the comprehensive analysis of this paired rna and ribosome data. results: we describe the babel framework, an analytical methodology for assessing the significance of changes in translational regulation within cells and between conditions. this approach facilitates the analysis of translation genome-wide while allowing statistically principled gene-level inference. babel is based on an errors-in-variables regression model that uses the negative binomial distribution and draws inference using a parametric bootstrap approach. we demonstrate the operating characteristics of babel on simulated data and use its gene-level inference to extend prior analyses significantly, discovering new translationally regulated modules under mammalian target of rapamycin (mtor) pathway signaling control. availability: the babel framework is freely available as source code atthe translation of cellular messenger rnas (mrnas) is the allimportant final product of gene expression. nevertheless, a complete understanding of gene expression at the level of mrna translation is generally lacking. as mrna levels explain only a modest fraction of protein abundance, we must establish the landscape of mrna translation and determine the mechanisms by which it is regulated to fully elucidate diverse cellular systems. nevertheless, genome-scale characterization of translational changes has lagged behind the development of similar methods for exploring mammalian transcriptomes. recent advances in profiling ribosome occupancy with deep sequencing , however, now allows a near codon resolution view of ribosome-bound mrnas. briefly, ribosome profiling entails isolating fragments of such mrnas, which results in $30 bp ribosome-protected fragments (rpfs) that are purified and processed for massively parallel sequencing. simultaneously, and from the same cells, poly(a) mrna is purified, and concurrent sequencing of both ribosome and rna libraries generates short sequence reads that identify either the position of a bound ribosome or the expression of the cognate transcript. these methods have been used to explore translation in diverse genomes including those from yeast, zebrafish, murine models and human cancers . these studies have revealed a complex and multifaceted translational landscape in mammalian transcriptomes. although open reading frames (orfs) that initiate with an aug codon are canonical and are perhaps best characterized, a variety of noncanonical structures also contribute to the diversity and complexity of translation. these include upstream orfs, non-aug initiation of translation, internal ribosome entry sites, translational re-initiation and frameshift, leaky scanning and the ever expanding world of small rnas: expressed short and long non-coding sequences that lack an orf. so, although ribosome profiling promises a new window into the nature and dynamics of normal and anomalous mrna translation, progress is predicated on the development of robust methodologies to facilitate statistically principled analysis. prior analyses have described the global features of translational efficiency in different systems, species and upon multiple perturbations by comparing the log of scaled ribosome counts to the log of scaled mrna counts for groups of genes . however, it is unclear how such a measure would lead naturally to inference about the biological significance of individual changes in genes, especially in the presence of few replicates. there is, therefore, a great need for robust methods for drawing gene-level inference on the basis of changes in translational regulation or even subtle shifts in patterns of ribosome occupancy. the importance of such quantitative methods will only grow as ribosome profiling is adopted more widely to characterize translational abnormalities that drive diverse pathologies including human cancers. such efforts would serve to whom correspondence should be addressed. as a vital companion to extensive genetic characterization efforts already underway, such as the cancer genome atlas (http:// cancergenome.nih.gov/). here, to facilitate such efforts, we describe a statistical framework, babel, for determining genes with unexpected ribosome occupancy: those insufficiently explained by their intrinsic transcript abundance within a condition, and those whose ribosome association changes in magnitude or direction between conditions . we demonstrate its statistical properties through simulations, and its applicability through the re-analysis of ribosome profiling data interrogating translational control downstream of the mtor signaling pathway.the ability to draw statistically principled inferences about translationally regulated genes from ribosome profiling is necessary for the discovery of specific mechanisms of, and abnormalities in, translational control in diverse cellular systems. here, we introduce the babel framework for performing just such an analysis. babel produces a natural and readily interpretable summary (p-value) of the level of ribosome-given-mrna for individual genes within samples and between conditions. on simulated data, we demonstrated that babel has proper type i error both within and between conditions and possesses good power that increases with sample and effect size, emphasizing the need for careful design of ribosome profiling experiments. a reanalysis of ribosome profiling in response to multifaceted mtor inhibition both confirmed prior findings, and importantly, extended them to identify novel functional modules subject to translational control in prostate cancer cells. among the greatest strengths of babel is model flexibility. as more is learned about the layers of overt post-transcriptional regulation that impact ribosome occupancy and may uncouple the abundance of a transcript from its level of active translation, quantitative measures of these underlying processes can be incorporated as covariates to improve the accuracy of the model. babel also introduces a new approach for combining p-values across independent tests in this context that has applicability far beyond the analysis of ribosome profiling. nevertheless, challenges remain. our simulations and experience indicate that modeling rpfs for genes with low mrna abundance (and, therefore, low rpfs) can produce inaccurate p-values based on what may be small stochastic fluctuations in read counts between samples (see supplementary note). although beyond the scope of this work, improving this will require a joint estimate of rpf and mrna counts sufficient to produce accurate p-values from the bootstrap in the left tail of the mrna distribution. furthermore, additional improvements to the ribosome profiling protocol are necessary to extend these analyses to isoformspecific translational patterns. despite these challenges, babel establishes a statistical framework for inferring changes in translational regulation of cellular mrnas. in conjunction with ribosome profiling, the babel framework will help bridge the gap in our understanding of the translational control of normal and pathogenic phenotypes.. analysis of mtor inhibition. (a) the relationship between babel-produced q-values for genes after mtor inhibition with the adenosine triphosphate site inhibitor pp242 compared with the absolute value of translational efficiency as previously calculated . the rank of genes identified by babel or by the original study is shown (inset), ranked by babel significance. (b) babel analysis of mtorc1 inhibition with pp242 identified several genes encoding distinct subunits of the eif3 complex as selectively inhibited at the translational level, a signature that was absent upon rapamycin treatment or among the other eif complexes. the eif3 complex bound to the 40s ribosome is represented schematicallywith subunits colored as a function of the significance of their translational repression upon mtor inhibition (as indicated)  
