bioinformatics-btq049.tex] sequence analysis assigning roles to dna regulatory motifs using comparative genomics motivation: transcription factors (tfs) are crucial during the lifetime of the cell. their functional roles are defined by the genes they regulate. uncovering these roles not only sheds light on the tf at hand but puts it into the context of the complete regulatory network. results: here, we present an alignment-and threshold-free comparative genomics approach for assigning functional roles to dna regulatory motifs. we incorporate our approach into the gomo algorithm, a computational tool for detecting associations between a user-specified dna regulatory motif [expressed as a position weight matrix (pwm)] and gene ontology (go) terms. incorporating multiple species into the analysis significantly improves gomos ability to identify go terms associated with the regulatory targets of tfs. including three comparative species in the process of predicting tf roles in saccharomyces cerevisiae and homo sapiens increases the number of significant predictions by 75 and 200, respectively. the predicted go terms are also more specific, yielding deeper biological insight into the role of the tf. adjusting motif (binding) affinity scores for individual sequence composition proves to be essential for avoiding false positive associations. we describe a novel dna sequence-scoring algorithm that compensates a thermodynamic measure of dna-binding affinity for individual sequence base composition. gomos prediction accuracy proves to be relatively insensitive to how promoters are defined. because gomo uses a threshold-free form of gene set analysis, there are no free parameters to tune. biologists can investigate the potential roles of dna regulatory motifs of interest using gomo via the webthe regulation of gene expression is crucial in the development and functioning of cells. dna-binding proteins called transcription factors (tfs) are one cog in the regulatory machinery shared by all cellular and multi-cellular organisms. the human genome, for instance, is estimated to contain up to 3000 such tfs, of which only about 1000 are annotated as such, and only 62 have experimentally to whom correspondence should be addressed. verified in vivo dna-binding and regulatory activity . for the vast majority of tfs in higher organisms, the set of genes they regulate, as well as the biological functions they are involved in, is largely unknown. however, for a growing number of tfs, models of their dna-binding propensities are known. the advent of protein binding microarrays (pbms) in particular is rapidly making dna-binding affinity data available for large numbers of tfs in many species . another source of dna-binding affinity data for tfs is chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing (chip-seq;). both of these types of data can be used to construct a position weight matrix (pwm;) model of the dna-binding affinity of a given tf. such models are herein referred to as motifs, and can also model the dna-binding affinity of other molecules, including micrornas. gene expression data can also be used to discover dna-binding motifs utilizing ab initio motif discovery from the promoters of sets of co-expressed genes . in contrast to the pbm and chip-seq approaches, motif discovery in sets of co-expressed genes usually results in dna-binding motifs for which the binding molecule (e.g. tf or microrna) is unknown. one application of dna-binding motifs is the in silico prediction of the regulatory targets of the tfs. to predict the targets of a tf, its binding motif is used to score promoter regions of genes for their potential to bind the tf protein. it is well-known that such predictions are not very specific, and many false positives must be tolerated if all regulatory targets of a tf are to be detected . however, as we have previously shown, even such noisy tf target predictions contain sufficient information to allow us to make useful predictions of the biological roles of the tf . the focus of the current work is to improve the sensitivity of computational methods that make tf role predictions using dna-binding motifs. our original method for predicting the roles of tfs starts with a pwm motif describing the dna-binding affinity of the tf. we use the pwm to score the promoter region of each gene in the genome for its likelihood to be bound by the tf. we then use the resulting affinity scores to test each term in the gene ontology (go;) for association with high-scoring genes. in contrast to other approaches (e.g.) that use an user-specified affinity score threshold to separate tf target genes from non-targets, we use the mannwhitney u-test , also known as wilcoxon rank sum test, to determine if the genes associated with a particular go term have significantly high scores. this method was implemented in the originalpage: 861 860866we have presented a comparative genomics approach for assigning biological roles to sequence motifs using a form of gene set enrichment analysis. the approach does not require multiple alignments because role predictions are made independently for each comparative genome and then combined across genomes. this means that the method does not assume that the location and orientation of binding sites is conserved across species. the method does require that orthologous genes be identified in the species being utilized, as would also be the case for a method employing multiple alignments. the approach also assumes that the functions of orthologous genes, and the dna-binding affinity of the regulatory molecule, have been conserved in the species being used. although the above assumptions are no doubt sometimes violated, our comparative genomics approach nonetheless substantially improves the sensitivity of tf role predictions. our principal result is that it is possible to substantially improve the prediction of the association of a dna-binding motif with an annotation term by mapping the annotation from a key species to related species, and combining the association scores for a single motif and term across species. the approach requires only that we are able to compute the p-value of the motif-term association in each species, and we combine across species by taking the geometric mean of the p-values. a simple permutation test then assigns significance values to the combined motif-term score. since our method is alignment-free, it avoids problems that would be caused by imperfect alignments or motif drift .  
