data and text mining assimilator: a new tool to inform selection of associated genetic variants for functional studies motivation: fine-mapping experiments from genome-wide association studies (gwas) are underway for many complex diseases. these are likely to identify a number of putative causal variants, which cannot be separated further in terms of strength of genetic association due to linkage disequilibrium. the challenge will be selecting which variant to prioritize for subsequent expensive functional studies. a wealth of functional information generated from wet lab experiments now exists but cannot be easily interrogated by the user. here, we describe a program designed to quickly assimilate this data called assimilator and validate the method by interrogating two regions to show its effectiveness.genome-wide association studies (gwas) have been enormously successful in identifying regions associated with a variety of complex traits and diseases. fine-mapping studies are underway for many of these disorders and are likely to identify a number of putative causal variants. the challenge then will be to prioritize which variants to select for the expensive functional studies required to fully translate how these variants affect risk. in many cases, it is expected that the likely causal variants will be single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) markers that are in complete linkage disequilibrium and which cannot be prioritized further based on genetic evidence alone. snps within genes which affect the resulting protein or lie in a regulatory region would be obvious candidates for functional studies but, in many complex diseases, the causal snps identified to date map to intergenic, non-coding regions and it is more challenging to prioritize these based on likely function . there is now a wealth of information available from the encyclopaedia of dna elements (encode) international consortium hosted by the university of california santa cruz (ucsc) through their genome browser . these data have been generated from wet lab experiments including to whom correspondence should be addressed. chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (chip-seq), dnase hypersensitivity and histone modification studies, and thus may provide better evidence of putative function compared with predictive algorithms used previously to infer function at a locus. an enormous amount of data is available including studies in different cell lines and different cell compartments, but currently these sites cannot be easily interrogated by the user simultaneously. other potential resources for prioritizing snps for functional studies are now becoming more widely available and include eqtl studies and programs which predict likely effects of non-synonymous polymorphisms. here, we describe a program designed to quickly assimilate all available data for snps or locations entered by the user, called assimilator. importantly, the ability to enter snps using base pair position will allow the interrogation of novel variants identified, for example, by the 1000 genomes project (http://www.1000genomes.org) even if an rs number has not yet been assigned. we also validate the method by interrogating snps in two regions: one associated with colorectal cancer and one with type ii diabetes (t2d) . we show that, based on the information drawn together by assimilator, we would have prioritized the subsequently confirmed causal snps for functional investigation from both previous studies.to verify the usefulness of assimilator, we used information from a published study by pomerantz et al. who found that an intergenic snp, rs6983267, associated with colorectal cancer, showed functional evidence for interaction with the myc gene . we used the snp annotation and proxy search (snap) tool to generate a list of snps highly correlated with rs6983267 (r 2 0.8). this generated a list of 15 snps that were subsequently used as the input to assimilator. the results are shown inclearly indicating that rs6983267 has the strongest a priori evidence of function. not only is it in an active region of the genome, but also it is one of only two snps to lie in a tfbs. additionally, assimilator correctly identified the same tfbs as the published data.similarly, a recent study bylooking at open chromatin across the genome identified a snp associated with t2d in an open region. as a further proof of concept, supplying assimilator with the same snp revealed three lines of evidence showing bioinformatically that the snp was in a region of open chromatin . this selection was achieved quickly and easily using our programme.  
