genetics and population analysis association analysis using next-generation sequence data from publicly available control groups: the robust variance score statistic motivation: sufficiently powered casecontrol studies with next-generation sequence (ngs) data remain prohibitively expensive for many investigators. if feasible, a more efficient strategy would be to include publicly available sequenced controls. however, these studies can be confounded by differences in sequencing platform; alignment, single nucleotide polymorphism and variant calling algorithms; read depth; and selection thresholds. assuming one can match cases and controls on the basis of ethnicity and other potential confounding factors, and one has access to the aligned reads in both groups, we investigate the effect of systematic differences in read depth and selection threshold when comparing allele frequencies between cases and controls. we propose a novel likelihood-based method, the robust variance score (rvs), that substitutes genotype calls by their expected values given observed sequence data. results: we show theoretically that the rvs eliminates read depth bias in the estimation of minor allele frequency. we also demonstrate that, using simulated and real ngs data, the rvs method controls type i error and has comparable power to the gold standard analysis with the true underlying genotypes for both common and rare variants. availability and implementation: an rvs r script and instructions can be found at strug.research.sickkids.ca, and at https://github .com/strug-lab/rvs. contact:genome-wide casecontrol association studies with single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) can incorporate publicly available genome-wide control data for comparison to disease group allele frequencies (the wellcome trust case control). this convenient strategy not only increases statistical power by using larger numbers of controls but also allows precious resources to be focused on data collection from diseased individuals. publicly available genome-wide nextgeneration sequence (ngs) data exist [e.g. 1000 genomes project (; however, it has generally been used as a tool to identify novel or rare variants in individual studies, rather than as a control group for association analysis. one explanation for this underutilization of ngs genotypes for association may be the bias that results from sequencing cases and controls with different genomic platforms and protocols; these biases tend to be less of a concern when using microarray data if properly accounted for . a more commonly implemented design for association with ngs data is to use sequenced cases for variant discovery and then genotype the identified variants in a larger sample of cases and controls . such two-step sampling designs can be cost effective and can ensure there is no type i error inflation. however, this approach cannot detect protective variants that are present only in the discovery sample and in general are overly conservative. here we develop statistical methodology for a design in which publicly available sequenced controls are used for association studies with in-study ngs sequenced cases to prioritize variants for further investigation. public controls could augment instudy sequenced controls or, in the case that we consider here, public controls could be the only control group used for analysis. possible confounders that could influence findings when using an external ngs control group in genetic association studies can be divided into two general categories: (i) those that can be controlled by design considerations such as appropriately matched control groups on ethnicity (i.e. basic epidemiologic principles unrelated to the type and production of genetic data); and (ii) factors directly related to the sequencing and variant calling technology : base calling procedures (e.g. various sequencing platforms), alignment (e.g. algorithm and reference genome), read depth, snp detection and genotype calling algorithms . for example, large publicly available datasets that were sequenced at low read depth (lrd) can result in biased estimation of allele frequencies. this bias diminishes with increasing read depth . however, if allele frequencies are compared from variants sequenced with different read depth in case and control cohorts, false associations may be generated and true ones masked. even when average read depth is similar coverage could vary in individual regions across platforms, samples and experiments. this would likewise bias results in regions with low coverage in one group by chance, and preclude comparison between cases and controls in regions completely lacking sequence in one group or the other. lastly, differences in snp discovery and variant calling algorithms can also lead to spurious association findings. as a consequence of these shortcomings, statistical methodology designed to assess association in sequence data has generally required both cases and controls to be sequenced together using a common platform, depth and design. here, we focus on the technical aspects of comparing allele frequencies between cases and controls that were sequenced as part of different projects with different experimental designs. when the matched case and control groups with their aligned ngs data (e.g. binary version of sequence alignment/map (bam) files) are available, we can apply the variant calling algorithm to the combined data so that the resulting case and control data would be well-matched with the exception of design parameters such as enrichment strategy, sequencing platform, read depth and resulting coverage . it is well-documented that differences in read depth between cases and controls have large effects on estimation of minor allele frequency (maf) and can lead to inflated type i error in association studies . less attention has been paid to the selection threshold used in genotype calling algorithms (genotypers) such as those implemented in samtools and genome analysis toolkit (gatk) . these genotypers provide confidence/quality scores for a genotype call (e.g. gq scores) and based on these scores and a predetermined threshold, low confidence/quality calls are filtered out. to address variant call differences that can occur even within a study design that sequences cases and controls, one could incorporate read depth or quality score differences into the association analysis by using a logistic regression analysis with read depth as a covariate or by weighting each variant call by quality score . however, in the setting where cases and controls are distinguishable by read depth, these approaches are not applicable because they would be confounded by casecontrol status, and the corresponding parameters would not be estimable. another approach to account for differential read depth is implemented in the gatk toolkit (http://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/gatkdocs/org_broadinstitute_ sting_gatk_walkers_printreads.html), which randomly downsamples bam files for the higher read depth group. this approach is a less powerful strategy in comparison with methodology that incorporates all observed data, as we show in section 3.2. when cases and controls are sequenced as part of the same experimental design, skotte et al (2012) suggest substituting genotype calls by their expected values given the observed sequence data. this can result in higher power and better control of type i error than methods based on called genotypes, while taking into account uncertainty in the calls without requiring filtering by arbitrary quality score thresholds. this approach incorporates read depth by constructing the joint likelihood of observed phenotypes and observed sequence data, and significance testing is conducted using a score statistic. this approach, however, would not control type i error when there are case control differences in read depth because these differences may produce inflated estimates of the score statistic variance, especially for rare variants. in section 2, we propose the robust variance score (rvs), which repurposes and extends the approach by. in section 3.1, we illustrate analytically and by simulation how differences in read depth and variant screening parameters affect type i error in association studies using called genotypes. we then present simulation results under the null and alternative models for association with single and multiple variants using the rvs method. in section 3.2, we show that analysis using the rvs has comparable power to an analysis with the true genotypes. in section 3.3, we apply the rvs to analysis of several studies using ngs technology, and we compare our findings with those from association studies using genotype calls with quality score thresholds.publicly available genome-wide microarray datasets have been widely used as controls in genome-wide association studies (the wellcome trust case). here we provide a new method, the rvs, to test for association in studies that use ngs from external control groups. confounding factors associated with ngs data processing, such as snp and genotype calling algorithms, read depth and selection parameters can all contribute to spurious or masked findings. here we focus on statistical adjustment for the bias in maf estimation (and consequently type i error) introduced by differential read depth between cases and controls, and the selection threshold. in the absence of a unified study design for sequencing cases and controls, using theoretical and empirical investigations, we show that the rvs is a useful tool to incorporate external control groups in genetic association studies with ngs data, in an effort to prioritize sequence variants for follow-up. the rvs can be used for single variant or joint rare variant analysis, and does not require arbitrary selection of parameter values for filtering but rather analyzes all observed data. the type i error associated with the rvs is well controlled by the use of robust variance estimates, and the power is comparable to analyses using genotypes called without error. our theoretical and simulation results indicate that systematic differences between cases and controls lead to spurious results in association analysis using genotype calls from ngs technology. the degree of deviation in p-value distribution from expected under the null hypothesis depends on maf, difference in readdepth and the applied selection threshold. particularly, when r 0, genotype call-based association analyses can be applied for some variants even when there is a significant difference in read depth between cases and controls (and).provides lower bounds on maf at which point maf estimates from low read depth data remain close to the true value. however, using these theoretical predictions to justify analysis at certain mafs would perforce preclude analysis at the remaining variants because the biased allele frequency estimation for the remaining data would remain unaccounted for. a hrd control group with ample coverage to allow a selection threshold (i.e. r40) can be used to avoid this bias; however, this does not ensure that there is ample read depth in cases and controls at every locus. to address systematic difference in read depth, the gatk toolkit (http://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/gatkdocs/org_broad institute_sting_gatk_walkers_printreads.html) proposes to randomly downsample bam files for the higher read depth group. this approach is a less powerful strategy in comparison to methodology that incorporates all observed data as we show in section 3.2. other methods that use logistic regression analysis with read depth as a covariate, or by weighting each variant call by quality score , as well as methods that substitute genotype calls by their expected values are only applicable if both groups are not distinguishable by read depth and sequencing error. we implement the rvs in a casecontrol study with 27 hrd cases and 113 lrd controls. the top-ranked variants are in agreement with an association study based on genotype calls from the 27 hrd cases and 200 hrd controls. however, as was the case in the present study, if one has access only to genotype calls, as opposed to the aligned bam files or the raw data, only variants with genotype calls present in both datasets can be analyzed; this could potentially be restrictive. for example, rs603202 inwas sequenced in the 1000 genomes project controls and epilepsy cases, but calls at this snp in the complete genomics control group are absent. without additional information about locus-specific coverage in the complete genomics control set, we are not able to determine whether the missing variant is monomorphic in the sample or there was simply no sequencing coverage. coverage information is integrated into the rvs analysis of the aligned reads. currently the rvs cannot accommodate covariate adjustment, and this will be an area of future development. the rvs is easily extendable to accommodate a design in which a subset of controls is sequenced alongside the cases in addition to incorporating an external control group. this type of study design may prove preferable to assess the comparability of the external control group; this more costly approach, however, requires a formal evaluation. ensuring the comparability of the case and control groups on the basis of epidemiologic principles is paramount. this assumption requires careful consideration before moving forward with any statistical analysis. ideally, cases and controls would also be matched on sequencing platform and enrichment strategy; however, our results indicate that this is not necessary because the rvs adjusts for differences in variability and missing rates because of platform/ enrichment differences. we suggest that when cases and controls are sequenced using different technologies, conducting association analysis with a second control group can provide confidence that systematic bias due to platform/enrichment differences is not driving the observed signals. different alignment algorithms are implicitly accounted for by the rvs because the unit of analysis is the genotype probability rather than the genotype calls in the association analysis. whole genome sequencing of large samples remains cost prohibitive for many investigators. using external control groups in ngs association studies, to augment a smaller set of sequenced controls or as the only control set for comparison, can reserve precious resources for the sequencing of cases. therefore, if ngs service providers (or other public initiatives) make control samples available to customers (or the public), then the rvs makes it feasible to use external control groups in association studies with ngs data.  
