sequence analysis accurate identification of polyadenylation sites from 3 0 end deep sequencing using a naı¨venaı¨ve bayes classifier motivation: 3 0 end processing is important for transcription termination , mrna stability and regulation of gene expression. to identify 3 0 ends, most techniques use an oligo-dt primer to construct deep sequencing libraries. however, this approach can lead to identification of artifactual polyadenylation sites due to internal priming in homopo-lymeric stretches of adenines. although heuristic filters have been applied in these cases, they typically result in a high proportion of both false-positive and-negative classifications. therefore, there is a need to develop improved algorithms to better identify mis-priming events in oligo-dt primed sequences. results: by analyzing sequence features flanking 3 0 ends derived from oligo-dt-based sequencing, we developed a navenave bayes classifier to classify them as true or false/internally primed. the resulting algorithm is highly accurate, outperforms previous heuristic filters and facilitates identification of novel polyadenylation sites.3 0 end processing of pre-mrnas influences transcription termination, mrna stability and localization and dynamic regulation of translation. in plants, yeast and metazoans, sequence elements in the 3 0 untranslated region (3 0 utr) direct cleavage and polyadenylation (reviewed in). among these elements is the polyadenylation signal (pas), a defined hexameric sequence located 1030 nucleotides (nt) upstream of the cleavage and polyadenylation site (pa site), which binds cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor complex . the pas predominantly comprises the sequence aauaaa , although single nucleotide variants are also functional . in addition to the pas, a guanine/uracil-or uracil-rich downstream sequence element can be found 2040 nt downstream of the pa site that is recognized by cleavage stimulatory factor . in some instances, a uracil-rich sequence element is present upstream of the pas, which may also act to enhance usage of a specific pas by recruiting cleavage factor i . in combination, these sequence elements help define the site of cleavage and polyadenylation at the 3 0 end of a pre-mrna. most efforts to identify 3 0 ends of mrnas have relied on priming with an oligonucleotide of deoxythymines (oligo-dt). these efforts include early studies relying on expressed sequence tags (ests;), as well as more recent work using deep sequencing (reviewed in). these include poly(a) site sequencing (pas-seq;) and polya-seq , which rely on oligo-dt containing primers for first strand cdna synthesis. while these approaches are technically straightforward, oligo-dt binding can occur in internal homopolymeric stretches of adenines leading to identification of false-positive pa sites. a more selective method is poly(a)-position profiling by sequencing (referred to as 3pseq), where a splint rna:dna oligonucleotide with overhanging thymines is hybridized and ligated to the polyadenylated tail of mrnas to prevent internal priming . however, 3pseq is technically demanding and most laboratories are more likely to use oligo-dtprimed approaches. in these latter cases, internal priming events are generally filtered from datasets based on the number of adenines in the genomic sequence downstream of the cleavage site . however, the strict definition of these heuristic filters inevitably misses some internal priming events (false positives) and also excludes true 3 0 ends (false negatives;). thus, additional methods are needed to easily analyze oligo-dt primed deep sequencing data to identify true pa sites. a navenave bayes classifier, based on bayes theorem, is a supervised learning algorithm in which the features used to predict the class are considered conditionally independent . navenave bayes classifiers are computationally efficient, require relatively small training datasets, handle both continuous and discrete features and ignore non-relevant features . here, we demonstrate the effectiveness of a navenave bayes classifier to identify internal priming events in oligo-dt primed sequencing data. we find that our trained algorithm outperforms heuristic filters and enriches for 3 0 ends in oligo-dt sequencing data that bear canonical motifs important for cleavage and polyadenylation. biological validation shows that our method is highly accurate, facilitating identification of novel 3 0 utrs and 3 0 ends in multiple animal species.  
