genome analysis a statistical variant calling approach from pedigree information and local haplotyping with phase informative reads motivation: variant calling from genome-wide sequencing data is essential for the analysis of disease-causing mutations and elucidation of disease mechanisms. however, variant calling in low coverage regions is difficult due to sequence read errors and mapping errors. hence, variant calling approaches that are robust to low coverage data are demanded. results: we propose a new variant calling approach that considers pedigree information and haplotyping based on sequence reads spanning two or more heterozygous positions termed phase informative reads. in our approach, genotyping and haplotyping by the assignment of each read to a haplotype based on phase informative reads are simultaneously performed. therefore, positions with low evidence for heterozygosity are rescued by phase informative reads, and such rescued positions contribute to haplotyping in a synergistic way. in addition, pedigree information supports more accurate haplotyping as well as genotyping, especially in low coverage regions. although het-erozygous positions are useful for haplotyping, homozygous positions are not informative and weaken the information from heterozygous positions, as majority of positions are homozygous. thus, we introduce latent variables that determine zygosity at each position to filter out homozygous positions for haplotyping. in performance evaluation with a parentoffspring trio sequencing data, our approach outper-forms existing approaches in accuracy on the agreement with single nucleotide polymorphism array genotyping results. also, performance analysis considering distance between variants showed that the use of phase informative reads is effective for accurate variant calling, and further performance improvement is expected with longer sequencing data.owing to the progress of next-generation sequencing (ngs) technologies, whole-genome sequencing for each individual becomes possible in practical time and with reasonable cost for the identification of disease-associated mutations. also, individual genome data from casecontrol study or study with pedigree analysis contribute to the elucidation of unknown disease mechanisms. because accurate variant calling is required for the analysis of these genomes in a reliable manner, the development of accurate variant callers is demanded. in most of the variant callers, variants such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), insertions and deletions are detected at each position in a reference genome from the information of mapped sequence reads. because there exist positions with insufficient coverage of reads due to bias in the library preparation and mapping failures at short tandem repeat polymorphic sites or variable number of tandem repeat sites, reliable variant calling is challenging at these sites . to improve the reliability of variant calling, several approaches have been proposed, where additional information such as pedigree information among individuals and linkage disequilibrium among snps is considered . at present, read length of sequence reads from most of the next-generation sequencers is 5250 bp. however, read length is still extending from the improvement of sequencing protocols, and several sequencers such as pacific biosciences rs sequencer can produce sequence reads with thousands of base pairs although their throughput is not high and their read error rate is relatively high compared with other sequencers such as illumina hiseq . longer sequence reads are more likely to cover two or more heterozygous genotyping positions, and the use of reads spanning multiple heterozygous positions is effective for accurate phasing . thus, an approach considering such phase informative reads is promising for reliable variant calling even in low coverage regions. we propose a new statistical variant calling approach that considers pedigree information and haplotyping based on phase informative reads. in the estimation process, genotyping and haplotyping by the assignment of each read to a haplotype based on phase-informative reads are simultaneously performed in a probabilistic manner. thus, positions that have low evidence for heterozygosity owing to the lack of mapped sequence reads are rescued by the phase informative reads, and such rescued variant positions also can be used for the evidence on phasing. to whom correspondence should be addressed.in addition, the use of pedigree information is effective not only for phasing but also for estimating variant positions because low coverage regions in each individual are supported by sequence reads covering the same regions in other individuals via pedigree information. from the synergistic effect by the use of phaseinformative reads and pedigree information, more accurate variant calling is expected in our proposed approach than other variant callers estimating variants independently on positions and individuals. in the haplotyping process of our approach, sequence reads are assigned to a more probable haplotype between two haplotypes based on a binomial model, and heterozygous positions are phased by the assigned reads spanning multiple heterozygous positions. although homozygous positions are not informative for phasing and cannot be used to distinguish between haplotypes, they are also used for data for the binomial model for phasing. because the majority of positions are homozygous, information from heterozygous positions is weakened and assignment of reads to haplotypes can be misled. to address this issue, we introduce latent variables that determine zygosity at each position to the model. by filtering out the information from highly probably homozygous positions by using the latent variables, only information from heterozygous positions is selectively used for phasing. the remainder of this manuscript is organized as follows. we describe a statistical model of our proposed approach and provide how the parameters and genotypes are estimated in section 2. in section 3, we compare the performance of our proposed approach and other existing variant callers through a simulation data analysis and real data analysis with human whole-genome sequencing data from illumina hiseq 2000 and snp array genotyping results from illumina omni 2.5 beadchip. we finally discuss and conclude the performance evaluation results and effective points of our approach in section 4.  
