systems biology a stochastic automaton model for simulating kinesin processivity motivation: cellular interactions of kinesin-1, an adenosine triphos-phate (atp)-driven motor protein capable of undergoing multiple steps on a microtubule (mt), affect its mechanical processivity, the number of steps taken per encounter with mt. even though the processivity of kinesin has been widely studied, a detailed study of the factors that affect the stepping of the motor along mt is still lacking. results: we model the cellular interactions of kinesin as a probabilistic timed automaton and use the model to simulate the mechanical processivity of the motor. theoretical analysis suggests: (i) backward stepping tends to be powered by atp hydrolysis, rather than atp synthesis, (ii) backward stepping powered by atp synthesis is more likely to happen with limiting atp concentration ([atp]) at high loads and (iii) with increasing load the frequency of backward stepping powered by atp hydrolysis at high [atp] is greater than that powered by atp synthesis at limiting [atp]. together, the higher frequency of backward stepping powered by atp hydrolysis than by atp synthesis is found to be a reason for the more dramatic falling of kinesin processivity with rising load at high [atp] compared with that at low [atp]. simulation results further show that the proces-sivity of kinesin can be determined by the number of atp hydrolysis and synthesis kinetic cycles taken by the motor before becoming inactive. it is also found that the duration of a backward stepping cycle at high loads is more likely to be less than that of a forward stepping cycle. contactkinesin-1 is an adenosine triphosphate (atp)-driven motor protein that walks in an asymmetric hand-over-hand fashion on a microtubule (mt) in discrete 8.2 nm steps . mechanical processivity of kinesin has revealed that the motor takes multiple steps in the forward direction (i.e. to the plus end of mt) and occasionally in the backward direction (i.e. to the minus end of mt) before detaching from mt in the presence of atp , or in the absence of atp if external load is applied to the motor . processivity of kinesin ensures that cellular cargos are transported reliably over long distances. processive stepping of kinesin exerts localized forces on nanostructures, which can be exploited in nanorobotics by inventing artificial nanomotors and thus, synthetic nanodevices powered by the motor . this stepping is also manipulated in the controlled propagation architecture of nanonetworks whose information molecules are carried by kinesin motors between transmitter and receiver nanomachines . synthetic nanodevices and nanonetworks are anticipated to contribute in medical diagnostics as well as engineering applications . despite this progress, artificial nanomotors still lack the functionality and efficiency of their biological counterparts . processivity of kinesin motor and thus, its mean run length (i.e. the distance that the motor travels before detaching from mt) is correlated to the cellular interactions of the motor . yet, little is known about how this motor can remain attached to mt through the hundreds of stepping cycles . a better understanding of the cellular interactions of kinesin would provide new insights into the mechanical processivity of the motor. recently, we developed a mathematical model that simulates the behaviour of kinesin stepping . we showed that the model could be used to analyse and predict forward and backward stepping of kinesin motor at different atp concentrations and loads. on the basis of our findings in, here we aim to model the stochastic behaviour of a single kinesin molecule by constructing a probabilistic timed automaton based on a discrete stochastic model of the motor at variousand loads. the probabilistic timed automata (pta) are mathematical models augmented with time and discrete probability distributions for modelling the temporal and stochastic properties of stochastic discrete-event systems . our proposed automaton model shows that the mean run length of kinesin, at differentand loads, can be determined by the number of atp hydrolysis and synthesis kinetic cycles taken by the motor before detaching from mt.  
