a structure-based protocol for learning the family-specific mechanisms of membrane-binding domains motivation: peripheral membrane-targeting domain (mtd) families, such as c1-, c2-and ph domains, play a key role in signal transduction and membrane trafficking by dynamically translocating their parent proteins to specific plasma membranes when changes in lipid composition occur. it is, however, difficult to determine the subset of domains within families displaying this property, as sequence motifs signifying the membrane binding properties are not well defined. for this reason, procedures based on sequence similarity alone are often insufficient in computational identification of mtds within families (yielding less than 65 accuracy even with a sequence identity of 70). results: we present a machine learning protocol for determining membrane-targeting properties achieving 8590 accuracy in separating binding and non-binding domains within families. our model is based on features from both sequence and structure, thereby incorporation statistics obtained from the entire domain family and domain-specific physical quantities such as surface electrostatics. in addition, by using the enriched rules in alternating decision tree classifiers, we are able to determine the meaning of the assigned function labels in terms of biological mechanisms. conclusions: the high accuracy of the learned models and good agreement between the rules discovered using the adtree classifier and mechanisms reported in the literature reflect the value of machine learning protocols in both prediction and biological knowledge discovery. our protocol can thus potentially be used as a general function annotation and knowledge mining tool for other protein domains.signal transduction networks formed by specific proteinprotein and proteinlipid interactions are a primary means by which the cell transmits information from its external environment to intracellular recipients.one vehicle driving the intracellular signal transduction speed beyond that of simple diffusion is the selective and reversible binding of so-called peripheral proteins to membrane surfaces within the cell . by redistributing cytosolic proteins to membranes in response to the onset of signaling events a de facto compartmentalization of the cellular space takes to whom correspondence should be addressed. place, allowing for greater proximity among communicating parties, thereby facilitating interaction . the importance of this mode of signal transduction is underlined by the fact that more than 10 of human protein kinases contain at least one lipid-binding module . the ability to identify and understand peripheral proteins and the physical factors causing their co-localization at membranes is thus pivotal in uncovering the dynamics governing signaling regimens. peripheral proteins are most commonly scaffold proteins containing one or more domains that associate with lipid-head groups, thereby anchoring the entire protein structure near the lipid surface . an increasing number of ubiquitous and structurally distinct domains have been found to display lipid binding properties, collectively referred to as membrane-targeting domains (mtds). mtds have been identified in the following families: c1 , c2 , ph , fyve (fab1/yotb/vac1/eea1) , px (phox) , enth (epsin n-terminal homology), and recently pdz domains . despite their highly similar intra-family folds, not all domains in these families possess membrane-targeting properties. in fact, a diverse array of overlapping intra-family functions exists, spanning from protein protein interaction to structural support and potentially enzymatic activity . numerous experimental techniques have been used to identify novel mtds revealing details on binding mechanisms and orientation . genome-scale identification and characterization of mtds does, however, remain labor intensive and expensive. to this end in silico protocols offer a highthroughput complement to wet-laboratory methods, allowing for rapid characterization of thousands of domains. membrane-binding properties are inherently difficult to predict, as they are often not determined by well-defined sequence motifs or a specific structural composition. pdz domains were, for instance, found to have highly diverging membrane-binding behavior despite high sequence similarity and ph domains span a large range of binding affinities though being structurally very similar . in previous works from our laboratory, machine learning protocols for distinguishing mtds from a general body of cytosolic protein domains know to have no membrane-binding activity were. performance of a sequence-based nearest-neighbor classification procedure. accuracy measures for classification of membrane binding properties for five domain families using consensus of the three nearest neighbors for each domain. the accuracy for each family is depicted at varying levels of maximum sequence similarity allowed between instances in dataset for each domain family constructed using support vector machines (svm) and later on extended using other classifiers . by representing each domain as a numerical vector of feature values derived from structural data, a classification model achieving 90 accuracy in separating binding and nonbinding domains was constructed. there are, however, two issues of this model to be addressed. first, while performing well when separating mtds from cytosolic protein domains of unrelated fold, the model does not provide similar performance in separating binding and non-binding domains within any specific family. as we will demonstrate, intrafamily classification is in fact a very hard problem as even highly similar domains display different membrane binding properties. second, the constructed svm model does, to a great extent, function as a black-box classifier giving little insight as to how the different calculated features play together in producing the final classification of a domains binding properties. in this work, we construct a series classification models for separating membrane-binding domains from domains with other activity within families. our focus is on c1, c2 and ph domain families, as domains from these three families have been found to be key players in a number of signaling pathways. we are, however, not merely interested in constructing models for classification, as such models are of limited utility in explaining the predicted behavior in a manner that leads to experimentally testable hypothesis. rather, we want to provide both a confident assessment of a given binding behavior and a body of biological evidence supporting the classification label. the goal is to go from data mining to knowledge mining revealing the specific mechanisms responsible for observable higher level behavior. to this end, we take advantage of a new ensemble-based classifier, namely the alternating decision tree (adtree) algorithm . the adtree relates to other classification tree algorithms such as cart and c4.5 by quantifying the relationship between features as a combination of rules each representing a binary decision on a feature. the adtree is based on the boosting technique but is at the same time a tree structure representable as a conjunction of rules all contributing a real-valued additive evidence toward classification.the final classification decision is thus determined by a committee voting scheme based on the real values evidence presented by each rule traversed in the tree by a given domain. this scheme makes representation of the classifier as a spare and easily interpretable tree structure possible, a feat recently demonstrated in studies for identifying dna-binding proteins and characterizing their binding mechanisms . the article is organized as follows: first, we give the intuition behind the features used to represent the individual domains in a form suitable for constructing machine learning protocols. we then construct classification models based on svm and adtree to separate intra-family binding and non-binding domains. finally, we analyze the individual rules used in determining membrane targeting behavior in the three domain families, in terms of experimentally known binding mechanisms.the contribution of this work is 2-fold. first, we show that machine learning models based on the sequence and structure features introduced below perform significantly better than procedures based on sequence homology in separating mtds from non-mtds within families. second, we demonstrate how adtree models not only perform comparable to a svm-based models but also present us with specific evidence for the classification label allowing us to interpret the model within the context of current experimental observations. to further illustrate the difficulty of the current classification task of intrafamily separation, a simple unsupervised classification scheme aimed at predicting the membrane-binding behavior of a domain based on the binding behavior of closely related homologs is fashioned. a sequence is predicted to be binding or non-binding from the majority vote decision of its three closest related sequence neighbor [as defined from a blast search (.depicts the prediction accuracy for the procedure as a function of varying levels of the maximum sequence similarity allowed between domains in the dataset. it is evident that even at maximum sequence similarity levels as high as 85, accuracies of no more than 75 can be achieved for any family, indicating the need for more sophisticated procedures to confidently identify mtds within families.compares the performance of svm, adtree and the sequence-based nearest neighbor protocol for three domain families. in all families, the two structure-based machine learning protocols perform significantly better domain separation than the sequence based nearest neighbor procedure at the 70 sequence identity level. for c1 domains both svm and adtree improve on the accuracy of the sequence-based method by more than 30 points, with both achieving accuracy rates in the 90 range. the svm protocol does, however, have a 6 better auc roc than the adtree due to a better balance between sensitivity and specificity, making it the strongest classifier for this family. inspecting the models constructed for c2 and ph domains, we again observe a far better performance of the machine learning methods over the sequence homology-based classifier, with accuracy improvements of 22 points for both families. comparing the svm and adtree models for the c2 domain families, a similar performance over the entire specificity range is observed as the auc roc of the two models is almost identical, although the adtree achieves a higher accuracy when comparing the points of best class separation for the two classifiers. for the ph domain family, we again observe the two classifiers performing comparable, with a small advantage to the svm algorithm of 3 points as measured by auc roc. in sum, the results show that for the problem at hand the adtree models perform comparable or only slightly worse than svm, indicating almost no loss in performance when using a model that has the feat of human interpretability. though not presented here, we have experimented with machine learning protocols relying solely on sequence-derived features. although these protocols did show better performance than the nearest neighbor homology-based procedure used as bench mark above, they never achieved accuracies higher than 75, which is significantly less than what was achieved by using both sequenceand structure-based features.  
