gene expression a sub-pathway-based approach for identifying drug response principal network motivation: the high redundancy of and high degree of cross-talk between biological pathways hint that a sub-pathway may respond more effectively or sensitively than the whole pathway. however, few current pathway enrichment analysis methods account for the sub-pathways or structures of the tested pathways. we present a sub-pathway-based enrichment approach for identifying a drug response principal network, which takes into consideration the quantitative structures of the pathways. result: we validated this new approach on a microarray experiment that captures the transcriptional profile of dexamethasone (dex)-treated human prostate cancer pc3 cells. compared with genetrail and david, our approach is more sensitive to the dex response pathways. specifically, not only pathways but also the principal components of sub-pathways and networks related to prostate cancer and dex response could be identified and verified by literatureit is increasingly important to understand the effects of treatment drugs on cellular pathways and networks. microarrays provide a novel way to investigate the expression of thousands of genes simultaneously, with a view to dissecting the molecular pathways . with the availability of biological pathway databases such as the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg) or biocarta (www.biocarta.com), several resources have been developed to visualize and analyze microarray data in the context of known biological networks/pathways. a number of statistical tests combined with known biological databases for detecting significant pathways are available for data interpretation, including genmapp to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint first authors., chipinfo , david , gominer , gsea-p , onto-tools and genetrail . these functional analysis tools are valuable but are unsuitable for the detection of drug response pathways, due to a number of limitations. first, most traditional strategies use only pre-selected gene lists (often the differentially expressed genes) to compute the statistic that tests the enrichment of each pathway. common statistical methods, such as chi-square, fishers exact test, binomial probability and hypergeometric distribution, are used to compare number of genes in the list that coincide with a given pathway by random chance. neglecting less relevant genes, and merely counting the number of pathway members contained in the reduced list, leads to loss of information such as gene order in the pathways. second, while the prevalent gene-set enrichment analysis (gsea) does account for gene order, the effect of the gene-set size, the influence of other gene sets and normalization procedures may lead to inaccurate assessment of statistical significance in some instances . third, the correlation structure of pathways is not considered. a pathway extracted from biological databases is the collection of specific sub-pathways or modules that perform certain functions. different sub-pathways may perform the same function in the same pathway and different pathways may use the same sub-pathways in similar roles. testing the whole pathway is too universal to determine which individual sub-pathways respond to a particular biological condition. fourth, drug-induced cell microarray experiments usually contain few samples (typically, a treated sample and a control sample). thus, the pathway significance test is limited to the traditional strategies mentioned above. to overcome these limitations, we propose a framework of sub-pathway-based strategy to identify the drug response pathways/network. the framework consists of the generation of a large number of relative sub-pathways (sub-graphs of the pathways obtained from the kegg public database), mapping of the unfiltered expression data onto them and statistically scoring for identification of the principal component of sub-pathways (pcss) that is most perturbed by two stage designs. pcss are then combined into a larger drug response network, on which topological and biological analyses are performed. in an analysis of the dexamethasone (dex) dataset, we found that this approach can enhance the biological interpretation of drug effect.page: 650 649654  
