a tool for rna sequencing sample identity check rna sequencing data are becoming a major method of choice to study transcriptomes, including the mapping of gene expression quantitative trait loci (eqtls). rna sample contamination or swapping is a serious problem for downstream analysis and may result in false discovery and lose power to detect the true biological relationships. when genetic data are available, for example, in eqtl studies or samples have been previously genotyped or dna sequenced, it is possible to combine genetic data and rna-seq data to detect sample contamination and resolve sample swapping problems. in this article, we introduce a tool (idcheck) that allows easy assessment of concordance between genotype (from snp arrays or dna sequencing) and gene expression (rna-seq) samples. idcheck compares the identity of rna-seq reads and snp genotypes using a likelihood-based method. based on maximum likelihood estimates of relevant parameters, we can detect sample contamination and identify correct sample pairs when swapping occurs. our tool provides an efficient and convenient way to evaluate and resolve these problems.comparing with array-based technology, rna-seq experiments allow us to more accurately measure gene expression level and provide new insights into the regulatory mechanisms underlying expression quantitative trait loci (eqtls) . eqtl mapping studies integrate genetic and gene expression data to identify genetic variants associated with expression of genes and have helped interpret findings from genome-wide association studies for many complex diseases and traits . as the scale of the study becomes larger and larger, sample contamination or label swapping is more likely to occur. sample mislabeling during the manual preparation of dna samples and rna samples is more prone to occur because of many steps involved in collecting the data. for example, if some sample labels are mixed and tagged to the wrong sequencing lane or dna sample, the genotype data and gene expression data are not correctly paired. the mislabeled or contaminated samples could add bias and/or noise to the datasets, resulting in false discovery and loss of statistical power to detect true associations . therefore, it is necessary to check the sample identity and potential contamination before any downstream data analysis. a fast and efficient tool to identify these potential problems and offer possible solutions is needed. here, we present a tool, idcheck, to do sample identity checking and detect potential sample contamination. it is particularly useful for eqtl mapping studies using rna-seq data, but also applicable to any rna-seq studies with genotype data available. it will output a text format file to report for how each sample is paired. idcheck also provides a quick overview of rna-seq data quality using summary graphs. these results are exported to pdf files.  
