sequence analysis a tree-based approach for motif discovery and sequence classification motivation: pattern discovery algorithms are widely used for the analysis of dna and protein sequences. most algorithms have been designed to find overrepresented motifs in sparse datasets of long sequences, and ignore most positional information. we introduce an algorithm optimized to exploit spatial information in sparse-but-populous datasets. results: our algorithm tree-based weighted-position pattern discovery and classification (t-wppdc) supports both unsupervised pattern discovery and supervised sequence classification. it identifies positionally enriched patterns using the kullback leibler distance between foreground and background sequences at each position. this spatial information is used to discover positionally important patterns. t-wppdc then uses a scoring function to discriminate different biological classes. we validated t-wppdc on an important biological problem: prediction of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) from flanking sequence. we evaluated 672 separate experiments on 120 datasets derived from multiple species. t-wppdc outperformed other pattern discovery methods and was comparable to the supervised machine learning algorithms. the algorithm is computationally efficient and largely insensitive to dataset size. it allows arbitrary parameterization and is embarrassingly parallelizable. conclusions: t-wppdc is a minimally parameterized algorithm for both pattern discovery and sequence classification that directly incorporates positional information. we use it to confirm the predictability of snps from flanking sequence, and show that positional information is a key to this biological problem. contacts:pattern discovery algorithms have been widely used in bioinformatics to analyze recurrent groups of symbols, such to whom correspondence should be addressed. as dna and protein sequences. existing methods can be divided into two classes based on their underlying approach: probabilistic versus deterministic. probabilistic methods maximize the likelihood between a motif pattern model and a background pattern model. gibbs sampling and its variants are the prototypical probabilistic methods . some deterministic methods construct candidate patterns from a given pattern length and alphabet size [e.g. oligo-analysis/dyad-analysis (van) and ymf (, some enumerate possible patterns from given sequences [e.g. mopac (, while others use tree structures [e.g. weeder (or other mathematical approaches [e.g. projection (. despite this methodological diversity, there are three issues not well-addressed by the existing algorithms. first, positional variability in sequences is typically ignored. most widely used pattern discovery methods focus on finding high-frequency sequences independent of their location, primarily representing patterns with position-specific scoring matrices or markov models . however, these techniques assume equal occurrence probabilities at all positions within a sequence. this assumption does not hold for many biological datasets . a recent method amadeus uses a localization score to estimate whether the occurrences of the motif tend to cluster at specific distance from the transcription start site ; however, they focused on the specific distance or a range of sequences, not all the positions of each sequences. second, it is unclear how to handle the numerous, lowinformation content motifs that occur in biological datasets. the presence of such motifs is a major reason for the low accuracy of current pattern discovery methods . third, current algorithms focus on analyzing sparse datasets comprising a small number of long sequences. the advent of next-generation genome sequencing has led to much populous, short-sequence data. to address these issues, we developed a new pattern discovery algorithm called tree-based weighted-position pattern discovery and classification (t-wppdc). t-wppdc first applies kullbackleibler distance between foreground and background sequences to determine a weight for each sequence position. it next integrates this spatial data to discover positionally important patterns. such patterns are used to classify sequences. moreover, the tree structure used by t-wppdc allows handling of different  
