aura: atlas of utr regulatory activity the atlas of utr regulatory activity (aura) is a manually curated and comprehensive catalog of human mrna untranslated regions (utrs) and utr regulatory annotations. through its intuitive web interface, it provides full access to a wealth of information on utrs that integrates phylogenetic conservation, rna sequence and structure data, single nucleotide variation, gene expression and gene functional descriptions from literature and specialized databases. availability: http://aura.the 5 and 3 untranslated regions (utrs) are the portions of an mrna located at each side of the coding sequence. utrs contain information for post-transcriptional regulation of mrna, including transport, stability, localization and access to translation, and hence they largely determine the fate of mature mrnas in the cell . such events are mediated by hundreds of trans-acting factors: primarily rna binding proteins (rbps), associated with all cellular mrnas to form ribonucleoprotein complexes (rnps), but also noncoding rnas, of which the microrna (mirna) class has a clear functional role. the experimentally determined sequence and structure binding constraints of utrs vary widely between and within rbps and non-coding rnas, and the regulatory interactions are globally characterized by extreme complexity, since a regulator can bind to multiple utrs in multiple sites and vice versa. moreover, the mrna transcis interaction network undergoes remarkable plasticity, since the fate of an mrna is determined by its temporally and spatially dependent association to several regulators . unraveling the molecular code behind this sophisticated process is the key for: (i) understanding to what extent cell programs are regulated by the degree of mrna abundance, localization and translation; (ii) deciphering how malfunction of trans-acting factors or mutation of target sites is at the root of some severely altered cellular phenotypes; (iii) identifying novel therapeutics aimed at modulating mrna dynamics in the window between transport and translation. with this aim, a growing number of to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint first authors. studies, both mechanistic and systems-based, provide information on factors binding to utrs. nevertheless, integration of these data and annotation of utrs in genome browsers are lacking or insufficient. the atlas of utr regulatory activity (aura) fills this gap with unprecedented richness and coverage, by collecting and combining human utr annotation and binding data from several sources.  
