databases and ontologies authorreward: increasing community curation in biological knowledge wikis through automated authorship quantification community curationharnessing community intelligence in knowledge curation, bears great promise in dealing with the flood of biological knowledge. to exploit the full potential of the scientific community for knowledge curation, multiple biological wikis (bio-wikis) have been built to date. however, none of them have achieved a substantial impact on knowledge curation. one of the major limitations in bio-wikis is insufficient community participation, which is intrinsically because of lack of explicit authorship and thus no credit for community curation. to increase community curation in bio-wikis, here we develop authorreward, an extension to mediawiki, to reward community -curated efforts in knowledge curation. authorreward quantifies researchers contributions by properly factoring both edit quantity and quality and yields automated explicit authorship according to their quantitative contributions. authorreward provides bio-wikis with an authorship metric, helpful to increase community participation in bio-wikis and to achieve community curation of massive biological knowledge.biological knowledge is generated at ever-faster rates and dispersed among researchers and across literatures. as each new biological study has become increasingly dependent on the availability of existing knowledge, comprehensive and up-to-date collection of biological knowledge across a wide variety of research fields is of critical significance in life sciences . traditionally, biological knowledge has been aggregated through expert curation, conducted manually by dedicated experts. however, with the burgeoning volume of biological data and increasingly diverse densely informative published literatures, expert curation becomes more and more laborious and time consuming, increasingly lagging behind knowledge creation. accordingly, community curationharnessing community intelligence for knowledge curationhas gained significant attention as a solution to this issue . a successful example that engages community intelligence in knowledge aggregation is wikipedia that features up-to-date content, huge coverage and low cost for maintenance. spirited by the extraordinary success of wikipedia, multiple biological wikis (bio-wikis) have been built to date (supplementary). however, bio-wikis have not achieved a substantial impact on community curation of biological knowledge . one of the major limitations in bio-wikis is insufficient participation from the scientific community, which is intrinsically because of lack of explicit authorship and thus no credit for community-curated contributions . a valuable attempt has been made to motivate community contributions in wikis by means of social rewarding techniques , but it does not provide explicit authorship for any wiki page. although authorship has been introduced in a non-mediawikibased system , it only links every sentence to its author but does not provide a quantitative measure of authorship, and most important, it is inapplicable to extant bio-wikis that are largely built on mediawiki (a free, open source and widely used wiki engine, which is adopted by wikipedia). several initiatives based on semantic web technologies have already emerged for biological knowledge management . however, they do not promise to manage or quantify authorship of the free text in bio-wikis. to increase community curation in bio-wikis, here we develop authorreward, an extension to mediawiki, to reward community-curated efforts in bio-wikis by contribution quantification and explicit authorship.  
