databases and ontologies autolabdb: a substantial open source database schema to support a high-throughput automated laboratory motivation: modern automated laboratories need substantial data management solutions to both store and make accessible the details of the experiments they perform. to be useful, a modern laboratory information management system (lims) should be flexible and easily extensible to support evolving laboratory requirements, and should be based on the solid foundations of a robust, well-designed database. we have developed such a database schema to support an automated laboratory that performs experiments in systems biology and high-throughput screening. results: we describe the design of the database schema (autolabdb), detailing the main features and describing why we believe it will be relevant to lims manufacturers or custom builders. this database has been developed to support two large automated robot scientist systems over the last 5 years, where it has been used as the basis of an lims that helps to manage both the laboratory and all the experiment data produced. availability and implementation: the database schema has been made available as open source (bsd license), so that others may use, extend and improve it to meet their own needs. example software interfaces to the database are also provided.every laboratory has different priorities, and so has different needs from their information management system. the information structure of such a system must keep abreast of changes in the laboratory, as new equipment is purchased and new workflows are made possible. useful and flexible laboratory data management software is difficult to achieve and maintain. commercially available lims providers and systems include: idbss activitybase, cambridgesofts bioassay and accelryss assay explorer. open source lims include biorails, openlims and bikalims (www.biorails.org/projects/core; www.openlims.org and www.bikalabs.com), but none of these make their core database explicit or describe it in public documentation. each of these attempts to cover some aspects of the processes performed in a typical laboratory. however, very few open source lims are flexible yet detailed enough to be capable of assisting an automated laboratory in a full scientific work cycle. in order to allow others to modify and extend autolabdb we have taken care to use hierarchical data structures which can be extended or sub-classed, to use generic concepts wherever possible, and to compartmentalize regions of the database so that future changes to one part are isolated from the rest. we provide full schema diagrams and descriptions of the purpose of tables to enable engineers to plan and make suitable changes. screensaver , a recently published open source lims, is perhaps the closest alternative to autolabdb. it provides a web-based solution for high-throughput screening applications and, just as autolabdb was originally developed to  
