bioimage informatics automated analysis of giant unilamellar vesicles using circular hough transformation motivation: in order to obtain statistically relevant results, the study of membrane effects at the single-vesicle level requires the analysis of several hundreds of giant unilamellar vesicles (guvs), which becomes a very time-consuming task if carried out manually. complete and user-friendly software for fast and bias-free automated analysis has not been reported yet. results: we developed a framework for the automated detection, tracking and analysis of individual guvs on digital microscopy images. our tool is suited to quantify protein binding to membranes as well as several aspects of membrane permeabilization on single vesicles. we demonstrate the applicability of the approach by comparing alternative activation methods for bax, a pore-forming protein involved in mitochondrial permeabilization during apoptosis. availability and implementation: the complete software is implemented in matlab (the mathworks, inc., usa) and available as a standalone as well as the full source code atin recent years, giant unilamellar vesicles (guvs) have become powerful and widely used tools to study membrane processes . among other applications, guvs are extensively used to investigate the mechanisms of pore-forming molecules . in previous work, we developed a guv-based single-vesicle method for the analysis of membrane permeabilization . the individual-vesicle integrity, the permeabilization degree, the stability of the permeabilized state, the binding of proteins to the membrane as well as the kinetics of single-vesicle leakage can be successfully addressed with this approach . however, to achieve high statistical accuracy, several hundreds of guvs per experiment need to be considered. the analysis of guv experiments is mostly carried out on digital microscopy images using basic image processing techniques like measuring mean pixel intensities on defined regions of interest or quantifying certain shape features . due to the high amount of vesicles, this method usually turns out to be extremely time consuming and can additionally suffer from subjective bias if carried out manually. the researcher might tend to select guvs following certain characteristics like size or degree of filling and thus introduce a bias into the sample. so far, integrated systems for segmenting large populations of lipid vesicles are scarce in publishing research.proposed a vesicle segmentation algorithm based on the markov random field model, which depends on a bright vesicle rim and a generous intensity contrast between the inner and outer region of the vesicle. this is hardly the case in permeabilization studies since a reduced dye concentration and laser power during image acquisition is required to not considerably affect membrane properties. we propose the circular hough transformation (cht), a robust technique to find circular patterns in images , for the segmentation of guvs and demonstrate its efficiency on noisy real experiment images. to our best knowledge, this article presents the first complete and user-friendly framework for the automated detection and analysis of large guv populations. it is suitable for an entire permeabilization analysis, including kinetics and the size and stability of pores. in addition, radial profiles for each vesicle can be used to acquire quantitative information about protein binding to membranes. the automatization is not only advantageous in terms of time saving, but also guarantees an unbiased statistical analysis to the highest possible extent. the software is therefore powerful not only in detecting circular objects in microscopy images, but also objects which moderately deviate from the circular shape. for the analysis of movies, we implemented a tracking algorithm which allows tracking of single vesicles, making the software applicable to moving guvs. to validate the approach and demonstrate the applicability of our program, we investigated the degree of individual vesicle to whom correspondence should be addressed. permeabilization induced by bax under different activating conditions. bax is a member of the bcl-2 family with a major role in the regulation of apoptosis. it induces the permeabilization of the outer mitochondrial membrane (omm) that releases cytochrome c (cyt c) during apoptosis . despite intense research, the mechanism of bax-induced omm permeabilization is under debate. previous studies showed that the cleaved form of the bh3-only protein bid activates bax . furthermore, bax activation has been shown to occur in vitro by incubation with detergents, acid ph or high temperature . but whether these methods induce comparable bax activation and pore activity remains unknown. in this article, we compared the effect of these four activating methods on bax-induced membrane permeabilization at the single-vesicle level. our results demonstrate that all four methods efficiently activate bax and yield comparable all-or-none pore activity on cardiolipin-containing guvs.  
