automated analysis of information processing, kinetic independence and modular architecture in biochemical networks using midia motivation: understanding the encoding and propagation of information by biochemical reaction networks and the relationship of such information processing properties to modular network structure is of fundamental importance in the study of cell signalling and regulation. however, a rigorous, automated approach for general biochemical networks has not been available, and high-throughput analysis has therefore been out of reach. results: modularization identification by dynamic independence algorithms (midia) is a user-friendly, extensible r package that performs automated analysis of how information is processed by biochemical networks. an important component is the algorithms ability to identify exact network decompositions based on both the mass action kinetics and informational properties of the network. these modularizations are visualized using a tree structure from which important dynamic conditional independence properties can be directly read. only partial stoichiometric information needs to be used as input to midia, and neither simulations nor knowledge of rate parameters are required. when applied to a signalling network, for example, the method identifies the routes and species involved in the sequential propagation of information between its multiple inputs and outputs. these routes correspond to the relevant paths in the tree structure and may be further visualized using the inputoutput path matrix tool. midia remains computationally feasible for the largest network reconstructions currently available and is straightforward to use with models written in systems biology markup language (sbml).understanding how information is encoded and transferred by biochemical networks is of central importance in cellular and systems biology . we recently introduced a rigorous new approach grounded in biochemical, mass action kinetics and based on dynamic conditional independences between species trajectories . a species trajectory is the time course of the number of molecules of a particular type of biomolecule. by deriving dynamic conditional independences, we are able to identify the species trajectories that fully encode the relevant information and thus to trace the sequential process of information transfer through the network (section 5.2.1 in supplementary material). importantly, the approach is applicable to a wide class of stochastic dynamics . a suitable foundation has thus been laid for automated and potentially high-throughput computational analysis of information processing, kinetic independence and modular architecture for a wide class of biochemical networks. here, the necessary algorithms and software for such analyses are made available to the community in a user-friendly, extensible package called midia (modularization identification by dynamic independence algorithms). the package is written in the freely available r language and is therefore applicable to the majority of operating systems (including windows, mac and linux). midia is straightforward to use with models of intracellular dynamics written in systems biology markup language or sbml and hence also with public repositories of systems biology models such as the biomodels database . an important component of midia is the ability to compute exact network decompositions based on dynamic independence properties of the modules (section 5.2.3 in supplementary material). midia identifies the species resulting in the overlap of modules and thus the important intermediaries in the network. of all those species present in other modules, only those in a given modules overlap region or intersection are relevant for the instantaneous kinetics of its other species and (if stipulated) for the trajectory of the module. noteworthy departures from previous approaches to module identification are that the decompositions are explicitly based on dynamic, informational properties, and that these decompositions are not partitions. graphical, community detectionbased methods were extended byto kinetic (but solely deterministic) models of signalling networks by partitioning the species between modules so as to minimize inter-modular retroactivity. constraint-based module detection methods such as correlated reaction sets (or ) assume steady-state dynamics in which concentrations are constant over time. we believe that this limits the scope of their applicability,  
