automated benchmarking of peptide-mhc class i binding predictions motivation: numerous in silico methods predicting peptide binding to major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class i molecules have been developed over the last decades. however, the multitude of available prediction tools makes it non-trivial for the end-user to select which tool to use for a given task. to provide a solid basis on which to compare different prediction tools, we here describe a framework for the automated benchmarking of peptide-mhc class i binding prediction tools. the framework runs weekly benchmarks on data that are newly entered into the immune epitope database (iedb), giving the public access to frequent, up-to-date performance evaluations of all participating tools. to overcome potential selection bias in the data included in the iedb, a strategy was implemented that suggests a set of peptides for which different prediction methods give divergent predictions as to their binding capability. upon experimental binding validation, these peptides entered the benchmark study. results: the benchmark has run for 15 weeks and includes evaluation of 44 datasets covering 17 mhc alleles and more than 4000 peptide-mhc binding measurements. inspection of the results allows the end-user to make educated selections between participating tools. of the four participating servers, netmhcpan performed the best, followed by ann, smm and finally arb. availability and implementation: up-to-date performance evaluations of each server can be found online at http://tools.iedb.org/auto_bench/mhci/weekly. all prediction tool developers are invited to participate in the benchmark. sign-up instructions are available at http://tools.iedb.org/auto_bench/ mhci/join.cytotoxic t-cell lymphocytes (ctls) play a pivotal role in the immune control in vertebrates. ctls scan the surface of cells and are able to recognize and destroy cells harboring intracellular threats. they do this by interacting with complexes of peptides and major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class i molecules presented on the cell surface. many events influence which peptides from a given non-self protein will become epitopes, including processing by the proteasome and tap , peptide trimming and t-cell precursor frequencies . however, the single most selective event is binding to the mhc class i (mhc-i) molecule . given this, large efforts have been dedicated over the last decades to the development of prediction methods capable of accurately predicting peptide binding to mhc-i molecules . the large number of different methods poses a significant challenge for the end-user in terms of selecting which method is most suitable to solve a given question. several articles have been published with the aim of dealing with this, using different strategies such as conducting a large-scale benchmark of prediction tools , benchmarks where prediction methods are trained and evaluated on identical datasets , making large, static benchmark datasets available or by hosting a machine learning competition that serves as a benchmark itself . such large-scale benchmarks of prediction tools are essential for researchers looking to make use of the predictions, as well as for tool developers, as it allows them to evaluate how novel prediction algorithms and training strategies increase predictive performance. however, performing such benchmarks in an optimal manner, where all participating methods are trained and evaluated on identical datasets, is a highly computationally complex task, limiting participation to expert users. another issue is the time lag between when the benchmark is performed and when the manuscript describing the results is published. during this time, developers may have updated or improved their prediction tools, meaning some of the benchmark results are instantly outdated. finally, when it comes to static benchmark datasets, a risk of overfitting exists leading to development of sub-optimal methods lacking generalizability to novel data. this is simply due to the fact that the same data are used repeatedly to evaluate and select the most optimal methods. another critical issue of benchmark studies relates to the transparency of both the data used in the study and the evaluation measures. the machine learning competition in immunology (mli) 2010 hosted bywas a well-supported competition, gathering a total of 20 participating prediction tools. likewise, the 2012 mli competition attracted significant attention from the community with 32 submissions for the competition (bio.dfci.harvard.edu/dfrmli/html/natural.php). being the first of their kind, these benchmarks have been of high relevance for both users and developers of mhc-i binding prediction tools. however, for both endusers and tool developers, certain aspects of the competitions were sub-optimal. for instance, the benchmark data for the 2010 competition of mhc-i binding prediction methods were generated using a commercial assay used in few academic settings with a criterion for binding that could not readily be compared with more commonly used kd/ic50/half-life data. likewise, the mli 2012 competition of ligands eluted from mhc-i molecules did not clarify up front how negative peptides would be chosen, how peptides for different lengths would be dealt with, nor how the performance would be scored. as participants in these competitions, we felt that it was unfortunate that this information was not provided up front and that the best way to reduce such uncertainties was to completely automate the benchmarking process to make it completely transparent. here, we seek to provide a complimentary approach to benchmarking prediction tools that addresses some of the issues listed above. our approach consists of two steps. first, we have developed a framework for the automated benchmarking of mhc-i binding prediction methods. earlier similar approaches have been taken to evaluate prediction of protein structure . the participating methods are run via a restful web service (henceforth referred to as servers) hosted locally for each participating method, making the effort involved in joining the benchmark minimal for tool developers. the benchmark is run weekly on data newly submitted to the immune epitope database (iedb) , thus making the source and nature of the evaluation data fully transparent. furthermore, to achieve the maximum degree of transparency, the benchmark evaluation criteria are outlined explicitly. the results of all benchmark evaluations are made publicly available, giving the public access to frequent, up-to-date performance evaluations of all participating methods. second, to overcome the problem of selection bias in the data that are included in the iedb (which is often pre-selected based on certain prediction algorithms), we have developed an approach that selects a set of peptides that is highly informative in the sense that different prediction methods disagree on how well the peptides bind. we plan to run this approach once a year and test a set of the resulting peptides. to provide complete transparency, the script selecting the peptides in the benchmark will be made publically available. the script takes a list of peptides and returns a subset of the peptides that should be measured experimentally. the resulting peptides and measurements can then be submitted to the iedb where they will automatically be identified and included in the benchmark. every step from peptide selection to comparison of predicted and experimental values is performed without manual intervention.  
