bioimage informatics automated prior knowledge-based quantification of neuronal patterns in the spinal cord of zebrafish motivation: to reliably assess the effects of unknown chemicals on the development of fluorescently labeled sensory-, moto-and inter-neuron populations in the spinal cord of zebrafish, automated data analysis is essential. results: for the evaluation of a high-throughput screen of a large chemical library, we developed a new method for the automated extraction of quantitative information from green fluorescent protein (egfp) and red fluorescent protein (rfp) labeled spinal cord neurons in double-transgenic zebrafish embryos. the methodology comprises region of interest detection, intensity profiling with reference comparison and neuron distribution histograms. all methods were validated on a manually evaluated pilot study using a notch inhibitor dose-response experiment. the automated evaluation showed superior performance to manual investigation regarding time consumption, information detail and reproducibility. availability and implementation: being part of gnu general public licence (gnu-gpl) licensed open-source matlab toolbox gait-cad, an implementation of the presented methods is publicly available for download at http://sourceforge.net/projects/zebrafishimage/.research in the life sciences is producing an ever increasing amount of experimental data in basically all areas. particularly the fields of toxicology, chemical genetics and classical genetics, where possibly tens of thousands of treatments of embryos have to be analyzed, benefit from lately established high-throughput acquisition techniques that enable large-scale experiments, which have been inconceivable in the past . in recent years, zebrafish embryos have emerged as attractive models for the screening of small molecules with the aim to identify new entities with a specific effect on cellular and developmental processes . the zebrafish provides a complex cellular environment that cannot be mimicked in conventional pharmacological screens with in vitro systems. furthermore, a multitude of properties such as fast reproduction and ex utero development, easy husbandry and handling, availability of many stable transgenic lines and the transparency in early developmental stages make the zebrafish an ideal model organism for high-throughput screening . in many cases, however, the facilitated and highly automated possibilities on the experimentalists side unravel a variety of new challenges and problems in subsequent data analysis steps. as meaningful information contained in the large amount of obtained data can hardly be extracted manually anymore, specialized software is needed to support or optimally take over the whole data analysis in an automated pipeline . besides various articles describing manually/semiautomatically evaluated experiments , multiple approaches for the automated evaluation of zebrafishbased screens have already been proposed in the literature. a comprehensive survey can be found in. methods for the automated analysis of gene expression based on image co-localization and morphing of regional intensity information to a reference embryo were described by. various publications tackled the problem of automated phenotype recognition by means of multi-resolution segmentation, randomized sub-window-and descriptor-based classification, respectively. moreover, to detect and quantify nuclei in images, several blob detection methods exist, e.g. based on circular hough transform, diffused gradient vector field and laplacian-of-gaussian (log) blob detection, as described by. approaches for the automated region of interest (roi) detection via template matching were presented byor. the approaches described by) are most closely related to our analysis. however, it is not yet possible to quantify the diverse neuron distributions of the spinal cord in zebrafish. the aim of this work was to derive an automated analysis pipeline that could be used to analyze the effect of chemicals on position, number and fluorescence intensity of the three different neuronal cell types in the spinal cord of zebrafish, namely to whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two and last two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. rohonbeard sensory neurons, interneurons and motoneurons (supplementary). therefore, we performed a pilot study using a double-transgenic zebrafish with rohonbeard cells and motoneurons expressing rfp and interneurons expressing egfp in the spinal cord. the developed algorithms should reliably extract both quantitative and qualitative information and should be applicable for high-throughput screening. in section 2, we briefly present the experimental design of the pilot study used for algorithmic development and introduce the newly developed image analysis pipeline, which is comprised of roi extraction, intensity profile analysis of different neuron types as well as quantification of sensory-and motoneurons. the validation of the methods and biological conclusions can be found in section 3. finally, in section 4, we discuss the benefits and limitations of our methods.although diverse zebrafish-related implementations already exist, up to the best of our knowledge none of the available methods and software packages was directly applicable to the challenges observed in our experiment. to analyze the doubletransgenic zebrafish line, information fusion of content found in different fluorescent channels was required to attain profound insights into treatment effects on neural development. the most similar methodology to ours with a focus on automated. overlay of 108 intensity profiles for the gfp channel. curves are colored according to the classification. a significant reduction of the interneuron intensity can be observed. a slight effect can be seen for a concentration 0:5m and a strong effect for higher concentrations of ly-411575. the norm corridor is foreshadowed by the gray surface). the embryo alignment method described by chen et al., however, was only applicable if the spinal cord exhibited a clear linear shape. we overcame the linear shape restriction by use of third order polynomial regression to extract a linearized and rotation-corrected crop image of the spinal cord region. in contrast to the blob detection described by liu et al. which had a high error rate for sensory neuron detection, our method uses a log scale-space based blob detection method to identify approximate centroids of stained nuclei in different fluorescence channels . additionally, we present a method to quantify intensity profiles that reflect distributions of different neuron types present in the spinal cord region. this method proved to be highly robust against misdetections and provided an instant impression of phenotype alterations for sensory neurons, interneurons and motoneurons on chemical exposure. we exploited the potential of spatial distribution methods to analyze and compare these intensity profiles between different embryos and treatments. the proposed methods were validated on a manually assembled ground truth from a doseresponse experiment with a notch receptor inhibitor. the spinal cord detection robustly identified regression curves in 98 of the 108 images that could successfully be used as a reference for further processing. the erroneous regressions, however, were still usable as the spinal cord was matched for the most part and only subtle deviations in border regions of the images occurred. the problems were mostly caused by undesired imaging effects such as dirt, dust or overexposed regions. in some of these cases, the binarization of the images had difficulties in extracting the correct spinal cord region. this issue might be solved by an explicit shape model that describes the silhouette of the desired region. although the described method reliably extracted sensory neurons from the given images, it should be noted that it performed sub-optimally for quantification of motoneurons in the cy3 channel. despite the inaccurate counts, however, the method could still be useful to estimate qualitative tendencies of the motoneuron distributions. to attain reliable information about motoneuron appearance, the intensity profile information described in section 2.4 is recommended. the limited capabilities of the algorithm to differentiate between individual motoneurons were mainly caused by insufficient image resolution and could vanish as soon as the magnification level is increased. additionally, more sophisticated nucleus detection methods such as described byor even a fusion of nuclei detected by different algorithms could be performed. assuming a perfectly linearized crop image, intensity profilebased methods and values were both informative and robust against misdetections. using the norm corridor of control embryo intensity profiles, a deviation of treated embryos from the norm could be easily detected either by intensity profile visualizations as depicted in figures 5 and 6 or quantitatively by using measures such as the norm deviation described in equation (4). the classification results showed that the features were well suited to distinguish between different treatment effects observed in the considered experiment. owing to the high versatility of the extracted features, investigated embryos or rather the possible treatment effects could be  
