automated validation of genetic variants from large databases: ensuring that variant references refer to the same genomic locations accurate annotations of genomic variants are necessary to achieve full-genome clinical interpretations that are scientifically sound and medically relevant. many disease associations, especially those reported before the completion of the hgp, are limited in applicability because of potential inconsistencies with our current standards for genomic coordinates, nomenclature and gene structure. in an effort to validate and link variants from the medical genetics literature to an unambiguous reference for each variant, we developed a software pipeline and reviewed 68 641 single amino acid mutations from online mendelian inheritance in man (omim), human gene mutation database (hgmd) and dbsnp. the frequency of unresolved mutation annotations varied widely among the databases, ranging from 4 to 23. a taxonomy of primary causes for unresolved mutations was produced.large numbers of genetic variants from medical and genetics publications have been compiled in databases, including the online mendelian inheritance in man (omim), the human gene mutation database (hgmd), among others. for example, the hgmd has curated 100 329 disease-associated genetic variants in its current release , and omim has described 20 068 variants as of june 2010 . these disease-associated variants are valuable in the understanding, prevention and diagnosis of human disease. with the imminent reduction to practice of whole-genome interpretation , an overview of the accuracy of these databases is important in understanding how much quality improvement work remains to make these prior genome-wide annotations clinically useful. we focus here on the syntactic accuracy of the annotations which are an important but small step toward assessing their clinical validity . to whom correspondence should be addressed.to this end, we developed a software module, aa2nt, which provides basic validation of single amino acid changes using information from current databases, derives the corresponding dna change from an amino acid change and generates human genome variation society (hgvs)-recommended names (supplementary). we applied aa2nt to a selected set of variants from three commonly used databases (omim, hgmd and dbsnp) to evaluate whether we could correctly resolve the locations of variants in current annotation databases. we validated 66 638 single nucleotide mutations from omim, hgmd and dbsnp and obtained a passing rate ranging from 77 to 96.  
