automated workflows for accurate mass-based putative metabolite identification in lc/ms-derived metabolomic datasets motivation: the study of metabolites (metabolomics) is increasingly being applied to investigate microbial, plant, environmental and mammalian systems. one of the limiting factors is that of chemically identifying metabolites from mass spectrometric signals present in complex datasets. results: three workflows have been developed to allow for the rapid, automated and high-throughput annotation and putative metabolite identification of electrospray lc-ms-derived metabolomic datasets. the collection of workflows are defined as putmedid_lcms and perform feature annotation, matching of accurate m/z to the accurate mass of neutral molecules and associated molecular formula and matching of the molecular formulae to a reference file of metabolites. the software is independent of the instrument and data pre-processing applied. the number of false positives is reduced by eliminating the inaccurate matching of many artifact, isotope, multiply charged and complex adduct peaks through complex interrogation of experimental data. availability: the workflows, standard operating procedure and further information are publicly available at http://www.mcisb.org/ resources/putmedid.html. contact:systems biology is applied to study the components of, and more importantly their complex interactions in, biological systems. one set of components which are studied in systems biology investigations are metabolites, either by targeted or holistic profiling experimental strategies . low molecular weight inorganic and organic metabolites play important roles in the to whom correspondence should be addressed. operation and maintenance of biological systems. the study of metabolites (metabolomics) is increasingly being applied to investigate microbial , plant , environmental and mammalian systems. many studies follow a hypothesis generating or inductive strategy and start from a small and known subset of biological knowledge. valid experiments are designed to acquire robust and reproducible data on a wide range of different metabolites and metabolite classes from carefully selected samples. subsequent data analysis procedures define the metabolic differences associated with a biological change related to genotype, biological perturbation or environmental intervention (for example, drug therapy). these studies employ a metabolic profiling strategy to detect a wide range of (but not all) metabolites from numerous biochemical classes to obtain maximum metabolic information rapidly. this strategy provides the detection of hundreds or thousands of metabolites. however, due to the diverse range of chemical and physical properties and the wide concentration range of metabolites within the metabolome, no single analytical technology can provide the non-biased quantitative detection of all metabolites in a biological system . metabolic profiling provides semi-quantitative data, typically as chromatographic peak areas, rather than absolute quantitation where metabolite concentrations would be reported. mass spectrometry (ms) and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (nmr) have been widely employed and provide complementary roles . chromatography-ms techniques provide advantages for these highly complex biological samples and include gas chromatography (gc-ms), liquid chromatography (lc-ms) and lc derivatives including ultra performance liquid chromatography (uplc-ms). capillary electrophoresis-ms and lc-ms apply electrospray ionization. direct infusion mass spectrometry (dims) can also be applied, though lacks the chromatographic separation of  
