gene expression automatically identifying and annotating mouse embryo gene expression patterns motivation: deciphering the regulatory and developmental mechanisms for multicellular organisms requires detailed knowledge of gene interactions and gene expressions. the availability of large datasets with both spatial and ontological annotation of the spatio-temporal patterns of gene expression in mouse embryo provides a powerful resource to discover the biological function of embryo organization. ontological annotation of gene expressions consists of labelling images with terms from the anatomy ontology for mouse development. if the spatial genes of an anatomical component are expressed in an image, the image is then tagged with a term of that anatomical component. the current annotation is done manually by domain experts, which is both time consuming and costly. in addition, the level of detail is variable, and inevitably errors arise from the tedious nature of the task. in this article, we present a new method to automatically identify and annotate gene expression patterns in the mouse embryo with anatomical terms. results: the method takes images from in situ hybridization studies and the ontology for the developing mouse embryo, it then combines machine learning and image processing techniques to produce classifiers that automatically identify and annotate gene expression patterns in these images. we evaluate our method on image data from the eurexpress study, where we use it to automatically classify nine anatomical terms: humerus, handplate, fibula, tibia, femur, ribs, petrous part, scapula and head mesenchyme. the accuracy of our method lies between 70 and 80 with few exceptions. we show that other known methods have lower classification performance than ours. we have investigated the images misclassified by our method and found several cases where the original annotation was not correct. this shows our method is robust against this kind of noise. availability: the annotation result and the experimental dataset in the article can be freely accessed atunderstanding the role of expression of a given gene and interactions between genes in the developmental processes of multicellular organisms requires monitoring the gene expression levels and spatial distributions on a large scale. two highthroughput methods have been widely used to curate gene expression at different developmental stages of organisms including: dna microarrays and rna in situ hybridization (ish) . dna microarrays measure gene expression levels of a large number of genes for a tissue sample or cell, which can reflect the relative changes of gene expression level in each individual gene during time courses. however, it does not provide spatial gene expression patterns. rna ish uses specific gene probes to detect and visualize spatialtemporal information of particular target genes in tissues. it offers the possibility to construct a transcriptome-wide atlas of multicellular organisms that can provide spatial gene pattern information for comprehensive analysis of the gene interactions and developmental biological processes. the result of rna ish consists of images of sections of tissue stained to reveal the presence of gene expression patterns. to understand gene functions and interactions of genes in depth, we need to transform the raw image data into detailed knowledge. annotation of gene expression patterns in the raw images from rna ish provides a powerful way to address this issue. the process of annotating gene expression pattern comprises the labelling of images with ontological terms corresponding to anatomical components. for every anatomical component that shows expression in the image, the image is labelled with that anatomical component using an hierarchically structured ontology that describes the developing mouse embryo. much effort has been devoted to the curation of gene expression patterns in the developmental biology. for example, the eurexpress project has built a transcriptomewide atlas for the developing mouse embryo established by rna ish; it has so far collected more than 18 000 genes at one development stage of wild-type murine embryos and has curated 4 tb of images. some studies have been conducted on drosophila gene expression patterns , for instance, the research inhas produced 3375 genes for genome-wide analysis on drosophila. many other spatial gene expression patterns generated via rna ish such as flybase and mouse atlas provide rich information for genetics. currently, all annotations of spatial gene expression is hand curated by domain experts. with large amount of curated image  
