automatic determination of net (neutrophil extracellular traps) coverage in fluorescent microscopy images motivation: neutrophil extracellular traps (nets) are believed to be essential in controlling several bacterial pathogens. quantification of nets in vitro is an important tool in studies aiming to clarify the biological and chemical factors contributing to net production, stabilization and degradation. this estimation can be performed on the basis of fluorescent microscopy images using appropriate labelings. in this context, it is desirable to automate the analysis to eliminate both the tedious process of manual annotation and possible operator-specific biases. results: we propose a framework for the automated determination of net content, based on visually annotated images which are used to train a supervised machine-learning method. we derive several methods in this framework. the best results are obtained by combining these into a single prediction. the overall q 2 of the combined method is 93. by having two experts label part of the image set, we were able to compare the performance of the algorithms to the human interoperator variability. we find that the two operators exhibited a very high correlation on their overall assessment of the net coverage area in the images (r 2 is 97), although there were consistent differences in labeling at pixel level (q 2 , which unlike r 2 does not correct for additive and multiplicative biases, was only 89).neutrophils are important effectors of the innate immune system in mammals, constituting the first line of defense against many microbial pathogens. upon tissue injury and infection, neutrophils circulating in the blood are recruited to the site of inflammation or infection, contributing to pathogen clearance through phagocytosis, production of highly toxic reactive oxygen species and release of granule proteins with antimicrobial activity .in recent years, it has been shown that some inflammatory mediators, as well as a wide range of microbes including bacteria, fungi and protozoa, can stimulate neutrophils to undergo a distinctive form of cell death designated netosis . this process leads to the extracellular release of fibers of dna associated with histones, granule proteins and peptidesneutrophil extracellular traps (nets). these are capable of entrapping microbial pathogens and mediate their extracellular killing. it is also becoming increasingly clear that net formation is linked to multiple neutrophil-mediated pathologies and that it is implicated in vascular injury and thrombosis . since the first identification of nets by, this has become an area of active research, with many studies relying on the in vitro production and quantification of nets as means to further understand the mechanisms involved in their formation, as well as their importance in pathogen clearance and in the development of multiple diseases . the spectrofluorometric quantification of net content based on dna release using dna intercalating dyes has been frequently used. however, this can be confounded by the necrotic release of dna, and by the influence of peptides present in nets, such as ll-37, which can affect the binding of dna to such dyes . the quantification of the area covered by nets on fluorescent microscopy images is a suitable alternative, but visual quantification, besides being tedious and labor-intensive, has reproducibility problems and can present interoperator differences. in order to avoid these pitfalls, an automatic quantification method is needed. a method for the semiautomatic quantification of in vitro net formation in microscopy images has been recently proposed, based on the calculation of the percentage of neutrophils that are under netosis, corresponding mostly to a cell death program that leads to chromatin decondensation and net formation . this method is useful for evaluating net induction by different stimuli, but is not suitable for net degradation experiments. in these experiments, net production is chemically induced, so that virtually all neutrophils are activated, and the ability of degrading nets is then evaluated based on the quantification of the dna fibers. preliminary analysis showed that threshold-based methods, whichsuccessfully used to detect nets, were not able to quantify the area of the slide that was covered in nets (which requires a more precise quantification). we thus developed a more sophisticated method based on a supervised machine learning approach that has shown good results in other areas of bioimage informatics including (most similar to our work) in the segmentation of fluorescent images . these methods have even been reported to outperform human evaluation on some tasks . in particular, we used a supervised learning approach whereby we learn a regression model to determine net fraction in local regions based on numeric features computed from the pixels in that region. finally, all the regions in an image are aggregated for a combined prediction. we present three different implementations of this generic framework based on particular choices for splitting the image into regions and different feature sets. we also show that we can combine the outputs of the different implementations to obtain a single combined result, which outperforms all the individual predictions, as evaluated by cross validation. part of our data was annotated by two different experts enabling us to quantify interoperator variation. we observe that the two experts have large disagreements on a pixel-by-pixel level, with smaller disagreements on the global appreciation of the image. however, we also document a systematic bias between the two experts, highlighting the potential pitfalls of relying on human visual classification.we present a framework for automated quantification of net area in fluorescent microscopy images. based on this generic framework, we implemented three specific methods. follow-up work may make different choices of implementation and arrive at different methods. the use of different feature sets, different oversegmentation methods or a different regression methodology are all potential avenues toexplore whilst staying within the generic framework we propose in this work. the final output of our method is a single fraction measurement which does not directly relate back to pixel assignments. while the ideal method would compute a perfect segmentation, from which the net fraction would be trivially estimated, it is not necessary to obtain this segmented image in order to solve a biologically relevant question. a single fraction estimate can provide enough information for the user. this is in accordance with work in computer vision which had previously shown that to get accurate cell counts, it is not necessary to completely segment individual cells . the fact that we only aimed to obtain single overall estimate from each image, instead of pixel assignments, allowed us to build a stacked estimator from the different methods to obtain a final prediction, even though these do not share the same partitions of the image . on our data, the gains from combining different predictions is at least partially explained by the fact that the errors of the different methods are only weakly correlated. previous work byhad demonstrated the need for careful delineation of data for cross-validation in the context of subcellular location determination. in this work, we reinforce the point in a different context, namely automated determination of net content, by demonstrating that when different images from the same sample are used for training and testing, the measured performance is increased relative to validation from data from different samples. this is likely due to overfitting to match very particular aspects of each slide as opposed to generalizable features of nets. we also empirically investigated and measured the agreement between different human evaluators. the results require a nuanced interpretation. the pixel-level agreement is very low, but the two experts have very high correlation in their evaluations of the images. this is another instance where pixel-level measures are misleading, a phenomenon we and others had already investigated in the case of nuclear segmentation . the general conclusion is that for evaluation of automated techniques, the evaluation measure should be as close as possible to the underlying biological goal (in our case, the fraction of the sample covered by nets) and not an intermediate result (the exact locations of such areas). the high correlation between human operators was hiding a systematic bias in quantitative results. one of the operators systematically reported a lower value. the automated method was more consistent with the data that it was trained on, resulting in a lower q 2 value. although the samples were prepared using the same protocol, the image acquisition equipment and parameters were not the same (see section 2). despite these differences, the proposed algorithm was able to classify equally well images obtained with either condition, suggesting that it is insensitive to any potential specificities introduced. the automated method has a lower cost, perfect reproducibility, and results in a faster processing of the images than human annotation. automated analysis opens up the possibility of multistudy comparisons by consortia of independent laboratories, which can be trained with their data and assessed by the method proposed. this can result in more robust training sets that can accommodate more significant differences in sample preparation protocol and data acquisition conditions. in its current form, the robustness of the proposed automated process, when combined with automated image acquisition, can facilitate the analysis in a single laboratory of numbers of fields and samples that would be prohibitive using manual annotation. such large-scale analysis will certainly improve confidence in the determination of net area, providing more accurate and reproducible analyses than is currently available from human annotation. our data is available for others in the community.  
