automatic reconstruction of 3d neuron structures using a graph-augmented deformable model motivation: digital reconstruction of 3d neuron structures is an important step toward reverse engineering the wiring and functions of a brain. however, despite a number of existing studies, this task is still challenging, especially when a 3d microscopic image has low single-to-noise ratio and discontinued segments of neurite patterns. results: we developed a graph-augmented deformable model (gd) to reconstruct (trace) the 3d structure of a neuron when it has a broken structure and/or fuzzy boundary. we formulated a variational problem using the geodesic shortest path, which is defined as a combination of euclidean distance, exponent of inverse intensity of pixels along the path and closeness to local centers of image intensity distribution. we solved it in two steps. we first used a shortest path graph algorithm to guarantee that we find the global optimal solution of this step. then we optimized a discrete deformable curve model to achieve visually more satisfactory reconstructions. within our framework, it is also easy to define an optional prior curve that reflects the domain knowledge of a user. we investigated the performance of our method using a number of challenging 3d neuronal image datasets of different model organisms including fruit fly, caenorhabditis elegans, and mouse. in our experiments, the gd method outperformed several comparison methods in reconstruction accuracy, consistency, robustness and speed. we further used gd in two real applications, namely cataloging neurite morphology of fruit fly to build a 3d standard digital neurite atlas, and estimating the synaptic bouton density along the axons for a mouse brain. availability: the software is provided as part of the v3d-neuron 1.0 package freely available at http://penglab.janelia.org/proj/v3d contact: pengh@janelia.hhmi.orga major engineering challenge recognized by the national academy of engineering is to reverse engineer a brain . to achieve such a goal, we would need a number of enabling techniques, of which one of the fundamental computational techniques is to precisely digitize the 3d morphological structure of a neuron acquired through various microscopy methods, such as laser scanning microscopy. this process is often called neuron reconstruction or tracing. there are a number of existing studies on neuron tracing. one may use structure elements (spheres, cylinders) as image matching templates to progressively fit and march along a neuron structure (proposed a to whom correspondence should be addressed. ray-bursting algorithm to cast rays in the bright image regions to approximate a neuron structure.assembled multiple detected center skeletons of a neuron as the complete 3d structure. interactive tracing was also considered. the widely used neurolucida software (mbf bioscience) provides a method to reconstruct a neuron manually in 2d.used the live-wire algorithm in 2d semiautomatic online tracing. in our v3d system (http://penglab.janelia.org/proj/v3d), we also provide an efficient 3d semiautomatic, interactive neuron tracing and editing method . fibrous tissue segmentation methods for other medical images and bioimages (e.g. electron microscopy images) are also relevant to neuron tracing. for instance, partial differential equations and mathematical morphology methods for blood vessel tracing (e.g.) can be used for neurons as well. in this article, we focus on a hard case of 3d neuron reconstruction, where a 3d microscopic image had low single-tonoise ratio, and/or broken and fuzzy neurite patterns that are due to the intrinsic punctuated neurite structures (e.g. synaptic boutons) or imperfectness of sample preparation. such datasets are common for the nervous systems of different animals. for instance, the punctuated and thus often broken neurites can be ubiquitously seen in the single-neuron images of drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly) and caenorhabditis elegans (and b), and the multiaxon staining of a mouse brain . the high level of background noise in an image can also lead to broken and fuzzy neurites (e.g.). in these challenging situations, the methods summarized above often fail. our intuition to solve this problem is to combine both global and local cues. the global information will guide the finer-scale optimization using local information. we formulate a graph-augmented deformable (gd) model based on the geodesic shortest path, and produce satisfactory tracing by first optimizing a shortest path graph problem followed by refining a 3d deformable curve. within the gd framework, it is also easy to incorporate an investigators prior knowledge, e.g. the starting and ending locations for tracing, the shape prior of a 3d reconstruction, etc. in a number of experiments using both synthetic data and real neuronal patterns of different model organisms, including fruit fly, c.elegans and mouse, our method outperforms several comparison methods in terms of accuracy, consistency, robustness and speed. we also applied gd to building a 3d neurite pattern atlas for the fruit fly brain and to estimating synaptic bouton density in a mouse brain.  
