genome analysis a wavelet-based method to exploit epigenomic language in the regulatory region motivation: epigenetic landscapes in the regulatory regions reflect binding condition of transcription factors and their co-factors. identifying epigenetic condition and its variation is important in understanding condition-specific gene regulation. computational approaches to explore complex multi-dimensional landscapes are needed. results: to study epigenomic condition for gene regulation, we developed a method, awnfr, to classify epigenomic landscapes based on the detected epigenomic landscapes. assuming mixture of gaussians for a nucleosome, the proposed method captures the shape of histone modification and identifies potential regulatory regions in the wavelet domain. for accuracy estimation as well as enhanced computational speed, we developed a novel algorithm based on down-sampling operation and footprint in wavelet. we showed the algorithmic advantages of awnfr using the simulated data. awnfr identified regulatory regions more effectively and accurately than the previous approaches with the epigenome data in mouse embryonic stem cells and human lung fibroblast cells (imr90). based on the detected epige-nomic landscapes, awnfr classified epigenomic status and studied epigenomic codes. we studied co-occurring histone marks and showed that awnfr captures the epigenomic variation across time. availability and implementation: the source code and supplemental document of awnfr are available atthe epigenetic landscapes, represented by modifications to histones, dna methylation and other proteins that package the genome, regulate the function of cells by activating or repressing gene activity . the epigenetic landscapes drawn over the genome reflect the commitment of cells to a lineage and/or response to the environmental changes . histone codes representing combinatorial effects of histone modification tell how transcriptional apparatuses are used in a given cell-type/environment. at active promoters, active marks, including mono-, di-and tri-methylation of lys4 of h3 (h3k4me1/2/3), showed strong signals. chromatin marks at the enhancers showed strong h3k4me1 and weak h3k4me3 . histone acetylations are enriched both at active promoter and enhancer . epigenetic variations reflected condition-specific binding of transcription factors (tfs) . therefore, identifying epigenomic condition in regulatory regions is important to understand condition-specific gene regulation. algorithmic development to exploit epigenomic landscapes is required for systematic analysis of cell-type specific gene regulation. here, we present a method that explores multi-dimensional epigenomic landscapes using the wavelet transforms (wts). wavelet compromises between time-and frequency-based views of signal. because of its property, wavelet has been widely used in signal and image processing . in genome-wide study, wavelet has been applied to analyzing dna replication profile , studying admixed population and analyzing protein or microarray data . also, wavelet has been also applied for epigenomic data analysis . we applied wavelet to idntify nucleosome, given the multi-dimensional histone modification data. for accurate and fast performance, we applied down-sampling wt and wavelet footprint in modeling nucleosome. awnfr identifies the position and the shape of nucleosomes after modeling a nucleosome with mixture of gaussians (mogs). the gapped region between two identified nucleosomes is defined as a nucleosome free region (nfr). using the shape of histone modification captured in the wd, we classified nfrs based on the epigenomic landscapes and interrogated the combination of histone modification marks. previously, a number of algorithms were suggested to detect nfrs from histone modification data. a method named nucleosome positioning from sequencing (nps) was designed to predict nucleosome position . nps used wt for denoising signal after modeling a nucleosome with laplacian of gaussian. homer package is equipped with a function to predict nfrs. normal uses gaussian mixture model to identify nucleosome position . however, these frameworks only allow one mark for the input and cannot be applied to detecting comprehensive epigenetic variation or code. an hmm-based approach, called chromia, predicted regulatory regions using epigenome data (to whom correspondence should be addressed.to show the algorithmic advantages of awnfr, we evaluated the performance of hwm in both parameter estimation and nfr detection. first, we compared hwm with dwt and dt-cwt for enriched region detection. also, we compared dog1/2/3 with other competitors such as gass1/2/3 , nps and canny for the parameter estimation of mogs. for real data, we compared the performance using histone modifications in mesc and imr90. supplementarysummarizes the data we used to predict nfrs.  
