sequence analysis a web application for sample size and power calculation in case-control microbiome studies when designing a case-control study to investigate differences in microbial composition , it is fundamental to assess the sample sizes needed to detect an hypothesized difference with sufficient statistical power. our application includes power calculation for (i) a recoded version of the two-sample generalized wald test of the hmp r-package for comparing community composition , and (ii) the wilcoxon-mann-whitney test for comparing operational taxonomic unit-specific abundances between two samples (optional). the simulation-based power calculations make use of the dirichlet-multinomial model to describe and generate abundances. the web interface allows for easy specification of sample and effect sizes. as an illustration of our application, we compared the statistical power of the two tests, with and without stratification of samples. we observed that statistical power increases considerably when stratification is employed, meaning that less samples are needed to detect the same effect size with the same power. availability and implementation: the web interface is written in r code using shiny (rstudio inc., 2016) and it is available at https://fedematt.shinyapps.io/shinymb. the r code for the recoded generalized wald test can be found at https://github.com/mafed/mswaldhmp.a pivotal aspect of planning a case-control study is the calculation of sample sizes, which is typically based on the costs of data collection and on the need to have sufficient statistical power for detecting a relevant difference between cases and controls. power can only be computed if the researchers can specify: (i) the smallest relevant deviation from the null hypothesis that is to be detected at some specified significance level, and (ii) a realistic guess of the variability in the sample. we model microbiome data with the dirichlet-multinomial (dm) distribution. it is described by two parameters: the overdispersion parameter (h) which measures the within-sample excess of variability w.r.t. a multinomial distribution; and the vector of relative abundances (p). depending on the research question each element of p refers to a single operational taxonomic unit (otu) or to a species, genus or any other rank in the microbial taxonomy. in many microbiome studies the null hypothesis can be expressed as h 0 p 1 p 2 , where the indices 1 and 2 refer, respectively, to the controls and cases. the null hypothesis thus expresses equality of community composition. proposed to test this null hypothesis with the generalized wald test of koehler and wilson (1986). for other applications researchers are interested in differential abundance for k 1 specific otus. the null hypotheses of interest are then h 0 : p 1j p 2j , j 1,.. .k, where the index j refers), as well as the non-parametric wilcoxon-mann-whitney (wmw) test, but correcting for multiple testing is required. it is usually hard to specify the smallest relevant deviation from h 0 , particularly when the p-vectors are large. in the web application, p 1 (controls) is specified by the user in an interactive way with several possible choices, while p 2 (cases) is based on p 1 with some user-selected otus showing a modified relative abundance (referred to as the requested otus). for the other otus (referred to as the unrequested otus) the relative abundances are altered to make the entries in p 2 add up to 1. it is also possible to estimate p 1 and h from user-uploaded data. for ease of presentation both vectors p 1 and p 2 are ordered according to the decreasing order of relative abundances in p 1. our application allows the simulation-based statistical power to be computed either for a specific pair of sample sizes (balanced or not, named power option 1 in the application), or for a range of sample sizes (only balanced, named power option 2 in the application). powers for both the generalized wald test for comparing community composition and the wmw test for comparing relative abundances of specific otus are implemented. sometimes biological samples can be classified into strata. a multicenter trial is a typical example, but stratification may also arise when age, gender or any other baseline information is used in the design stage to account for population heterogeneity. power calculation for stratified designs is also implemented in the web application, and we illustrate its use with enterotypes as strata. enterotypes can be described as microbiome profiles to which a sample can be said to belong; more details on the topic can be found in. although enterotypes have to be used with care as a stratification factor (they can only be identified after sequencing), power calculations are still correct as long as differences between cases and controls are not confounded by the enterotype. moreover, over-sampling may be needed to ensure that the required number of subjects is acquired in the least frequent stratum, or when accounting for drop-out during the study.using hmp stool samples data, we compared the powers of the generalized wald test (a 0.10) with and without stratification by enterotype. the sample size was set to 40 in both groups. the four most abundant otus of p 2 were set 20, 20, 40 and 40 higher than those in p 1. the resulting power was much larger for the stratified wald test, going from 0.008 without to 0.393 with stratification. the power of the wmw test went up from 0.145 to 0.94. these results were based on 1000 monte carlo simulations.we developed a web interface that allows exploring the power/sample sizes behaviour in microbiome case-control studies with or without stratification. we demonstrated that our application can estimate power when stratified tests are applied. funding: we acknowledge support of iap research network grant (p07/06) from the belgian government (belgian science policy) and of ghent university (multidisciplinary research partnership bioinformatics: from nucleotides to networks). we also want to thank doris vandeputte who ran the enterotype detection pipeline on the hmp stool data. conflict of interest: none declared.  
