gene expression a web application for the unspecific detection of differentially expressed dna regions in strand-specific expression data genomic technologies allow laboratories to produce large-scale data sets, either through the use of next-generation sequencing or microarray platforms. to explore these data sets and obtain maximum value from the data, researchers view their results alongside all the known features of a given reference genome. to study transcriptional changes that occur under a given condition, researchers search for regions of the genome that are differentially expressed between different experimental conditions. in order to identify these regions several algorithms have been developed over the years, along with some bioinformatic platforms that enable their use. however, currently available applications for comparative microarray analysis exclusively focus on changes in gene expression within known transcribed regions of predicted protein-coding genes, the changes that occur in non-predictable genetic elements, such as non-coding rnas. here, we present a web application for the visualization of strand-specific tiling microarray or next-generation sequencing data that allows customized detection of differentially expressed regions all along the genome in an unspecific manner, that allows identification of all rna sequences, predictable or not. availability and implementation: the web application is freely accessible ateukaryotic genomes are composed by coding and non-coding dna sequences. until recently it was thought that most coding regions had been identified, as they encode either protein-coding genes, highly conserved ribosomal rna, transference rna or other minor non-coding rna (ncrna) species which open reading frames (orf) are relatively easy to find . only 5 0 and 3 0 extended transcribed regions outside the orf and some introns were not easily predictable . during the last years, however, evidence from different sources has made clear that most of the assumed non-coding dna was, in fact, encoding non-predictable rna molecules. these noncoding sequences have proven not only to be expressed, but also to play many different regulatory roles within the cell . current genome-wide methods, such as tiling microarrays and next generation sequencing (ngs) provide platforms for the study of transcriptomes. in most cases, transcriptomic analyses are performed to compare relative rna abundance in different samples, such as wild type versus mutant or before versus after stressence of unpredicted introns, antisense transcripts, or other unannotated ncrnas are not detectable using these algorithms. to meet this need, we have developed tilingscan, a new web application for the visualization of microarray data that has been implemented with a new search algorithm for the detection of differentially expressed regions in an unsupervised manner. for this detection, we have developed a version of the geometric moving average algorithm, which corresponds to the class of methods of stationary random processes and constitutes one of the several methods developed for the detection of abrupt changes in a signal . this algorithm scans the signal based in scalable and sliding windows and searches for over-or under-expressed regions of a minimum size of nucleotides flanked by neutral regions (see supplementary materia for detailed description). rather than focusing on changes in protein-coding genes exclusively, the application detects changes that occur all along the genome, including unannotated ncrna, and then assigns them to the specific genetic elements annotated, if any. in addition, provided that microarray data signals often display noisy profiles, tilingscan enables the application of a smoothing algorithm that is based on a gaussian filter, allowing signal noise removal prior to the search and clearer visualization of the data. the application can be used to analyze ngs data provided that bam files are converted into compatible files using freely available software as described in the tutorial.  
