a weighted sampling algorithm for the design of rna sequences with targeted secondary structure and nucleotide distribution motivations: the design of rna sequences folding into predefined secondary structures is a milestone for many synthetic biology and gene therapy studies. most of the current software uses similar local search strategies (i.e. a random seed is progressively adapted to acquire the desired folding properties) and more importantly do not allow the user to control explicitly the nucleotide distribution such as the gc-content in their sequences. however, the latter is an important criterion for large-scale applications as it could presumably be used to design sequences with better transcription rates and/or structural plasticity. results: in this article, we introduce incarnation, a novel algorithm to design rna sequences folding into target secondary structures with a predefined nucleotide distribution. incarnation uses a global sampling approach and weighted sampling techniques. we show that our approach is fast (i.e. running time comparable or better than local search methods), seedless (we remove the bias of the seed in local search heuristics) and successfully generates high-quality sequences (i.e. thermodynamically stable) for any gc-content. to complete this study, we develop a hybrid method combining our global sampling approach with local search strategies. remarkably, our glocal methodology overcomes both local and global approaches for sampling sequences with a specific gc-content and target structure. availability: incarnation is available at csb.cs.mcgill. ca/incarnation/ contact:at the core of the emerging field of synthetic biology resides, our capacity to design and reengineer molecules with target functions. rna molecules are well tailored for such applications. the ease to synthesize them (they are directly transcribed from dna) and the broad diversity of catalytic and regulation functions they can perform enable to integrate de novo logic circuits within living cells or reprogram existing regulation mechanisms . future advances and applications of these techniques in gene-therapy studies will strongly rely on efficient computational methods to design and reengineer rna molecules. most of rna functions are, at least partially, encoded by the 3d molecular structures, which are themselves primarily determined by the secondary structures. the development of efficient algorithms for designing rna sequences with predefined secondary structures is thus a milestone to enter the synthetic biology era. rnainverse pioneered rna secondary structure design algorithms. it has been developed and distributed with the vienna rna package . however, only posterior experimental studies revealed the potential and practical impact of these techniques. thereby, during the past 6 years, many improvements and variants of rnainverse have been proposed. conceptually, almost all of existing algorithms follow the same approach. first a seed sequence is selected, then a local search strategy is used to mutate the seed and find, in its vicinity, a sequence with desired folding properties. using this strategy, info-rna , rna-ssd (aguirre-hernandez) and nupack:design significantly improved the performance of rna secondary structure design algorithms. more recent research studies aimed to include more constraints in the selection criteria. rnaexinv focused on the design of sequences with enhanced thermodynamical and mutational robustness , while frnakenstein enables to design rna with multiple target structures . we recently introduced with rna-ensign a novel paradigm for the search strategy of rna secondary structure design algorithm . instead of a local search approach, we proposed a global sampling strategy of the mutational landscape based on the rnamutants algorithm . this methodology offered promising performances, but suffered from prohibitive runtime and memory consumption. following our work, garciaproposed rnaifold, an alternate methodology that uses constraint programming techniques to prune the mutational landscape. while also suffering from prohibitive running times, it is worth noting that this latter algorithm also proposes a seedless approach to the rna secondary structure design problem. in this article, we introduce incarnation, an rna secondary structure design algorithm that benefits from our recent algorithmic advances to expand our original rna-ensign algorithm . incarnation addresses previous limitations of rna-ensign and offers new functionalities. first, while our previous program had a running time complexity of on 5 , incarnation now runs in lineartime and space complexity, allowing it to demonstrate similar speeds as any local search algorithm. next, incarnation is seedless. unlike rna-ensign, it does not require a seed sequence to initiate its search. finally, incarnation implements a novel algorithm based on weighted sampling techniques to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com that enables us to control, for the first time, explicitly the gc-content of the solution. this functionality is essential because wild-type sequences within living organisms often present medium or low gc-content, presumably to offer better transcription rates and/or structural plasticity. previous programs do not allow to control this parameter and tend to output sequences having high gc-contents . we demonstrate the performance of our algorithms on a set of real rna structures extracted from the rna strand database . to complete this study, we develop a hybrid method combining our global sampling approach with local search strategies such as the one implemented in rnainverse. remarkably, our glocal methodology overcomes both local and global approaches for sampling sequences with a specific gc-content and target structure.  
