a wide repertoire of mirna binding sites: prediction and functional implications motivation: over the past decade, deciphering the roles of micrornas (mirnas) has relied heavily upon the identification of their targets. most of the targets that were computationally and experimentally characterized were evolutionarily conserved seedmicrornas (mirnas) have emerged as key regulators of gene expression, exerting their regulatory function post-transcriptionally by base-pairing with the mrna. over the past decade, hundreds of mirna genes have been to whom correspondence should be addressed. discovered in metazoa, plants and viruses. while it has been demonstrated that quite a few of them have important roles in central cellular processes [reviewed in ref. (, understanding these roles relies heavily upon identification of their target genes. consequently, many experimental and computational efforts have been made to identify mirna targets. most of the first discovered mirna targets exhibited evolutionary conservation and full complementarity in their 3-untranslated region (3 utr) to a short sequence of 7 nt in the 5 region of the mirna, termed seed [reviewed in ref. (. therefore, the main features of mirna binding sites that were initially used to predict mirna targets were the presence of a seed and evolutionary conservation of the site [reviewed in ref. (. these features narrowed the vast number of possible base-pairings between mrna 3 utrs and mirnas, and directed most research in the field to seed-containing targets. however, two of the originally discovered mirna targets in caenorhabditis elegans, as well as additional targets identified along the years, lacked perfect seed pairing, but rather exhibited extensive base-pairing between the mrna 3 utr and the mirna 3 region, termed 3 compensatory sites . furthermore, the mirna binding options were recently expanded even further with the identification of centered sites, functional mirna binding sites that lack both perfect seed and 3 compensatory pairing but exhibit extensive pairing between the mrna 3 utr and the center region of the mirna . all these additional types of sites were far less studied; non-evolutionarily conserved targets can be predicted by several algorithms , the 3 compensatory targets are predicted by only few and no target prediction algorithm to date predicts centered sites (see supplementary material s1 and supplementary). consequently, much is still unknown regarding the functionality and the biological implications of these non-conventional targets. this shortage may be even more pronounced when targets of viral mirnas are considered, as these mirnas are not evolutionarily conserved and one of their first discovered cellular targets (based on reptars predictions) contained a 3 compensatory site . here, we provide a wide repertoire of targets obtained by our algorithm reptar, which enables identification of targets with various binding types. the set of reptars predictions includes  
