genome analysis b2g-far, a species-centered go annotation repository motivation: functional genomics research has expanded enormously in the last decade thanks to the cost reduction in high-throughput technologies and the development of computational tools that generate, standardize and share information on gene and protein function such as the gene ontology (go). nevertheless, many biologists, especially working with non-model organisms, still suffer from non-existing or low-coverage functional annotation, or simply struggle retrieving, summarizing and querying these data. results: the blast2go functional annotation repository (b2g-far) is a bioinformatics resource envisaged to provide functional information for otherwise uncharacterized sequence data and offers data mining tools to analyze a larger repertoire of species than currently available. this new annotation resource has been created by applying the blast2go functional annotation engine in a strongly high-throughput manner to the entire space of public available sequences. the resulting repository contains go term predictions for over 13.2 million non-redundant protein sequences based on blast search alignments from the simap database. we generated go annotation for approximately 150 000 different taxa making available 2000 species with the highest coverage through b2g-far. a second section within b2g-far holds functional annotations for 17 non-model organism affymetrix genechips. conclusions: b2g-far provides easy access to exhaustive functional annotation for 2000 species offering a good balance between quality and quantity, thereby supporting functional genomics research especially in the case of non-model organisms. availability: the annotation resource is available at http://www.b2gfar.org.functional genomics research has gained importance in the last decade thanks to the fast improvement and cost reduction in to whom correspondence should be addressed. high-throughput technologies. beyond traditional model species, also non-model organisms are in the genomics race and today it is hard to find a biological domain without a functional genomics initiative. this expansion would not have been that successful without the accompanying development of computational tools that generate, standardize and share information on gene and protein function. the gene ontology (go) project is one such standard. go is a collaborative effort aiming at the establishment of a controlled vocabulary that provides biologically meaningful annotations for gene (products) across species . there are two main aspects of this project: (a) the definition of a comprehensive ontology of functional terms and (b) the generation of an annotation database containing the assignment of go terms to genes and proteins . annotation for each organism in the go database is supplied and maintained by the respective consortium member. evidence codes (ecs) are added to each individual annotation to reflect the information source used in a go term assignment. ecs indicate if the annotation is supported by some (and which) experimental evidence, whether it was transferred (and how) from related genes or if it was generated by other prediction methods. the large majority of go annotations is centralized in the gene ontology annotation (goa) database . this resource contains highquality functional annotations for proteins mostly obtained from the uniprot knowledgebase . however, the great majority (95) of go corresponds to automatically transferred annotations based on interproscan results. currently, only a small number of assignments have experimental evidence or are revised by expert curators. while the go project is improving the ontology definition and quality of the goa database , it is still far from providing extensive functional annotation for the wealth of sequence data that populate public databases. however, thanks to the structured and universal nature of go, large-scale annotation using an automated process is conceivable and could be feasible given that adequate computational resources are available. such an annotation effort complement current established annotation initiatives by generating preliminary functional labels for sequences not yet covered by any of the reference projects of the go consortium. examples of functional data-intensive resources in the field of functional genomics such as the integr8 and pedant ([page: 920 919924  
