gene expression backclip: a tool to identify common background presence in par-clip datasets motivation: par-clip, a clip-seq protocol, derives a transcriptome wide set of binding sites for rna-binding proteins. even though the protocol uses stringent washing to remove experimental noise, some of it remains. a recent study measured three sets of non-specific rna backgrounds which are present in several par-clip datasets. however, a tool to identify the presence of common background in par-clip datasets is not yet available. results: we used the measured sets of non-specific rna backgrounds to build a common background set. each element from the common background set has a score that reflects its presence in several par-clip datasets. we present a tool that uses this score to identify the amount of common backgrounds present in a par-clip dataset, and we provide the user the option to use or remove it. we used the proposed strategy in 30 par-clip datasets from nine proteins. it is possible to identify the presence of common backgrounds in a dataset and identify differences in datasets for the same protein. this method is the first step in the process of completely removing such backgrounds. availability: the tool was implemented in python. the common background set and the supplementary data are available at https://github.com/phrh/backclip. contact:rna-binding proteins (rbps) have important roles in rna regulation. the first step to understand rbps specific functions is to identify the rna targets for each rbp. the introduction of protocols combining clip (uv crosslinking and immunoprecipitation) and high-throughput sequencing (commonly known as clip-seq protocols) have made it possible to obtain sets of binding sites for rbps at a transcriptome-wide scale . however, each clip-seq protocol introduces distinct modifications to reduce the presence of background (non-crosslinked rna). par-clip, a frequently used clip-seq protocol, uses photo activatable nucleosides to label the transcripts in addition to an enhanced crosslinking . these modifications induce specific nucleotides transitions that facilitate the recognition of the crosslinked sites. the presence of a common background in par-clip datasets has been noted . this non-specific rna background must be taken into account when processing par-clip data because it can interfere with the distinction of the specific characteristics recognized by the rbps, and therefore the identification and understanding of binding targets and protein function. a recent study experimentally measured three background sets and demonstrated that background rna is common in several par-clip datasets. this background rna mainly originates from false binding sites. it is worth noting that par-clip induced transitions were also present in several sites from the measured background sets, thus it is difficult to distinguish background rna. although computational tools exist specifically for clip-seq data (reyes), only a few proposals address the background issue . these computational tools use mathematical models to distinguish binding sites from the rna background based on characteristics such as read counts or the number of induced transitions, but these characteristics are measured from whole datasets (both background and binding sites). friedersdorf and keene (2014) present an alternative strategy for background correction, it consists on removing sites from the par-clip dataset that overlap by one or more nucleotides with the sites present in one of three known background rna sets. however, a limitation of this strategy is that it may remove sites that incidentally overlap with the background. the datasets of non-specific rna background constitute a valuable reference resource for the quantification of the amount of background present in a par-clip dataset. here, we build on this resource to develop a computational tool, backclip, to identify the presence of common background rna in par-clip datasets.  
