bacom: in silico detection of genomic deletion types and correction of normal cell contamination in copy number data motivation: identification of somatic dna copy number alterations (cnas) and significant consensus events (sces) in cancer genomes is a main task in discovering potential cancer-driving genes such as oncogenes and tumor suppressors. the recent development of snp array technology has facilitated studies on copy number changes at a genome-wide scale with high resolution. however, existing copy number analysis methods are oblivious to normal cell contamination and cannot distinguish between contributions of cancerous and normal cells to the measured copy number signals. this contamination could significantly confound downstream analysis of cnas and affect the power to detect sces in clinical samples. results: we report here a statistically principled in silico approach, bayesian analysis of copy number mixtures (bacom), to accurately estimate genomic deletion type and normal tissue contamination, and accordingly recover the true copy number profile in cancer cells. we tested the proposed method on two simulated datasets, two prostate cancer datasets and the cancer genome atlas high-grade ovarian dataset, and obtained very promising results supported by the ground truth and biological plausibility. moreover, based on a large number of comparative simulation studies, the proposed method gives significantly improved power to detect sces after in silico correction of normal tissue contamination. we develop a cross-platform open-source java application that implements the whole pipeline of copy number analysis of heterogeneous cancer tissues including relevant processing steps. we also provide an r interface, bacomr, for running bacom within the r environment, making it straightforward to include in existing data pipelines.dna copy number change is an important form of structural variation in the human genome. somatic copy number alterations (cnas) are key genetic events in the development and progression of human cancers, and frequently contribute to tumorigenesis . the coverage of copy number changes varies from a few hundred to several million nucleotide bases, and somatic cnas in tumors exhibit highly complex patterns. the advance of oligonucleotide-based single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) arrays provides a high-density and allelic-specific genomic profile and enables researchers to study copy number changes on a genomewide scale. for instance, affymetrix offers several dna analysis arrays for snp genotyping and copy number variation (cnv) analysis, and the newest affymetrix genome-wide human snp array 6.0 features 1.8 million genetic markers, including more than 906 600 snps and more than 946 000 probes for detecting cnvs or cnas. quantitative analysis of somatic cnas has found broad application in cancer research. although molecular analysis of tumors in their native tissue environment provides the most accurate picture of their in vivo state, tissue samples often consist of mixed cancer and normal cells, and accordingly, the observed snp intensity signals are the weighted sum of the copy numbers contributed from both cancer and normal cells. this tissue heterogeneity inherited in the measured copy number signals could significantly confound subsequent marker identification and molecular diagnosis rooted in cancer cells, e.g. true copy number estimation, consensus region detection, cna association studies and detection of loss of heterozygosity and homozygous deletion. experimental methods for minimizing normal cell contamination, such as cell enrichment or purification, are prohibitively expensive, inconvenient and prone to errors . here we ask whether it is possible to computationally correct normal tissue contamination by estimating the proportions of normal and cancer cells and recovering the true copy number profiles of cancer cells, based on the observed snp intensity signals frompage: 1474 14731480  
