genome analysis badger—an accessible genome exploration environment high-quality draft genomes are now easy to generate, as sequencing and assembly costs have dropped dramatically. however, building a user-friendly searchable web site and database for a newly annotated genome is not straightforward. here we present badger, a lightweight and easy-to-install genome exploration environment designed for next generation non-model organism genomes. availability: badger is released under the gpl and is available at http://badger.bio.ed.ac.uk/. we show two working examples: (i) a test dataset included with the source code, and (ii) a collection of four filarial nematode genomes. contact:high-throughput sequencing has revolutionized genome sequencing. new sequencing technologies and improved computational tools mean that a high quality draft eukaryotic genome can be sequenced and assembled in days, on a budget accessible to most researchers. this has produced an explosion of genome projects, an increasing number of which involve multiple species or strains. genome data and annotation must be made accessible to collaborators via a restricted environment and to the wider research community following publication. several genome exploration environments (gees) exist, including ensembl and national center for biotechnology information (ncbi) genomes (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), but these do not allow real-time updates or restrictions on data access. ensembl can be used as a stand-alone gee, as can projects like genedb , but these require skills not available in groups new to genome informatics. gees that use the generic model organism database (gmod) chado database model , including tripal and chado on rails (http://gmod.org/wiki/ chado_on_rails), are similar to ensembl in scope. tripal is the most mature gmod gee and is widely used, but requires a dedicated software engineer to develop and design each genome instance. we here present badger, an easy-to-install gee for genome scientists who need to produce a web-accessible portal for new data. a single installation of badger can contain data from multiple species, and each species can have multiple genome drafts and gene sets.  
