genome analysis badirate: estimating family turnover rates by likelihood-based methods motivation: the comparative analysis of gene gain and loss rates is critical for understanding the role of natural selection and adaptation in shaping gene family sizes. studying complete genome data from closely related species allows accurate estimation of gene family turnover rates. current methods and software tools, however, are not well designed for dealing with certain kinds of functional elements, such as micrornas or transcription factor binding sites. results: here, we describe badirate, a new software tool to estimate family turnover rates, as well as the number of elements in internal phylogenetic nodes, by likelihood-based methods and parsimony. it implements two stochastic population models, which provide the appropriate statistical framework for testing hypothesis, such as lineage-specific gene family expansions or contractions. we have assessed the accuracy of badirate by computer simulations, and have also illustrated its functionality by analyzing a representative empirical dataset. availability: badirate software and documentation is available fromit is generally accepted that gene and genome duplications are a major evolutionary mechanism for generating functional innovation . the increasing availability of closely related genome sequences allows an accurate analysis of gene family evolution . such studies have shown that most families are highly dynamic and evolve under a birth-and-death (bd) process . indeed, the comprehensive analysis of gene gains and losses can provide helpful insight into the role of natural selection and adaptation in shaping gene family size variation. the stochastic bd model (bdm) implemented in the programs cafe and begfe allows estimating the family turnover rate by maximum likelihood (ml) and by bayesian methods, respectively. this model, nevertheless, has some drawbacks. first, it assumes equal bd rates, an assumption that may not hold. secondly, because duplicationsmodel (li). this model is nearly equivalent to that implemented in cafe (except for the innovation parameter), which allows the comparison between the two programs. we have implemented three statistical frameworks to estimate family turnover rates and the number of members in internal nodes: maximum a posteriori (map), ml and parsimony (see supplementary material). likelihood-based methods have the advantage of contrasting biological relevant scenarios, such as the identification of gene families or specific-lineages with extreme turnover rates . moreover, the map approach allows the incorporation of prior biological information without a large computational cost. badirate requires as input the established species phylogenetic tree and a tab-delimited file with the family size of each species represented in the phylogeny (see badirates documentation).  
