balestraweb: efficient online evaluation of drug–target interactions balestraweb is an online server that allows users to instantly make predictions about the potential occurrence of interactions between any given drugtarget pair, or predict the most likely interaction partners of any drug or target listed in the drugbank. it also permits users to identify most similar drugs or most similar targets based on their interaction patterns. outputs help to develop hypotheses about drug repurposing as well as potential side effects. availability and implementation: balestraweb is accessible at http:// balestra.csb.pitt.edu/. the tool is built using a probabilistic matrix fac-torization method and drugbank v3, and the latent variable models are trained using the graphlab collaborative filtering toolkit. the server is implemented using python, flask, numpy and scipy.contemporary drug discovery faces important challenges: bringing a new molecular entity to the market is estimated to cost upward of 1.8 billion us$ , and the rate of new drug discovery has steadily halved every 9 years for the past 60 years . one of the common suggestions brought forth to explain and remedy this trend is a paradigm shift in drug discovery efforts from high-affinity binding on a single target toward modulation of cellular network states through multiple interactions . the development of computational methods that can efficiently assess potential new interactions for drug repurposing thus became an important goal in quantitative systems/network pharmacology research. we recently introduced a probabilistic matrix factorization (pmf) method that can be applied to known drugtarget interaction graphs for predicting new interactions . here, we introduce balestraweb, a web server that has been developed for allowing users to efficiently obtain results from the pmf analysis, and assess the likelihood of interaction between any drugtarget pair. similarity. stitch is an extensive repository of protein and chemicals (1.07 billion interactions), including predictions based on chemical similarities of compounds. however, the interactions predicted by balestraweb are not based on a particular chemical or genomic similarity method, but on the assessment of comparable interaction patterns, and as such they differ from, or complement, those predicted by sea or listed by stitch.balestraweb provides users the ability to predict the most likely interaction partners of any drug or target beyond those known and compiled in the drugbank. the technology used to build the web server scales linearly with the number of drugs or targets and is therefore easily scalable to larger datasets as they become available. our plan is to regularly update the underlying engine and optimized parameters by using the newly released data. the modular architecture of the software allows us to update the web server to reflect changes as new data become available. free, fast and easy-to-use balestraweb enables researchers to help eliminate improbable drugtarget interactions and efficiently focus their limited resources on selected drugs.. balestraweb architecture and underlying methodology. the user input (lower left) is mapped onto the latent factor vector(s) u i v j (for targets), learned by minimizing squared error regularized by frobenius norm (see equation at top left). the output (right) contains a score r representative of predicted interaction confidence along with a graphical representation of the close neighborhood of the query drug (sunitinib) and/or query target (scn5a) in the drug-target association network, along with a table of known and predicted interactions. similar features hold for drug-drug and targettarget similarity searches and outputs  
