bamview: viewing mapped read alignment data in the context of the reference sequence bamview is an interactive java application for visualizing the large amounts of data stored for sequence reads which are aligned against a reference genome sequence. it supports the bam (binary alignment/map) format. it can be used in a number of contexts including snp calling and structural annotation. bamview has also been integrated into artemis so that the reads can be viewed in the context of the nucleotide sequence and genomic features. availability: bamview and artemis are freely available (under a gpl licence) for download (for macosx, unix and windows) at: http://bamview.sourceforge.net/second-generation sequencing produces large volumes of short-read sequence data. in common applications of the technology, such as resequencing or transcriptome sequencing, reads are mapped against a reference genome. in many cases, bases in a reference are covered with alignment depths varying by orders of magnitude and therefore present a challenge for visualization. sam (sequence alignment/map) and bam (binary alignment/map) formats are emerging as a standard representation for read alignments. it is therefore important to have visualization software for this format. bam files contain the same information as sam. as bam format is compressed it provides an efficient means to store the data and enables fast retrieval of regions and so this format has been adopted here. samtools includes a very simple text alignment viewer using the gnu ncurses library giving a detailed view at the nucleotide resolution level. lookseq is a perl-cgi application used to display, in a web browser, reads mapped against a reference. it can read the data either directly from bam files or from a relational database to display reads and plots paired read positions against their inferred size. alignment tools can be used to produce bam format files. for instance, ssaha now supports sam format and maq output can be converted to sam/bam using samtools. bamview can be used as a stand-alone java application or displayed in artemis (,) in conjunction with the reference sequence and annotation. to whom correspondence should be addressed.(b)artemis is a freely available genome browser and annotation tool. bamview in artemis provides the annotator with an extra level of information that can inform them about structural annotation. bamview not only displays the lookseq type of view (plotting against the paired reads inferred size) but also has other types of views that are described below. it does not require a web server and reads the data from an indexed bam file.  
