genome analysis acgh.spline—an r package for acgh dye bias normalization motivation: the careful normalization of array-based comparative genomic hybridization (acgh) data is of critical importance for the accurate detection of copy number changes. the difference in labelling affinity between the two fluorophores used in acghusually cy5 and cy3can be observed as a bias within the intensity distributions. if left unchecked, this bias is likely to skew data interpretation during downstream analysis and lead to an increased number of false discoveries. results: in this study, we have developed acgh.spline, a natural cubic spline interpolation method followed by linear interpolation of outlier values, which is able to remove a large portion of the dye bias from large acgh datasets in a quick and efficient manner. conclusions: we have shown that removing this bias and reducing the experimental noise has a strong positive impact on the ability to detect accurately both copy number variation (cnv) and copy number alterations (cna).recent advancements in array-based comparative genomic hybridization (acgh) technology enable entire genomes to be scanned for copy number changes using high-resolution oligonucleotide tiling arrays. in particular, it is now possible to design the content of arrays with a high degree of flexibility as a number of companies offer rapid custom array generation as a standard service. due to the particular needs of specific experimental questions, microarrays frequently contain oligonucleotide probes displaying variable performance particularly when designs are targeted towards regions of the genome with complex architecture. for example, regions containing repetitive sequences are important for studies of both copy number variation (cnv) and copy number alterations (cna) and often need to be included in array designs. replication hot spots contain large numbers of repetitive structures and often underlie the mechanisms for copy number break point formation, which include non-allelic homologous recombination (nahr), non-homologous end joining (nhej), and fork stalling to whom correspondence should be addressed. and template switching (fostes) mechanisms . probe performance in and around replication hot spots in repetitive regions is often poor and characterized by heterogeneous probe response. this variable probe response increases the general noise and number of outliers seen across an array, which in turn can cause problems during normalization. with ever-increasing array resolution and complexity, the need for a consistent, efficient, universal normalization method has become of greater importance. it is well established that a bias exists between the two fluorophores (cy5 and cy3) due to differential efficiency in enzymatic labelling. this bias manifests as a difference between the two resulting intensity distributions and if left uncorrected is highly likely to skew the ratio calculated during downstream analysis. over the years there have been a number of different approaches taken for dye bias removal including both linear and non-linear methods . these methods were primarily developed for the normalization of expression microarrays and have more recently been applied to acgh microarrays . the most commonly used and widely trusted dye bias normalization methods tend to be based on lowess (locally weighted regression) techniques. however, standard regression techniques can be sensitive to outliers, which are common features of acgh data. as a result, lowess-based dye bias normalization approaches normally use robust regression techniques, becoming computationally intensive and severely limiting if applied to microarrays comprising 300 000 probes . normalization methods based on fitting smoothing spline functions have most often been seen in relation to between-chip quantile normalization of microarrays and although promising work has been carried out previously have thus far seldom been applied to two-colour acgh microarray data. one possible explanation for this is that when fitting a spline curve only a subset of data is used and without appropriate action can lead to inaccurate data adjustment when applied to complex datasets . here we describe an efficient, robust normalization method using natural cubic spline interpolation (acgh.spline), which consistently removes, in a computationally efficient manner, the dye biases seen across a large range of acgh data.in this study, we have shown that acgh.spline enables efficient dye bias removal on acgh profiles, giving similar, if not superior, results to several approaches available within the r programming environment . interestingly, acgh.spline not only increases data quality by reducing the experimental noise , but also decreases the fdr (and) in the majority of situations. removing a large portion of the dye bias reduces the inherent noise of acgh profiles and decreases the magnitude of falsely elevated or lowered log 2 ratio values .estimating experimental variability can be difficult with highly rearranged or aneuploid samples where the majority of data points respond to an altered copy number state, thus falsely increasing noise estimations . we chose to use two different estimations of the systematic noise in acgh profiles: (i) the rp68 (68th percentile of the absolute log 2 ratiovalues), which gives an accurate estimation of the spread of the noise within the centralized log 2 ratio distribution; (ii) the dlrs that measure the probe-to-probe noise across the array. although both of these measures are, to some degree, insensitive to outliers, using a combination of the two is necessary for accurate quality control of acgh data. indeed, by using the dlrs value alone as a quality control (qc) metric, it is possible to miss subtle artefacts within the dataset. for example, the auto-correlation or wave profile often seen in acgh data will not be well reflected by a dlrs value. additionally, by using only the rp68 value as a qc measure, the noise estimation of highly variable datasets (e.g. annioploid samples) can be compromised. as the use of ultra-high-resolution microarrays becomes a standard for acgh analysis, it is important to be aware of the potential for increased fdrs. using a custom microarray comprising 1 million probes in our hands leads to the detection of 1000 cnvs. with a fdr of 5 (which is usually considered as an acceptable cut-off) this analysis would include 50 false discoveries. decreasing fdrs is of great importance for the identification of cnvs associated with disease or evolution and for avoiding unnecessary and wasteful validation of results. acgh.spline is efficient for the normalization of arrays with 1 million data points and performs consistently over a range of data complexities (, 2, 3 and 4). this method is particularly useful for the processing of large numbers of ultra-high-resolution microarray datasets . although all of the results presented here have been generated using agilent acgh arrays, the method can be applied to any dual colour microarray data. the acgh.spline r package contains various functions for the reading and writing of standard microarray data formats, including the complex feature extraction data format from agilent, the generation of qc statistics and the plotting of data. the package is deliberately distributed with mild default parameters (see acgh.spline documentation in supplementary material) and aims to include only data points that are representative of the dye bias within the spline fit. this reduces page: 1200 11951200  
