systems biology basylica: a tool for automatic processing of a bacterial live cell array live cell array (lca) technology allows the acquisition of high-resolution time-course profiles of bacterial gene expression by the systematic assessment of fluorescence in living cells carrying either transcriptional or translational fluorescent protein fusion. however, the direct estimation of promoter activities by time-dependent derivation of the fluorescence datasets generates high levels of noise. here, we present basylica, a user-friendly open-source interface and database dedicated to the automatic storage and standardized treatment of lca data. data quality reports are generated automatically. growth rates and promoter activities are calculated by tunable discrete kalman filters that can be set to incorporate data from biological replicates, significantly reducing the impact of noise measurement in activity estimations. availability: the basylica software and the related documentation are available atdespite recent developments in transcriptomic technologies, direct rna sequencing and tiling array approaches require tedious sample preparations. for this reason, they are not suitable for transcriptional high-resolution time courses that require one microarray and/or messenger rna (mrna) extraction per timepoint. an alternative approach is to measure the transcriptional activity of promoters using reporter genes. in the last decade, fluorescent proteins, in particular green fluorescent protein (gfp), have become widely used . major advances have come from the characterization and development of fast-folding gfp monomer variants . fluorescent reporters allow the high-temporal-resolution measurement of promoter activity in living cells . live cell array (lca) technology involves the generation of a large collection of strains that harbour transcriptional fusions with fast-folding fluorescent proteins and monitoring their accumulation under the appropriate conditions. the promoter activity profiles of up to 96 individual gfp fusions in cells grown in microtiter plates can be obtained at once at very high resolution by determining the difference in fluorescence levels at successive timepoints. promoter activation or deactivation can be easily detected by an increase or a decrease in the fluorescence accumulation rate. this high-throughput technology was proven to be an accurate and versatile method of determining gene expression in 2000 escherichia coli promoters subjected to a glucose lactose diauxic shift experiment . we previously described the development of the plasmid pbasysbioii, constructed within the framework of the eu-funded basysbio systems biology program (http://www. basysbio.eu/), for use in the lca analysis of gene expression in bacillus subtilis . however, no tools have been developed to facilitate the analysis of the quickly growing bacterial lca datasets. here, we report the development of a user-friendly software, basylica, for the storage and analysis of lca data. basylica is dedicated to wet lab biologists for the analysis of large amounts of lca data in microplates. as a proof of concept, we produced and analysed lca data for several promoters using b. subtilis as a model bacterium and the newly developed pbasysbioii plasmid (see supplementary information).  
