gene expression bayesian ensemble methods for survival prediction in gene expression data motivation: we propose a bayesian ensemble method for survival prediction in high-dimensional gene expression data. we specify a fully bayesian hierarchical approach based on an ensemble sum-of-trees model and illustrate our method using three popular survival models. our non-parametric method incorporates both additive and interaction effects between genes, which results in high predictive accuracy compared with other methods. in addition, our method provides model-free variable selection of important prognostic markers based on controlling the false discovery rates; thus providing a unified procedure to select relevant genes and predict survivor functions. results: we assess the performance of our method several simulated and real microarray datasets. we show that our method selects genes potentially related to the development of the disease as well as yields predictive performance that is very competitive to many other existing methods.gene expression profiling using dna microarray technology has successfully identified molecular classes of cancer and revealed gene expression patterns that are associated with disease recurrence or prognosis of patient survival . survival prediction is often formulated in terms of categorical outcomes (e.g. poor versus good prognosis), which may be useful for guiding decisions about cancer management and treatment . however, due to a large degree of heterogeneity observed within prognostic classes, prediction of time to a clinical event/occurrence may not be successful. improved accuracy of survival prediction can be attained by relating time-to-event measures directly with gene expression profiles, which requires specific survival analysis methods that account for the presence of right censored outcomes, such as the (multivariable) cox to whom correspondence should be addressed. proportional hazards (cph) model and the accelerated failure time model (aft;). in our context, we define the (uncensored) survival time as the dependent variable of interest representing the time to an event (such as death or recurrence), and a right censored observation is an observation that is lost to follow-up after the period of study. in spite of their widespread use in other settings, these standard multivariable survival methods cannot be directly applied to clinical outcome prediction using gene expression data because the number of covariates (genes) under investigation is considerably larger than the number of samples (patients)the large p, small n problem . many different strategies have been employed to solve this high dimensionality problem. for example, clustering techniques have been applied to group-correlated sets of genes,), linear combinations of covariates obtained by the partial least squares method or the principal components of the design matrix have been used as explanatory variables in survival regression models. in addition, some authors have proposed the use of penalized versions of the cph model, l1-penalized (lasso regression) and l2-penalized (ridge regression) versions, for estimating parameters while simultaneously performing variable selection . similarly,developed penalized variants of the aft model for fitting high-dimensional datasets. bayesian techniques for variable selection have also been developed for weibull and cph models as well as for the aft model . although these strategies address the high-dimensionality problem with some degree of success, they fail to incorporate complex interactions between genes because they model genes in an additive and linear manner. ensemble methods such as bagging , boosting and random forests are flexible alternatives for accommodating variable interactions that are more stable in high-dimensional settings . because ensemble methods use a linear combination of trees to fit data variations such that each tree fits part of the data, these methods have been shown to have high predictive accuracy . the ensemble methods were originally developed for modeling binary or continuous responses. extensions for modeling survival data, often called survival ensembles , address the censoring problem by growing relative risk forests , bypage: 360 359367we propose bayesian ensemble methods for survival prediction for high-throughput data such as gene expression data. using a powerful predictive tool, bart, we model the covariate effects via a latent variable scheme, that not only allows stochastic deviations from the parameteric model but also greatly reduces the computational complexity. we chose bart because it has the flexibility to accommodate a high number of covariates and their interactions. in addition, our primary reason of working under a bayesian paradigm is that the uncertainty in estimation is propagated at each stage of the hierarchy, thus the credible intervals on all our model parameters are in some sense exact by conditioning on all sources of variation. thus, using the selected gene expression profile one can estimate the median survival time and credibility intervals for a given patient using the posterior distributions of the process parameters obtained with the aft-tree model or, alternatively, survival curves along with confidence bounds for the population using the wei-tree and cph-tree methods. although our method is based on the bart page: 366 359367  
