bayesian integration of networks without gold standards motivation: biological experiments give insight into networks of processes inside a cell, but are subject to error and uncertainty. however, due to the overlap between the large number of experiments reported in public databases it is possible to assess the chances of individual observations being correct. in order to do so, existing methods rely on high-quality gold standard reference networks, but such reference networks are not always available. results: we present a novel algorithm for computing the probability of network interactions that operates without gold standard reference data. we show that our algorithm outperforms existing gold standard-based methods. finally, we apply the new algorithm to a large collection of genetic interaction and proteinprotein interaction experiments. availability: the integrated dataset and a reference implementation of the algorithm as a plug-in for the ondex data integration framework are available for download at http://bio-nexus.ncl.ac.uk/ projects/nogold/ contact:a significant proportion of knowledge about molecular biological processes is distributed over a large number of online databases . this knowledge has been obtained through experiments performed in laboratories all over the world. overlaps often exist across the contents of these databases. the sub-discipline of integrative bioinformatics aims at collating this knowledge and making it accessible to both humans and computers. a popular integration paradigm is the construction of functional networks . functional networks represent different types of relationships between biological entities in an abstract manner. associations such as genetic interactions (gis), proteinprotein interactions (ppis), to whom correspondence should be addressed. gene regulation and co-expression are combined into simple abstract statements of functional relatedness, which are termed functional interactions. an alternative paradigm is semantic data integration . these approaches aim at representing the biological information (and as much of its meaning as possible) in a computationally accessible fashion. rather than generalizing over all types of associations between entities to infer functional interactions, each type of association is considered separately. an important question regarding such networks is how to assess the degree of confidence in each statement, that is, how likely the statement is to be correct. several popular solutions to this problem exist for functional networks . these methods assess the quality of each input dataset against one or more additional datasets of higher quality, usually manually-curated collections. based on the confidence measures gained from this comparison it is then possible to calculate a confidence measure for each functional interaction. the high-quality datasets used in these comparisons are often referred to as gold standards. the method described byevaluates each evidential dataset against such a gold standard and obtain a log likelihood score (lls). subsequently, for each interaction in question, a weighted sum is formed over the lls scores of those datasets that report the interaction. the weights are chosen in a manner that represents the degree of dependency between the datasets . lycett describes a method that extends the original method of lee et al. not only one, but several different gold standards are used to generate lls scores for the datasets. furthermore, instead of creating a score for each interaction via the weighted sum described above, this method computes an existence probability from the original lls scores and then averages over the different probabilities according to the different gold standards. the authors show that any bias inherent in the used gold standards can thus be overcome . these methods work very well for functional networks. however, inferring confidence assessments for semantic networks, rather than functional networks, is more challenging, because each single type of association must be scored separately. reliable gold standards  
