achievements and challenges in structural bioinformatics and computational biophysics motivation: the field of structural bioinformatics and computational biophysics has undergone a revolution in the last 10 years. developments that are captured annually through the 3dsig meeting, upon which this article reflects. results: an increase in the accessible data, computational resources and methodology has resulted in an increase in the size and resolution of studied systems and the complexity of the questions amenable to research. concomitantly, the parameterization and efficiency of the methods have markedly improved along with their cross-validation with other computational and experimental results. conclusion: the field exhibits an ever-increasing integration with biochemistry , biophysics and other disciplines. in this article, we discuss recent achievements along with current challenges within the field.structural bioinformatics, originally known as structural computational biology, predates other forms of bioinformatics. it can be argued that the seminal 1953 article by watson and crick is in fact a modeling paper and arguably the first structural bioinformatics paper. thus, the 2014 nobel prize for multiscale modeling to martin karplus, arie warshel and michael levitt marks an important hallmark acknowledging the impact of structural bioinformatics on science. in his account of the birth of the field, levitt (2001) describes how computation was required to accurately refine the trna model predicted by crick in building an actual model that was taller than himself. thus, computation has been an integral part of structural biology from its early days and has had an ever-increasing role in biochemistry and molecular biology with the passing of years. indeed, from the first simulations of small systems and a few picoseconds acknowledged by the nobel committee, we are now at a stage where millisecond simulations or massive searches of sequence and structure space as required for, e.g. computational protein design are achievable. structural bioinformatics or structural computational biology, broadly defined, is a field at the intersection between computer science, physics, chemistry and molecular biology. historically, the term structural bioinformatics describes data-driven statistical, knowledge-based research of representative non-redundant ensembles of structures to understand the statistical behavior of the system under investigation. alternatively, computational biophysics describes a hypothesis-driven physics-based treatment of biological molecular systems. the ergodic hypothesis guarantees that conclusions from the two types of approaches converge over large non-redundant samples or long simulations . currently, numerous methodologies employ ideas from both approaches. consequently, hereafter we will refer to both as structural bioinformatics. biologically, structural bioinformatics aims to understand the factors that influence and determine the function of biological macromolecules, the interplay between evolution, kinetics and thermodynamics, the determinants of specificity and selectivity in molecular interactions, the dynamic aspects of macromolecular structures and their effect on function and stability and, finally, the ability to use all these for engineering, design and biotechnology. in fact, a complete understanding of biological processes must inescapably pass through an understanding of the factors influencing such processes at the atomic and sometimes even subatomic levels. in this article, we discuss some of the most notable achievements in structural bioinformatics over the past 10 years and discuss existing challenges in the field. without a doubt, the topics and the specific articles mentioned here are biased by the opinion of the authors.  
