gene expression bayesian model-based clustering of temporal gene expression using autoregressive panel data approach motivation: in a microarray time series analysis, due to the large number of genes evaluated, the first step toward understanding the complex time network is the clustering of genes that share similar expression patterns over time. up until now, the proposed methods do not point simultaneously to the temporal autocorrelation of the gene expression and the model-based clustering. we present a bayesian method that considers jointly the fit of autoregressive panel data models and hierarchical gene clustering. results: the proposed methodology was able to cluster genes that share similar expression over time, which was determined jointly by the estimates of autoregression parameters, by the average level of expression) and by the quality of the fitted model. availability and implementation: the r codes for implementation of the proposed clustering method and for simulation study, as well as the real and simulated datasets, are freely accessible on the webmicroarray time series (mts) analysis allows the researcher to characterize set of genes through their longitudinal pattern of expression. according to, the mts data analysis methodologies can be divided into two classes. the first one assumes the observations on the expression at each time as independent variables, and so the usual methods such as hierarchical process and the optimization can be directly used to cluster genes with similar expression pattern. the second performs clustering based on the set of parameters estimates from specific models, therefore, it is considered more interesting from the statistical and biological viewpoint, since the temporal expression behavior can be taken into account in the clustering. among the second class of methods, the dynamic , the hidden markov and the b-splines models deserve special attention. although these methods are useful, they are not suitable for relatively small to whom correspondence should be addressed. experiments, with less than 10 temporal observations per gene . however, according to, mts studies are generally characterized by a large number of genes evaluated but with a small number of the temporal expression measures per gene. in the field of time series, mainly in econometrics, the bayesian autoregressive panel data model is recommended for situations with large number of small series , since it provides an increase in accuracy relatively to autoregressive model fit to each one small series. considering these advantages of model-based clustering methods and the difficulty of applying them to a large number of small series, here we propose a bayesian method that considers simultaneously an autoregressive panel data model fit and a hierarchical clustering of the parameter estimates from this model. in addition, we present the detailed r (r development core) codes with comments about the proposed method and its application to a mts dataset extracted from saccharomyces cerevisiae stanford microarray database.  
