systems biology bayesian network webserver: a comprehensive tool for biological network modeling the bayesian network webserver (bnw) is a platform for comprehensive network modeling of systems genetics and other biological datasets. it allows users to quickly and seamlessly upload a dataset, learn the structure of the network model that best explains the data and use the model to understand relationships between network variables. many datasets, including those used to create genetic network models, contain both discrete (e.g. genotype) and continuous (e.g. gene expression traits) variables, and bnw allows for modeling hybrid datasets. users of bnw can incorporate prior knowledge during structure learning through an easy-to-use structural constraint interface. after structure learning, users are immediately presented with an interactive network model, which can be used to make test-able hypotheses about network relationships. availability and implementation: bnw, including a downloadable structure learning package, is available at http://compbio.uthsc.edu/ bnw. (the bnw interface for adding structural constraints uses html5 features that are not supported by current version of internet explorer. we suggest using other browsers (e.g. google chrome or mozilla firefox) when accessing bnw).bayesian network modeling has been successfully applied to many biological problems, ranging from assessment of disease risk to identifying cellular interactions that link genotypes with complex phenotypes . however, widespread use of bayesian networks by biologists has been hindered by a lack of easy-to-use tools that can perform all of the steps needed to create a bayesian network model and use it to make predictions. in particular, while several tools for bayesian network structure learning from data exist (e.g. wilczynski), they often require additional tools to make predictions with the models, increasing both the learning curve for inexperienced users and the time required to perform modeling. in response, we have created the bayesian network webserver (bnw) to provide a web-based tool for comprehensive bayesian network modeling. bnw allows users to load a text file containing a dataset, identify the structure of the network that best explains the data, perform parameter learning of the network and use the network to make predictions. these predictions are a crucial step in bayesian network modeling, as they provide testable hypotheses that can be used to assess model structures and fully understand the relationships between variables in the network. for any node in the network and the value of k when identifying the k-best network structures. additionally, a drag-and-drop interface is available for incorporating prior knowledge about interactions between variables in the network search. in addition to banning or requiring specific interactions between pairs of variables, users can assign variables to different tiers and then denote interactions that are allowed within and between tiers. for example, the variables in a systems genetics dataset containing genotypes, intermediate traits (e.g. gene expression traits) and phenotypes can be assigned to tiers to require that networks begin with genotypes and terminate with phenotypes. also shown on the structural constraint interface page is an estimate of the time required for structure learning in bnw that is updated in real-time based on user settings and the number of nodes and samples in the network. finally, users can download a structure learning package to more easily learn structures of larger networks or larger values of k. the output of the downloadable structure learning package can be uploaded to the bnw web site to visualize the network and make predictions.  
