gene expression bayesian prediction of tissue-regulated splicing using rna sequence and cellular context motivation: alternative splicing is a major contributor to cellular diversity in mammalian tissues and relates to many human diseases. an important goal in understanding this phenomenon is to infer a splicing code that predicts how splicing is regulated in different cell types by features derived from rna, dna and epigenetic modifiers. methods: we formulate the assembly of a splicing code as a problem of statistical inference and introduce a bayesian method that uses an adaptively selected number of hidden variables to combine subgroups of features into a network, allows different tissues to share feature subgroups and uses a gibbs sampler to hedge predictions and ascertain the statistical significance of identified features. results: using data for 3665 cassette exons, 1014 rna features and 4 tissue types derived from 27 mouse tissues (http://genes .toronto.edu/wasp), we benchmarked several methods. our method outperforms all others, and achieves relative improvements of 52 in splicing code quality and up to 22 in classification error, compared with the state of the art. novel combinations of regulatory features and novel combinations of tissues that share feature subgroups were identified using our method.alternative splicing enables individual genes to generate different transcripts, by selectively including or excluding rna sequences. high-throughput sequencing shows that over 90 of human genes are alternatively spliced, mostly in a tissue-dependent manner . the importance of alternative splicing is evidenced by numerous examples of genes whose functions are switched depending on which alternative transcript (isoform) is expressed, plus analyses showing that a large fraction of human disease mutations affect splice site selection . these results underscore the importance of accounting for splicing regulation when modeling gene expression. for over two decades, researchers have sought to define splicing regulatory models in the form of a mapping from genomic features to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors.. a comparison of methods for predicting tissue-regulated splicing in mouse, using the metric of code quality measured in bits (see main text). and cellular conditions to predicted abundances of alternative transcripts . in the words of, an important long-term goal in the community is to determine a splicing code: a set of rules that can predict the splicing pattern of any primary transcript sequence. recently, we described the assembly of a mouse splicing code that can be used to predict the regulatory properties of previously uncharacterized exons, predict regions in the unspliced transcript that when mutated led to changes in splicing patterns, and reveal novel regulatory mechanisms . our purpose here is to (i) describe a dataset and evaluation method that researchers can use to improve and extend splicing codes; (ii) introduce a bayesian technique that uses hidden variables to model relationships between features and splicing changes within a network; and (iii) benchmark several machine learning methods.compares our bayesian technique to several other methods in terms of code quality, which is the amount of genomewide splicing variability accounted for by rna sequence features (see below). the result labeled tissue only indicates how much splicing variability is accounted for by tissue type, i.e. that different tissues have different overall levels of splicing. most of the methods  
