genome analysis bayesian sampling of genomic rearrangement scenarios via double cut and join motivation: when comparing the organization of two genomes, it is important not to draw conclusions on their modes of evolution from a single most parsimonious scenario explaining their differences. better estimations can be obtained by sampling many different genomic rearrangement scenarios. for this problem, the double cut and join (dcj) model, while less relevant, is computationally easier than the hannenhallipevzner (hp) model. indeed, in some special cases, the total number of dcj sorting scenarios can be analytically calculated, and uniformly distributed random dcj scenarios can be drawn in polynomial running time, while the complexity of counting the number of hp scenarios and sampling from the uniform distribution of their space is unknown, and conjectured to be p-complete. statistical methods, like markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) for sampling from the uniform distribution of the most parsimonious or the bayesian distribution of all possible hp scenarios are required. results: we use the computational facilities of the dcj model to draw a sampling of hp scenarios. it is based on a parallel mcmc method that cools down dcj scenarios to hp scenarios. we introduce two theorems underlying the theoretical mixing properties of this parallel mcmc method. the method was tested on yeast and mammalian genomic data, and allowed us to provide estimates of the different modes of evolution in diverse lineages. availability: the program implemented in java 1.5 programming language is available from http://www.renyi.hu/miklosi/dcj2hp/.although genome rearrangement was the very first clearly stated computational problem in biology introduced by, and many computational methods finding one most parsimonious rearrangement scenario have been published in the past 15 years, the statistical tools available for analysing genome rearrangements are still very limited.published the first polynomial running time algorithm that finds a most parsimonious scenario transforming one genome to whom correspondence should be addressed. into another using reversals. the method has been extended to transforming multichromosomal genomes by reversals and translocations . this general model is called the hannenhallipevzner (hp) model. having a single parsimonious scenario is usually not enough to draw conclusions on the evolution of the genomes. for example,have computed different values of the breakpoint reuse rate for different scenarios transforming a human genome into a mouse genome, which tell different stories about their evolution. exact counting or sampling in the space of parsimonious hp scenarios seems to be difficult and has only been achieved for very small examples . several authors published markov chain monte carlo methods that sample from a bayesian distribution of genome rearrangement scenarios , but these markov chains have very poor mixing , and it has been proved that there are series of data (pair of genomes) for which the mixing time of these markov chains grows exponentially with the size of the data . this means that billions of markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) steps are necessary to get a sufficient number of low-correlated samples from the markov chain, making the approach computationally infeasible for large datasets.introduced a massively parallel mcmc method that samples from the uniform distribution of most parsimonious reversal scenarios, and approximately counts the number of such scenarios. by applying the method on real biological data, they showed that it is superior to other available methods. however, they could not prove that fast mixing of their markov chain is guaranteed for any input. furthermore, their method works only for most parsimonious reversal scenarios, and it is not clear how to extend it to sampling from the bayesian distribution of all possible hp scenarios. the double cut and join (dcj) model was introduced byand in a slightly different version by. this model allows all types of mutations of the hp model, together with mutations that are rarely observed in biological data. in particular, the formation of circular chromosomes, which is frequent in the dcj model, is never observed in the evolution of eukaryote genomes. a few big transpositions possibly issued from such a mechanism are hypothesized , and some cancer karyotypes carry circular chromosomes. however, observed as well as predicted rearrangements are almost always of hp type. for example,infer a scenario with  
