genome analysis bayespeak—an r package for analysing chip-seq data motivation: identification of genomic regions of interest in chip-seq data, commonly referred to as peak-calling, aims to find the locations of transcription factor binding sites, modified histones or nucleosomes. the bayespeak algorithm was developed to model the data structure using bayesian statistical techniques and was shown to be a reliable method, but did not have a full-genome implementation. results: in this note we present bayespeak, an r package for genome-wide peak-calling that provides a flexible implementation of the bayespeak algorithm and is compatible with downstream bioconductor packages. the bayespeak package introduces a new method for summarizing posterior probability output, along with methods for handling overfitting and support for parallel processing. we briefly compare the package with other common peak-callers. availability: available as part of bioconductor version 2.6. url:chromatin immunoprecipitation (chip) experiments produce short dna fragments, preferentially selected to identify the locations of protein binding sites, histone modifications or nucleosome positions. in the chip-seq protocol, as described in, the 5-end of one strand of each fragment is sequenced, obtaining a read, and then aligned to a reference genome. these aligned reads form peakslocalized regions of high read densityalong the genome. determining the locations and magnitudes of these peaks is an active area of research, and a number of tools exist for the so-called peak-calling, using a variety of methodologies. the algorithm described intakes a bayesian approach to modelling aligned reads from chip-seq data. many peak-callers model read counts with the poisson distribution, and thus do not allow for the overdispersion seen in practice. bayespeak addresses this issue by using the negative binomial distribution.page: 714 713714. a schematic representation of a hypothetical peak region, with bins labelled by genomic order. supposing that each bin has an associated pp value above a threshold (by default 0.5), we would merge these six bins into a peak from 1100 to 1450, with an associated pp value as calculated in section 2.1. are collected. where two adjacent jobs call the exact same bin, the maximal pp value is usedthis is a rare occurrence under default settings.we present the peak-caller comparison results in the supplementary material. bayespeak demonstrated a competitive sensitivity and specificity on the genome-wide scale and showed a substantial overlap with other peak-callers. the over-fitting correction greatly improved the enrichment for true binding sites in bayespeaks data, as did subsequent filtering by pp value. in its raw output, bayespeak returns pp values for each bin and, for each job, the posterior mean of each estimated parameter (excluding half of the draws as burn-in). as of bayespeak version 1.1.3, mcmc samples of several key parameters are also present, permitting convergence tests such as the geweke diagnostic in the boa or coda packages. since the summarized output is in rangeddata format, this allows direct analysis of the peaks in any downstream package compatible with iranges , including those in bioconductor. for example, chippeakanno can annotate the output. we have observed some phenomena that occur with lower quality data. for example, over-fitting can occur as follows: the model assumes that for each job there are both enriched and unenriched states. as such, when there are no peaks in a job or when the peaks are extremely weak, these two states are used to explain the natural variance present in the unenriched background. we identify over-fit jobs from their low 1 values (where 1 is the expected number of counts in an enriched bin), and from their pp values being spread out overrather than tending to be 0 or 1. bayespeak supports the identification and removal of jobs that have encountered this effect (supplementary table s2 and).bayespeak provides a bayesian analysis, with advantages including allowance for overdispersion in read counts and a competitive genome-wide specificity and sensitivity. by anticipating peak structure, bayespeak does not call peaks based on sheer numbers of reads without appropriate read formation. careful selection of job regions may improve the analysis. for example, we can use prior knowledge to partition jobs in a manner that avoids analysing the centromeres and telomeres, which usually contain no reads. this will prevent unnecessary computation, and may also improve results in the surrounding regions. there is scope for adapting the bayespeak approach to other forms of peak-calling. for example, some histone mark data consist of regions of enrichment containing many peaks and, in brdu-seq data, peaks are much broader than those in transcription factor data.  
