bayexer: an accurate and fast bayesian demultiplexer for illumina sequences demultiplexing is used after high-throughput sequencing to in silico assign reads to the samples of origin based on the sequenced reads of the indices. existing demultiplexing tools based on the similarity between the read index and the reference index sequences may fail to provide satisfactory results on low-quality datasets. we developed bayexer, a bayesian demultiplexing algorithm for illumina sequencers. bayexer uses the information extracted directly from the contaminant sequences of the targeting reads as the training dataset for a navenave bayes classifier to assign reads. according to our evaluation, bayexer provides higher capability, accuracy and speed on various real datasets than other tools.although the rapid improvement of next-generation sequencing is dramatically increasing data output and reducing sequencing costs, multiplexing, which allows large numbers of samples to be sequenced simultaneously during a single sequencing run, is also raising sample throughput. commonly, multiplexing is achieved by adding different specifically designed short sequences, referred to as indices, to the sequencing adapters of each sample. the in silico process after sequencing to determine the origin sample of each read by comparing the sequenced indices (sis) with the reference indices (ris) is called demultiplexing. because sequencing errors occur, sis do not always perfectly match the ris. the demultiplexers (casava, bcl2fastq) provided by illumina allow for 0, 1 or 2 hamming distances between the sis and ris. splitaake (https://github.com/faircloth-lab/splitaake) and deindexer (https://github.com/ws6/deindexer) use levenshtein distances to tolerate the in-del (insertion and deletion) errors. in the separate index reads as observations. based on this idea, we developed a novel application, bayexer, which applies a navenave bayes classifier (nbc) to the demultiplexing of illumina sequences. bayexer extracts training datasets directly from the contaminant sequences of targeting reads and then uses them to train the nbc and assigns the reads. the evaluation on real sequencing datasets showed the great advantage of bayexer compared with other tools. bayexer is compatible with both single-index and dual-index sequencing and supports various illumina sequencers.  
