genetics and population analysis bcftools/roh: a hidden markov model approach for detecting autozygosity from next-generation sequencing data runs of homozygosity (rohs) are genomic stretches of a diploid genome that show identical alleles on both chromosomes. longer rohs are unlikely to have arisen by chance but are likely to denote autozygosity, whereby both copies of the genome descend from the same recent ancestor. early tools to detect roh used genotype array data, but substantially more information is available from sequencing data. here, we present and evaluate bcftools/roh, an extension to the bcftools software package, that detects regions of autozygosity in sequencing data, in particular exome data, using a hidden markov model. by applying it to simulated data and real data from the 1000 genomes project we estimate its accuracy and show that it has higher sensitivity and specifi-city than existing methods under a range of sequencing error rates and levels of autozygosity. availability and implementation: bcftools/roh and its associated binary/source files are freely available from https://github.com/samtools/bcftools. contact:the prevalence of runs of homozygosity (rohs) varies worldwide depending on past demography and recent mating patterns. targeted studies in families from populations with high consanguinity have been successful in identifying genes underlying simple autosomal recessive disorders using autozygosity mapping. while several methods exist to detect these roh they were primarily designed for genotyping data and do not exploit all the information available from population sequencing, which includes fuller information about allele frequencies and recombination rates; moreover, they were not designed to be computationally efficient to accommodate the higher complexity of sequence data. more recently,introduce a new method h3m2 developed for sequence data but which requires bam files, which are not always available. we present a software package, bcftools/roh, to allow geneticists carrying out genome-wide sequencing studies to infer autozygous sections from sequence-derived variation data in a more accurate and more efficient way.  
