structural bioinformatics bcov: a method for predicting b-sheet topology using sparse inverse covariance estimation and integer programming motivation: prediction of protein residue contacts, even at the coarse-grain level, can help in finding solutions to the protein structure prediction problem. unlike a-helices that are locally stabilized, b-sheets result from pairwise hydrogen bonding of two or more disjoint regions of the protein backbone. the problem of predicting contacts among b-strands in proteins has been addressed by several supervised computational approaches. recently, prediction of residue contacts based on correlated mutations has been greatly improved and finally allows the prediction of 3d structures of the proteins. results: in this article, we describe bcov, which is the first unsuper-vised method to predict the b-sheet topology starting from the protein sequence and its secondary structure. bcov takes advantage of the sparse inverse covariance estimation to define b-strand partner scores. then an optimization based on integer programming is carried out to predict the b-sheet connectivity. when tested on the prediction of b-strand pairing, bcov scores with average values of matthews correlation coefficient (mcc) and f1 equal to 0.56 and 0.61, respectively , on a non-redundant dataset of 916 protein chains known with atomic resolution. our approach well compares with the state-of-the-art methods trained so far for this specific task. availability and implementation: the method is freely available under general public license at http://biocomp.unibo.it/savojard/ bcov/bcov-1.0.tar.gz. the new dataset betasheet1452 can be down-loaded atb-sheets are widespread motifs of local structure found in over 80 of the protein structures presently available in the protein data bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do). b-sheets are generated by the pairing of two or more b-strands held together by characteristic patterns of hydrogen bonds running in a parallel or antiparallel fashion . prediction of the b-sheet topology from the covalent structure of the protein is useful for predicting its tertiary structure, for designing new proteins and for understanding folding pathways. the first method to predict b-strand pairing was based on a statistical potential approach . prediction of b-residue contacts was addressed byusing an elaborate method based on neural networks. steward and thornton (2002) adopted an information theoretic approach to predict b-residue pairwise interaction. cheng andpioneered the idea of predicting b-sheet topologies when the protein secondary structure is known and set the standard for this type of task. their method betapro is based on a 2d-recursive neural network trained to predict pairing probabilities of interstrand b-residue pairs. then an algorithm finds alignments between all pairs of b-strands, and a weighted-graph matching algorithm predicts the b-sheet topologies.introduced an alternative approach based on markov logic networks (mlns). this approach exploits b-sheet structural constraints defined as logical formulas whose weights can be learned from examples . the prediction of b-residue contacts was also applied to the problem of predicting the 3d structure of proteins using integer linear optimization .combined betapro outputs with a bayesian approach and tested it on subsets of the cheng and baldi benchmark set . recently, a new method to predict protein b-sheet contacts using a maximum entropy-based correlated mutation measure (cmm) has been introduced and compared with the state-of-the-art methods . cmm achieves performances similar to betapro and mlns . in recent years, the main breakthroughs in residue contact prediction have concerned improvements in the exploitation of information from multiple sequence alignments (msa). the degree of coevolution of pair of sites in the msa can be used to infer the closeness of the corresponding residues in the 3d structure. different approaches have been described to elucidate the coevolution of columns in an msa, including standard correlated mutations analysis and information theoretic measures . recently some powerful methods based on the extraction of direct coupling information from msas have been introduced to predict protein contacts both in globular and membrane proteins . these new contact prediction methods are not only improved with respect the previous approaches but also finally allow to predict 3d structures of the proteins (for review see dein this article, we describe bcov, a new approach for b-sheet topology prediction based on sparse inverse covariance estimation and integer programming. bcov is the first unsupervised method that addresses this task. we use the residue-contact propensities provided by the protein sparse inverse covariance (psicov) method to compute the scores of the b-strand pairings. we selected psicov because it is freely available and does not require proprietary software to run. then we apply an integer programming optimization to assign the bsheet topology. bcov well compares with the performances of the state-of-the-art algorithms (betapro, cmms and mlns) that integrate supervised techniques to address the same task.  
