sequence analysis a classification model for g-to-a hypermutation in hepatitis b virus ultra-deep pyrosequencing reads motivation: g a hypermutation is an innate antiviral defense mechanism, mediated by host enzymes, which leads to the mutational impairment of viruses. sensitive and specific identification of host-mediated g a hypermutation is a novel sequence analysis challenge, particularly for viral deep sequencing studies. for example, two of the most common hepatitis b virus (hbv) reverse transcriptase (rt) drug-resistance mutations, a181t and m204i, arise from g a changes and are routinely detected as low-abundance variants in nearly all hbv deep sequencing samples. results: we developed a classification model using measures of g a excess and predicted indicators of lethal mutation and applied this model to 325 920 unique deep sequencing reads from plasma virus samples from 45 drug treatment-nave hbv-infected individuals. the 2.9 of sequence reads that were classified as hypermutated by our model included most of the reads with a181t and/or m204i, indicating the usefulness of this model for distinguishing viral adaptive changes from host-mediated viral editing. availability: source code and sequence data are available athepatitis b virus (hbv) is a double-stranded dna virus that infects more than 500 million people worldwide and is a leading cause of mortality as a result of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. in the past 12 years, five nucleoside analogs have been licensed for hbv treatment. these drugs are capable of fully suppressing hbv replication but rarely eradicate infection because hbv is converted intra-cellularly into a stable covalently closed circular dna form. hbv replicates via an rna intermediate, and its polymerase enzyme has a high mutation rate similar to other enzymes with reverse transcriptase activity. it thus generates a quasispecies of innumerable related virus variants from which drug resistant viruses to whom correspondence should be addressed. can arise . because hbv drug resistance is one of the obstacles to successful anti-hbv therapy, current treatment guidelines recommend hbv genotypic resistance testing for patients who experience primary or secondary virological failure while receiving nucleoside therapy . deep sequencing is increasingly performed on plasma samples from clinical trials to determine the clinical significance of lowabundance human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) and hepatitis c virus drug-resistance mutations prior to starting antiviral treatment . we and others have recently described the use of ultra-deep pyrosequencing (udps) with the 454 life sciences/roche genome sequencer flx platform to detect low-abundance hbv variants. we previously showed that nucleoside analog drugresistance mutations not detected by direct pcr sequencing could be detected by udps in as few as 1.0 of sequence reads. we also observed that many samples contained sequence reads with unusually high numbers of guanine (g) to adenine (a) changes relative to the direct pcr sequence, consistent with the recently described phenomenon of g a hypermutation. g a hypermutation results from an innate antiviral defense mechanism mediated by the activity of host enzymes belonging to the apolipoprotein b rna-editing catalytic polypeptide-like 3 (apobec3) family of cytidine deaminases . these enzymes are capable of causing extensive deamination of cytidine bases to uridine in negative-stranded dna, resulting in g a hypermutation in positive-stranded dna. although apobecmediated g a hypermutation was first reported to act upon hiv , it has also been reported to act upon hbv , other retroviruses, and retrotransposons . because extensive g a editing leads to mutational impairment of viruses, distinguishing hypermutated sequence reads from nonhypermutated reads is necessary for accurate analysis of viral quasispecies. this is particularly important in deep sequencing studies designed to detect low levels of nucleoside analog drugresistant viruses because two of these, a181t and m204i, primarily result from g a substitutions. indeed, the creation of sensitive and specific methods for identifying apobec-mediated g a hypermutation is a novel sequence analysis challenge. we previously described an ad hoc method for identifying g a hypermutation in hbv sequences . now, we develop a data-derived method using a probabilisticudps provides insight into the evolutionary dynamics of the emergence of viral drug resistance and may eventually prove useful in clinical diagnostic testing. however, the biological and clinical significance of hbv udps results cannot be optimally interpreted without being able to distinguish hypermutated from non-hypermutated sequence reads. apobec-mediated g a hypermutation results from a host defense mechanism against viral genomes and retroelements, and therefore mutations caused by this mechanism have different biological and clinical significance from mutations resulting from viral adaptation. three groups have developed methods for identifying hypermutated hiv-1 sequences . to our knowledge, no such method has been developed for hbv or for deep sequencing reads. identifying g a hypermutation in hbv udps reads is particularly challenging because such reads are shorter and therefore contain fewer informative sites than direct pcr sequences. moreover, in contrast to hiv, hbv hypermutation could potentially be mediated by six of the seven enzymes in the apobec3 family (a3a-c and f-h) and does not occur in a consistent dinucleotide context . in this study, we have demonstrated the use of a novel em-based model in assigning probabilistic labels to udps reads in order to  
