systems biology beams: backbone extraction and merge strategy for the global many-to-many alignment of multiple ppi networks motivation: global many-to-many alignment of biological networks has been a central problem in comparative biological network studies. given a set of biological interaction networks, the informal goal is to group together related nodes. for the case of proteinprotein interaction networks, such groups are expected to form clusters of functionally orthologous proteins. construction of such clusters for networks from different species may prove useful in determining evolutionary relationships, in predicting the functions of proteins with unknown functions and in verifying those with estimated functions. results: a central informal objective in constructing clusters of ortho-logous proteins is to guarantee that each cluster is composed of members with high homological similarity, usually determined via sequence similarities, and that the interactions of the proteins involved in the same cluster are conserved across the input networks. we provide a formal definition of the global many-to-many alignment of multiple proteinprotein interaction networks that captures this informal objective. we show the computational intractability of the suggested definition. we provide a heuristic method based on backbone extraction and merge strategy (beams) for the problem. we finally show, through experiments based on biological significance tests, that the proposed beams algorithm performs better than the state-of-the-art approaches. furthermore, the computational burden of the beams algorithm in terms of execution speed and memory requirements is more reasonable than the competing algorithms. availability and implementation: supplementary material including code implementations in leda c, experimental data and the results are available atproteins and their interactions are at the core of almost every biological process. in proteinprotein interaction (ppi) networks, nodes represent the proteins and the edges correspond to interactions between pairs of proteins. several high-throughput techniques together with novel computational methods gave rise to extraction of large-scale ppi networks for many organisms in recent years . parallel to this enormous growth in data, several problem formulations related to the analysis of such networks have been proposed and many computational methods have been developed for their comparative studies. in particular, biological network alignment problem has been of particular interest. the main motivation behind the problem is to detect functionally orthologous proteins across given networks from several organisms. two types of biological network alignments have been covered in literature: local network alignments and global network alignments. the former aims to extract local network motifs (subnetworks) from input networks; the motifs are expected to bear reasonable similarity both in terms of sequence and local network topologies . global network alignment on the other hand treats the problem globally and aims to find functionally orthologous mappings across all networks and proteins. some of the proposed global alignment algorithms such as mi-graal and spinal perform these alignments only for pairwise networks, whereas others such as isorank and isorankn perform alignments on multiple networks. additionally, global alignment algorithms may also differ with respect to the types of mappings they provide. one-to-one alignment approaches aim to generate alignments where the output alignment either maps a protein in a network to exactly one protein from one of the networks or leaves the protein unmapped . one-to-many alignments have been proposed for the global alignment of other biological networks including metabolic pathways, where each metabolic reaction in a pathway is mapped to a subset of reactions from another pathway . finally, for many-to-many alignments, the goal is to extract clusters of proteins where each cluster may include any number of proteins from the input networks . the proteins mapped to the same cluster as a result of the alignment are all expected to compose a functionally orthologous group. among all three versions of the global network alignments, the many-to-many version is the most general. furthermore, as far as constraints from evolutionary molecular biology are concerned, it provides a more intuitive definition; the evolutionary distance between organisms under study may have large variations, leading to different numbers of proteins functioning similarly when considered in different networks. the focus of this article is on global many-to-many alignment of multiple ppi networks from different species. we first provide to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com a formal combinatorial definition of the problem. we proceed with proving its computational intractability even in a restricted case. we next provide a general framework for the problem, where we decompose the original problem into two subproblems, that of backbone extraction and backbone merging. informally, each backbone in this framework corresponds to a closely related central group of proteins, at most one from each network. once all the backbones are determined, the latter subproblem involves merging together the backbones with higher chances of coexistence in a cluster of orthologous proteins. we provide heuristic methods for both subproblems that together form our proposed algorithm based on backbone extraction and merge strategy, beams. we experimentally evaluate the algorithm with regards to several biological significance metrics proposed in literature and compare it against one of the most popular global manyto-many alignment methods, isorankn, and a recently proposed state-of-the-art alignment algorithm, smetana. the experimental results indicate that beams alignments on real network data provide more consistent clusters than those of isorankn and smetana. furthermore, considering the heavy computational load of the problem, the exceptional running time and memory requirements of beams is a further improvement resulting from the provided framework and the algorithm.  
