data and text mining becas: biomedical concept recognition services and visualization the continuous growth of the biomedical scientific literature has been motivating the development of text-mining tools able to efficiently process all this information. although numerous domain-specific solutions are available, there is no web-based concept-recognition system that combines the ability to select multiple concept types to annotate, to reference external databases and to automatically annotate nested and intercepted concepts. becas, the biomedical concept annotation system, is an api for biomedical concept identification and a web-based tool that addresses these limitations. medline abstracts or free text can be annotated directly in the web interface, where identified concepts are enriched with links to reference databases. using its customizable widget, it can also be used to augment external web pages with concept highlighting features. furthermore, all text-processing and annotation features are made available through an http rest api, allowing integration in any text-processing pipeline. availability: becas is freely available for non-commercial use atexponential growth of the biomedical literature during the past decades has prompted the development of automatic techniques and systems to ease the task of finding relevant information in unstructured documents . however, the offer of no-installation, no-maintenance and online modular solutions for concept annotation that can be easily integrated in any text-processing pipeline is still scarce. whatizit , for instance, offers dictionary-based annotation of documents with a large set of vocabularies and is available both through a web service and a web page. yet, annotation of concepts from different types is only possible by repeating the annotation process several times and combining the results generated by different pipelines. ihop is a web application offering programmatic access to pre-annotated abstracts from medline. it is a protein-centric system and does not allow the annotation of external documents submitted by the user. another solution focused on genes, proteins and small-molecules is reflect , a web service that annotates these concepts on web pages and provides, through popups, additional information such as synonyms, database identifiers and related literature. cocoa is a multiple concept annotator with an online interface and an http api (http://npjoint.com). it annotates entities in user submitted text, but it is limited to named entities and does not provide concept identifiers or external references. and for medline abstracts, which are automatically fetched from pubmed.becas provides three distinct user interfaces for biomedical concept identification, presenting state-of-the-art performance, as evaluated on various corpora. it currently recognizes and annotates 1.2 million concepts and enriches them with 1.6 million external references to 30 online resources. the rest api is suitable for integration in custom text-processing pipelines, whereas the widget can be easily integrated in any web page. finally, users can also use becas annotation services as a stand-alone web application. in the future, we plan to add support for more entity types and continue to improve annotation performance, with focus on concept disambiguation.  
