genome analysis bedops: high-performance genomic feature operations the large and growing number of genome-wide datasets highlights the need for high-performance feature analysis and data comparison methods, in addition to efficient data storage and retrieval techniques. we introduce bedops, a software suite for common genomic analysis tasks which offers improved flexibility, scalability and execution time characteristics over previously published packages. the suite includes a utility to compress large inputs into a lossless format that can provide greater space savings and faster data extractions than alternatives.experimental genomic data and subsequent analysis results are frequently stored in variations of the browser extensible data (bed) format . many bed analyses require set-like operations using genomic coordinates. others require nearest-element associations between feature sets and quantitative calculations across related genomic segments. simple examples include selecting transcription factor binding sites 500 base pairs away from any gene, identifying the closest transcriptional start site for every putative replication origin and computing the average exon expression value per gene. the bedops tool suite addresses these and other typical analysis questions. the suite operates efficiently in memory with bed inputs of any size and number, in sharp contrast to the bedtools and feature-rich galaxy packages. compressing a large file can save valuable disk space and facilitate data transfers, typically at the expense of data access performance. bedops offers high-quality bed compression into a format that actually reduces access times to the vast majority of data relative to any sequential processing approach. to whom correspondence should be addressed. the first three authors contributed equally.computing overlap and proximity relationships between datasets is fundamental to many genomic analyses. working with large datasets complicates computations and necessitates scalable solutions. the bedops suite facilitates common analysis tasks and functions efficiently with inputs of arbitrary size. the suite also includes efficient data storage and retrieval techniques to help manage and query sizable datasets.  
