bedtools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features motivation: testing for correlations between different sets of genomic features is a fundamental task in genomics research. however, searching for overlaps between features with existing web-based methods is complicated by the massive datasets that are routinely produced with current sequencing technologies. fast and flexible tools are therefore required to ask complex questions of these data in an efficient manner. results: this article introduces a new software suite for the comparison, manipulation and annotation of genomic features in browser extensible data (bed) and general feature format (gff) format. bedtools also supports the comparison of sequence alignments in bam format to both bed and gff features. the tools are extremely efficient and allow the user to compare large datasets (e.g. next-generation sequencing data) with both public and custom genome annotation tracks. bedtools can be combined with one another as well as with standard unix commands, thus facilitating routine genomics tasks as well as pipelines that can quickly answer intricate questions of large genomic datasets. availability and implementation: bedtools was written in c++. source code and a comprehensive user manual are freely available atdetermining whether distinct sets of genomic features (e.g. aligned sequence reads, gene annotations, ests, genetic polymorphisms, mobile elements, etc.) overlap or are associated with one another is a fundamental task in genomics research. such comparisons serve to characterize experimental results, infer causality or coincidence (or lack thereof) and assess the biological impact of genomic discoveries. genomic features are commonly represented by the browser extensible data (bed) or general feature format (gff) formats and are typically compared using either the ucsc genome browsers table browser or using the galaxy interface. while these tools offer a convenient and reliable method for such analyses, they are not amenable to large and/or ad hoc datasets owing to the inherent need to interact with a remote or local web site installation. moreover, complicated to whom correspondence should be addressed. analyses often require iterative testing and refinement. in this sense, faster and more flexible tools allow one to conduct a greater number and more diverse set of experiments. this necessity is made more acute by the data volume produced by current dna sequencing technologies. in an effort to address these needs, we have developed bedtools, a fast and flexible suite of utilities for common operations on genomic features.  
