sequence analysis bellerophontes: an rna-seq data analysis framework for chimeric transcripts discovery based on accurate fusion model motivation: next-generation sequencing technology allows the detection of genomic structural variations, novel genes and transcript isoforms from the analysis of high-throughput data. in this work, we propose a new framework for the detection of fusion transcripts through short paired-end reads which integrates splicing-driven alignment and abundance estimation analysis, producing a more accurate set of reads supporting the junction discovery and taking into account also not annotated transcripts. bellerophontes performs a selection of putative junctions on the basis of a match to an accurate gene fusion model. results: we report the fusion genes discovered by the proposed framework on experimentally validated biological samples of chronic myelogenous leukemia (cml) and on public ncbi datasets, for which bellerophontes is able to detect the exact junction sequence. with respect to state-of-art approaches, bellerophontes detects the same experimentally validated fusions, however, it is more selective on the total number of detected fusions and provides a more accurate set of spanning reads supporting the junctions. we finally report the fusions involving non-annotated transcripts found in cml samples.the analysis of rna-seq data revealed to be particularly effective for the detection of fused genes, which have been shown to be involved in several diseases. by applying rna-seq short reads, novel fusion genes and in particular the vapb-ikzf3 chimera have been found to play a key role in the survival in breast cancer cells . in, the analysis of single long reads has been performed to reveal novel fusion junctions. however, the application of short paired-end reads has been recently demonstrated to provide higher dynamic range and sensitivity in supporting fusion transcripts . in paired-end to whom correspondence should be addressed.reads, both the forward and reverse template strands of each dna fragment are sequenced. the two sequenced ends, also known as the two mate reads, are spaced by a gap of unknown nucleotides, whose size is approximately known. the nature of the paired-end reads and the way they map on a gene fusion boundary offer the opportunity to detect possible chimeric candidates.shows a schematic representation of how the paired-end reads map on two fused genes. according to the reads arrangement over the fusion junction, two scenarios might occur as follows (i) each mate of the read encompasses the junction and maps on a different gene of the fused gene couple. the read is considered as a read encompassing the fusion boundary; (ii) alternatively, a single mate of the read overlaps the fusion junction while the corresponding paired-end mate matches one of the two genes involved in the fusion. in this case, the read is considered as spanning the fusion junction. encompassing reads can be used to find a first list of gene fusion candidates, while spanning reads are used to detect the exact boundary sequence. since in the case of spanning reads the mate overlapping the junction breakpoint is discarded by conventional short reads aligners, these reads must be searched on the set of initially unmapped mates. these reads are then mapped on an artificially constructed putative fusion junction from candidate gene pairs previously detected through encompassing reads analysis. in this work, we propose a new framework for the detection of fusion transcripts through short paired-end reads. with respect to currently available solutions, bellerophontes provides the following contributions: @bullet to improve the quality and selectivity of fusion discovery, bellerophontes selects those fusions matching an accurate, aimed at overcoming rna-seq challenges concerning multiple read alignment, novel transcript discovery and accounting for alternative splicing. in addition, it exploits recent researches about the pattern of reads mapping across fusion breakpoints , enabling a more accurate model of the fusion junction. on this concern, bellerophontes presents distinguishing features with respect to fusion detection tools proposed in the last year http://tophat-fusion.sourceforge.net, in that it integrates these new instruments in a fusion detection software framework. in this article, we report the fusion genes discovered by the proposed framework on experimentally validated biological samples of chronic myelogenous leukemia (cml) , and on public ncbi datasets of validated fusions. we also performed a comparative analysis with an alternative stateof-art approach on the same datasets. the results highlight that bellerophontes, while recognizing the validated fusions, reduced the final set of predictions and includes fusions involving non-annotated genes.in this section, we report details about the effects of filters and the results about a comparative analysis with another recently published), which has been used to discover gene fusions in tumour samples .the proposed framework implements a new analysis pipeline that exploits effective alignment and annotation algorithms as well as a filtering stage based on an accurate modeling of the junction. rnaseq data analysis presents major challenges concerning ambiguous assignments of reads to isoforms that can impact fusion detection. indeed, fusion candidates are discovered by means of encompassing reads. as such, the accuracy in detection of discordant mates is a key feature of a fusion detection pipeline. bellerophontes introduces a new approach where reads are mapped on experimental determined transcripts rather than using a reference genome, thus reducing the probability of multiple matches that may affect state-of-art fusion detection tools based on basic alignment algorithms.  
