structural bioinformatics bendix: intuitive helix geometry analysis and abstraction the flexibility of -helices is important for membrane protein function and calls for better visualization and analysis. software is presented that quantifies and projects the helix axis evolution over time, with the choice of uniform or analytic heatmap graphics according to the local geometry. bendix supports static, molecular dynamics, atomistic and coarse-grained input. availability and implementation: bendix source code and documentation, including installation instructions, are freely available at http://sbcb.bioch.ox.ac.uk/bendix. bendix is written in tcl as an extension to vmd and is supported by all major operating systems. contact:-helix flexibility enables membrane protein functionality such as receptor activation, molecule transport and channel gating . examples of this can be seen in the voltagegated potassium channels and the mscs mechanosensitive channel, where molecular hinges within channel-lining helices elicit gating . in addition, helix curvature ensures structural integrity by allowing close packing . the dynamics of transmembrane -helices can be explored through molecular dynamics (md) simulations, which is becoming an increasingly important tool to complement experimental structural studies . however, improved methods for analysis and visualization of helix dynamics are needed. considerations of helix flexibility are also somewhat compromised by their classical representation as idealized cylinders. the prevalence and importance of kinked helices therefore calls for improved helix abstraction and intuitive analysis tools. furthermore, it is important to make such developments available to the wider community by incorporation into existing, publicly adopted visualization software . we have therefore developed bendix, a program that meets these demands.curved -helices are prevalent in membrane protein structures, and their flexibility plays a key role in biological function. despite this demonstrated importance, methods for helix motion analysis are limited. we have developed a new tool for analysis of helix conformational change. thus, helix characterization in bendix aids structure comprehension and allows interactive analysis, visualization and manipulation of both atomistic and coarse-grained simulations. intuitive heatmap display of helix curvature at the point of interest allows the user to more readily detect potentially relevant helix distortions over time, thus aiding analysis of the relationship between structure, dynamic conformational changes and biological function.  
