systems biology berex: biomedical entity-relationship explorer biomedical entity-relationship explorer (berex) is a new biomedical knowledge integration, search and exploration tool. berex integrates eight popular databases (string, drugbank, kegg, phamgkb, biogrid, go, hprd and msigdb) and delineates an integrated network by combining the information available from these databases. users search the integrated network by entering key words, and berex returns a sub-network matching the key words. the resulting graph can be explored interactively. berex allows users to find the shortest paths between two remote nodes, find the most relevant drugs, diseases, pathways and so on related to the current network, expand the network by particular types of entities and relations and modify the network by removing or adding selected nodes. berex is implemented as a standalone java application. availability and implementation: berex and a detailed user guide are available for download at our project web site (http://infos.korea.ac. kr/berex).there is a good deal of biomedical databases, many of which become community resources. however, each database has its own limitations. first, each database covers only a small vertical domain. for example, string covers only proteinprotein interactions, drugbank and phamgkb mainly focus on drugs and diseases, stitch covers only proteins and chemicals and kegg covers pathways but the coverage is small. to comprehend a complex relation spanning over the different domains, users have to manually integrate the pieces of information obtained from each database. second, their query capabilities are limited. for example, pharmgkb and drugbank provide only a single result per query, and thus users have to manually combine the results from multiple queries to understand the interactions. last, the existing databases produce a static query result, and thus users are not able to customize the result. to address these problems, we developed a user-friendly database integration, search and exploration tool called berex (biomedical entity-relationship explorer). berex has the following advantages:((3) interactive exploration: berex visualizes the results from a query as a graph. users can interactively navigate through the relations and expand/modify the network. for example, users can find the shortest paths between two remote nodes; find the most relevant drugs, diseases, pathways and so on related to the current network; expand the network by particular types of entities and relations; and modify the network by removing or adding selected nodes.(4) generating new hypothesis: berex provides an environment for allowing a user-driven approach to automatically generate plausible and/or unexpected relationships from the derived integrated network. these plausible relationships describe potential interactions or mechanisms of action between query entities and may be used to generate a new testable hypothesis between query genes.  
