beta-poisson model for single-cell rna-seq data analyses motivation: single-cell rna-sequencing technology allows detection of gene expression at the single cell level. one typical feature of the data is a bimodality in the cellular distribution even for highly expressed genes, primarily caused by a proportion of non-expressing cells. the standard and the over-dispersed gamma-poisson models that are commonly used in bulk-cell rna-sequenc-ing are not able to capture this property. results: we introduce a beta-poisson mixture model that can capture the bimodality of the single-cell gene expression distribution. we further integrate the model into the generalized linear model framework in order to perform differential expression analyses. the whole analytical procedure is called bpsc. the results from several real single-cell rna-seq datasets indicate that $90 of the transcripts are well characterized by the beta-poisson model; the model-fit from bpsc is better than the fit of the standard gamma-poisson model in 80 of the transcripts. moreover, in differential expression analyses of simulated and real datasets, bpsc performs well against edger, a conventional method widely used in bulk-cell rna-sequencing data, and against scde and mast, two recent methods specifically designed for single-cell rna-seq data.gene expression at single-cell level is a stochastic process affected by extrinsic and intrinsic noise. the extrinsic noise comes from the environment outside the cell such as hormones or drugs. the intrinsic noise involves intra-cellular factors such as transcription rate (burst frequency), the number of mrnas (burst size) and degradation rate . previous studies have introduced different models to capture the stochastic process due to the intrinsic noise. in general there are two main approaches to measure expression of genes in a single cell (i) targeted and (ii) whole transcriptome-based. the formere.g. using qpcr or immunohistochemistryis used tois the integration of gene expression from multiple single cells; the distribution is commonly modelled by the gamma-poisson mixture model, or equivalently, the negative-binomial distribution. this model cannot capture the bimodality of gene expression in singlecell data . recentlybriefly introduced the beta-poisson model to capture the bimodality as well as the long-tailed behavior in the distribution. as an attractive feature, unlike the purely empirical gamma-poisson model for bulkrna, the beta-poisson model parameters introduce one biological interpretation in terms of burst size and burst frequency of the celllevel expression. however, due to computational problems with the beta-poisson model, wills et al. used an alternative discrete poisson mixture, a less-parameterized version of the beta-poisson model, to extract the information of the burst size and frequency. the model was applied for modelling of gene-level expression in qpcr-based datasets. furthermore, no details of evaluation of modeling performance were reported. another attempt of using the beta distribution to capture bimodality property of single-cell gene expression was introduced in the batbayes model . however, in this approach, instead of integrating it with the poisson distribution, the beta distribution was combined with binomial distribution to mimic the partitioning process of rna molecules into transcripts. here we develop bpsc, an analysis tool based on the betapoisson model for the single-cell gene expression data, and implement and apply it to several scrna-seq datasets. bpsc addresses practical and realistic issues such as non-integer expression values or low expression values. theoretically it is suitable for both transcript-level and gene-level expression, which is usually higher than the transcript-level expression. it is worth noting that the term transcript herein includes both isoform and other types of splicing variants. the beta-poisson model allows for control of the expression drop-off caused by technical noises or sequencing sensitivity. bpsc includes a generalized linear model (glm) based on the betapoisson model to perform differential expression analyses of singlecell rna-seq data. experiments using simulated and real datasets show that bpsc performs well against edger, an established method for bulk-cell rna-seq, and against mast and scde, two recent differential-expression analysis methods designed for single-cell rnaseq.  
