sequence analysis betaseq: a powerful novel method to control type-i error inflation in partially sequenced data for rare variant association testing despite its great capability to detect rare variant associations , next-generation sequencing is still prohibitively expensive when applied to large samples. in case-control studies, it is thus appealing to sequence only a subset of cases to discover variants and genotype the identified variants in controls and the remaining cases under the reasonable assumption that causal variants are usually enriched among cases. however, this approach leads to inflated type-i error if analyzed naively for rare variant association. several methods have been proposed in recent literature to control type-i error at the cost of either excluding some sequenced cases or correcting the genotypes of discovered rare variants. all of these approaches thus suffer from certain extent of information loss and thus are underpowered. we propose a novel method (betaseq), which corrects inflation of type-i error by supplementing pseudo-variants while keeps the original sequence and genotype data intact. extensive simulations and real data analysis demonstrate that, in most practical situations, betaseq leads to higher testing powers than existing approaches with guaranteed (controlled or conservative) type-i error.recent advances in next-generation sequencing technologies have made it possible to detect rare variant associations in genetic studies of complex diseases. while rare variants tend to exert stronger effects on complex traits than common variants , accurate detection of rare variant association typically requires sequencing at least hundreds or thousands of individuals at high coverage, which remains cost prohibitive for most investigators. in the literature, a two-stage design is often adopted in rare variant association studies to reduce costs. in the two-stage design, a subset of individuals are sequenced in stage 1 to discover variants, and the identified variants are then genotyped on the remaining individuals in stage 2. with a fixed budget, this two-stage design enjoys the advantage of increased sample size at potentially influential variants and thus may achieve a higher testing power than a one-stage approach in which all individuals used for association analysis are sequenced. under the reasonable assumption that causal variants are enriched in cases, it is appealing to sequence only cases to improve power of association testing in the two-stage design. however, as has been shown , sequencing only cases leads to inflated type-i error if stage 1 (sequence) and stage 2 (genotype) data are simply combined, because this partial sequencing strategy causes the distribution of detected (and thus tested) variants to be different between cases and controls. several methods have been proposed to correct this inflated type-i error. among them, using genotyped samples only (gso) and removing one variant carrier from the sequenced sample per variant nucleotide site (rops) manage to control type-i error by dropping all or a subset of cases sequenced in stage 1. gso and rops do not make full use of the genetic information in a sample and thus inevitably incur loss in efficiency. a more powerful method, seqchip , was proposed recently to correct the inflation created by such two-stage partial sequencing design. instead of discarding some sequenced cases, seqchip corrects genotypes of sequenced individuals in terms of the genotypes of genotyped individuals, such that the corrected genotypes of sequenced individuals follow an almost identical distribution as those among genotyped individuals. seqchip does not drop any individuals in the analysis and thus is potentially more efficient than gso and rops. however, seqchip suffers from abandoning some identified rare variants during the correction process and is thus still underpowered. moreover, the minor allele frequency (maf) in seqchip can be slightly underestimated, which may further impair the performance of seqchip. clearly and intrinsically, the inflated type-i error is due to only a portion of cases being sequenced. motivated by the intuition that more variants would be discovered if the un-sequenced individuals were also sequenced, we propose betaseq, a beta distribution-based method, to correct inflation of type-i error to whom correspondence should be addressed. when sequencing only a subset of cases. unlike existing methods, betaseq keeps all original sequence and genotype data intact and corrects inflation of type-i error by supplementing pseudovariants to the original data. the pseudo-variants are meant to mimic the extra variants that would be discovered under the counterfactual situation where individuals genotyped in stage 2 were also sequenced. since no sequencing information is dropped, betaseq has the potential to be more powerful than existing methods. the number of pseudo-variants added by betaseq and their mafs are estimated on the basis of the algorithm proposed by ionita-laza et al. (2009). betaseq can work with any existing rare variant association methods that use genotypes or imputed genotypes as input data. moreover, unlike seqchip, betaseq can be applied in situations where not only cases but also a small number of controls are sequenced. extensive simulations were carried out to evaluate the performance of betaseq and seqchip with three typical rare variant association methods: the cumulative minor-allele test (cmat) , extensions of the aggregated number of rare variants (anrv) test and the variable threshold (vt) test . in addition, we also applied both betaseq and seqchip to a real sequencing dataset from the population-based colaus study with the three rare variant association tests. results from simulations and real data application demonstrate the advantages of the proposed method over existing ones and establish that betaseq is effective for combining sequence and genotype data from the two stages for rare variant association testing.in this article, to control type-i error of rare variant association testing, a novel method is proposed to correct partially sequenced data in case-control studies, in which only a subset of individuals (mainly cases) are sequenced to detect variants and the discovered variants are genotyped in the remaining individuals. different from all the existing methods in literature, which drop either some sequenced cases or some detected variants to control type-i errors, our method betaseq conducts an in silico sequencing on the un-sequenced individuals by supplementing pseudo-variants into them, such that the spectrum of mafs in controls becomes approximately the same as that in cases. meanwhile, the original sequence and genotype data are keptintact. all the existing rare variant association methods that use genotypes or imputed genotypes as input data can be applied directly on the dataset corrected by betaseq. besides the situations where only cases are sequenced, betaseq can be applied when not only cases but also a small number of controls are sequenced. betaseq can also be applied when study sample is stratified by some confounders and cases within each subgroup are partially selected out to sequence. in that situation, betaseq can be used within each subgroup stratified by confounders. we demonstrated the performance of betaseq by three typical rare variant association tests: vt, anvr and cmat. extensive simulations showed that when betaseq is used to correct partially sequenced data, the inflation of type-i errors of all the three variant association tests is well corrected. type-i errors under betaseq can be conservative when q (percentage of sequenced cases) is small. but the conservativeness alleviates substantially as q increases. the powers of the three tests under betaseq increase with q and are higher than those under seqchip in most scenarios. when seqchip is used to integrate sequence and genotype data, type-i errors keep decreasing and eventually become conservative as q increases; meanwhile powers increase first and then decrease. under seqchip, there exists an optimal fraction of cases to sequence to maximize testing power . sequencing a larger number of samples may discover more causal variants but does not necessarily improve testing power. the optimal q depends on the underlying disease model and other factors of the settings and needs to be decided on a case by case basis , which renders explanation difficult and limits the practical utility of seqchip. in this article, we assume rare variants in a genomic region are deleterious. if rare variants are protective or exert effects in both directions, sequencing only cases may decrease testing power. if rare variants are assumed to be protective, we should sequence only controls in stage 1 because causal variants are enriched in controls. under that situation, our algorithm can still be applied by supplementing pseudo-variants to cases. if we assume rare variants exert effects in both directions, it is more appropriate to sequence both cases and controls in stage 1 for causal variant detection. in that case, variant ascertainment bias and subsequently type-i error control are likely no longer issues. because betaseq (and all other correction methods reviewed including seqchip) is proposed under the design where corrections are unidirectional, we have found, not surprisingly, that one-sided tests benefit more from our method than quadratic methods like skat (supplementary appendix i).there is still room to improve the algorithm of supplementing pseudo-variants into un-sequenced individuals. currently, our method is based on a parametric beta distribution to approximate the maf spectrum of biallelic variants in a given genomic region. in some situations, real maf spectrum can depart from the beta distribution assumption and then prediction of potential snps may become inaccurate. a nonparametric approach may be adopted to improve prediction accuracy. moreover, in step iii of our algorithm, we simply make the number of variants with  
