structural bioinformatics betaware: a machine-learning tool to detect and predict transmembrane beta-barrel proteins in prokaryotes the annotation of membrane proteins in proteomes is an important problem of computational biology, especially after the development of high-throughput techniques that allow fast and efficient genome sequencing. among membrane proteins, transmembrane-barrels (tmbbs) are poorly represented in the database of protein structures (pdb) and difficult to identify with experimental approaches. they are, however, extremely important, playing key roles in several cell functions and bacterial pathogenicity. tmbbs are included in the lipid bilayer with a-barrel structure and are presently found in the outer membranes of gram-negative bacteria, mitochondria and chloroplasts. recently, we developed two top-performing methods based on machine-learning approaches to tackle both the detection of tmbbs in sets of proteins and the prediction of their topology. here, we present our betaware program that includes both approaches and can run as a standalone program on a linux-basedtransmembrane-barrel proteins (tmbbs) are important proteins that cross the lipid bilayer with a series of-strands arranged in a cylindrical geometry and forming a structure that resembles a barrel . although all living organisms have transmembrane proteins organized into all-helical bundles, tmbbs are presently found in the outer membranes of gram-negative bacteria, mitochondria and chloroplasts. despite their relevance, few tmbb structures are available at atomic resolution from gram-negative organisms [about 0.1 of all the structures from gram-negative organisms in the protein database (pdb)]. several computational methods have been developed to predict tmbbs from protein sequences. two prediction problems can be addressed: (i) tmbb detection in genomes , and (ii) the prediction of protein topology . here, we present betaware, a tool based on machinelearning approaches to detect tmbbs in large sets of proteins and predict their topology. betaware is available under gpl license as a standalone program, which is particularly well-suited for large-scale genome analyses. for the prediction of tmbb topology, it has been shown on comparative analyses that approaches based on grammatical modelling are the best performing , while for the detection of tmmbs in a set of proteins, the best-performing method is based on n-to-1 extreme learning machines (elm) .in this application notes, we present betaware, a standalone program that can detect with high reliability tmbbs in large sets of proteins and that furnishes a state-of-the-art performance in the task of the prediction of tmbb topology. the program can be installed on a linux-based machine and can be used in-house for wide-screening applications.for the indices see supplementary material.  
