data and text mining bigwig and bigbed: enabling browsing of large distributed datasets bigwig and bigbed files are compressed binary indexed files containing data at several resolutions that allow the high-performance display of next-generation sequencing experiment results in the ucsc genome browser. the visualization is implemented using a multi-layered software approach that takes advantage of specific capabilities of web-based protocols and linux and unix operating systems files, r trees and various indexing and compression tricks. as a result, only the data needed to support the current browser view is transmitted rather than the entire file, enabling fast remote access to large distributed data sets. availability and implementation: binaries for the bigwig and bigbed creation and parsing utilities may be downloaded atrecent improvements in sequencing technologies have made it possible for labs to generate terabyte-sized genomic data sets. visualization of these data sets is a key to scientific interpretation. typically, loading the data into a visualization tool such as the genome browser provided by the university of california, santa cruz (ucsc) has been difficult. the data can be loaded as a custom annotation track, but for very large data sets the upload form times out before the data transfer finishes. to work around this limitation, some labs with access to solexa and later-generation sequencing machines have installed a local copy of the genome browser, but this requires a significant initial time investment by systems administrators and other informatics professionals, as well as continuing efforts to keep the data in the local browser installation current. to whom correspondence should be addressed.though visualization of results is just one of the many informatics challenges of next-generation sequencing, it is one that we are well positioned to address at ucsc. we have developed two new data formats, bigwig and bigbed, that make it practical to view the results of next-generation sequencing experiments as tracks in the ucsc genome browser. the bigwig and bigbed files are compressed binary indexed files that contain the data at several resolutions. rather than transmitting the entire file, only the data needed to support the current view in the genome browser are transmitted. collectively, bigwig and bigbed are referred to as big binary indexed (bbi) files.  
