genome analysis binoch: binding inference from nucleosome occupancy changes transcription factor binding events are frequently associated with a pattern of nucleosome occupancy changes in which nucleosomes flanking the binding site increase in occupancy, while those in the vicinity of the binding site itself are displaced. genome-wide information on enhancer proximal nucleosome occupancy can be readily acquired using chip-seq targeting enhancer-related histone modifications such as h3k4me2. here, we present a software package, binoch that allows biologists to use such data to infer the identity of key transcription factors that regulate the response of a cell to a stimulus or determine a program of differentiation. availability: the binoch open source python package is freely available at http://liulab.dfci.harvard.edu/binoch under the freebsdalthough transcription factors are known to have a high affinity for specific dna sequences, binding is often cell type and condition specific, therefore dna sequence alone is a poor predictor of in vivo genome-wide binding locations . when the relevant transcription factors are known and suitable antibodies are available, chip-chip and chip-seq technologies enable us to map their genome-wide binding locations. in many cases, however, the transcription factors governing a regulatory response are not known or antibodies suitable for chip-seq are not available. without transcription factor-specific antibodies, it is nevertheless possible to infer transcription factor binding events based on two observations. first, transcription factor binding sites are often associated with certain types of post-translational histone modifications, in particular histone h3 lysine 4 mono-(h3k4me) and di-methylation (h3k4me2) . second, transcription factor binding is frequently associated with a pattern of nucleosome occupancy changes in which nucleosomes flanking the binding site increase in occupancy, while those in the vicinity of the binding site itself are displaced . transcription factor (tf) binding events can therefore be inferred by comparing nucleosome resolution h3k4me1/2 chip-seq data under treatment to whom correspondence should be addressed.and control conditions. we present a software package, binoch, to allow biologists to carry out an analysis of nucleosome occupancy data to discover stimulus-induced transcription factor binding.  
