systems biology biocellion: accelerating computer simulation of multicellular biological system models motivation: biological system behaviors are often the outcome of complex interactions among a large number of cells and their biotic and abiotic environment. computational biologists attempt to understand , predict and manipulate biological system behavior through mathematical modeling and computer simulation. discrete agent-based modeling (in combination with high-resolution grids to model the extracellular environment) is a popular approach for building biological system models. however, the computational complexity of this approach forces computational biologists to resort to coarser resolution approaches to simulate large biological systems. high-performance parallel computers have the potential to address the computing challenge, but writing efficient software for parallel computers is difficult and time-consuming. results: we have developed biocellion, a high-performance software framework, to solve this computing challenge using parallel computers. to support a wide range of multicellular biological system models, biocellion asks users to provide their model specifics by filling the function body of pre-defined model routines. using biocellion, modelers without parallel computing expertise can efficiently exploit parallel computers with less effort than writing sequential programs from scratch. we simulate cell sorting, microbial patterning and a bacterial system in soil aggregate as case studies. availability and implementation: biocellion runs on x86 compatible systems with the 64 bit linux operating system and is freely available for academic use. visit http://biocellion.com for additional information.cells interact with other cells by moving, adhering, dividing and secreting and receiving diffusible molecules. as a result, unicellular organisms are able to form communities with complex macroscopic structure and behavior (e.g. biofilm), while multicellular organisms, where cells can differentiate to perform different functions, form tissues. multicellular biological systems respond to external stimuli and reshape the surrounding environment. complex interactions among cells and their biotic and abiotic environment drive multicellular system behavior. understanding the impact of such interactions is a critical step in our ability to predict and manipulate important biological system behaviors in the areas of energy , environment and health care . computational biologists have started to investigate multicellular biological systems via modeling and simulation. cells and their biotic and abiotic environment constitute a biological system. computational biologists commonly model the environment by imposing a grid on the extracellular space. there are two principal approaches in modeling cells: population-based modeling and discrete agent-based modeling. population-based modeling approximates the cells within any grid box by a set of variables associated with the grid box. discrete agent-based modeling maps each cell (or subcellular element) to a discrete simulation entity. biologists have accumulated a significant amount of knowledge about cell and subcellular organelle behaviors. discrete agent-based modeling naturally translates the accumulated knowledge to a mathematical model. however, the computational complexity of discrete agent-based modeling increases proportional to the number of discrete agents. many biological systems contain 1 million to 100 billion cells . researchers have acknowledged the necessity of supercomputers and a proper parallel implementation to simulate millions to billions of cells within a reasonable time . the lack of a proper parallel implementation forces computational biologists to simply use a small number of cells (which does not reflect the reality), resort to populationbased modeling or develop a hybrid approach that uses discrete agent-based modeling for a fraction of the cells [e.g. invading cancer cells (and adopts populationbased modeling for the remaining cells. the most practical approach to build a high fidelity model of important biological systems is starting from a relatively simple model and incrementally improving the model fidelity, which typically results in increases in the complexity and scale of the model. for this approach to be successful, we believe that an incremental increase in model complexity and scale should require only an incremental amount of additional programming effort. population-based modeling and the hybrid approach are to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2014. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com inherently limited in this regard. averaging a heterogeneous population of cells to a few variables associated with a grid box cannot model cell granularity events in the required level of detail . adopting the hybrid approach, fewer and fewer cells can be modeled using the population-based approach as modelers adopt more complex mathematics to describe individual cell behaviors. we designed biocellion to allow computational biologists to use discrete agent-based modelingin combination with highresolution grids to model the extracellular environmentfrom simple small-scale models to highly complex large-scale models with millions to billions of cells. we aim to address the increase in computational complexity exploiting high-performance computing (hpc): adoption of efficient algorithms, careful performance tuning and exploitation of parallel computers ranging from multicore pcs to cloud computers and supercomputers. parallel computers are abundant but developing efficient software for large parallel computers is a highly demanding task and becoming even more so with new multicore processors and manycore accelerators such as intel xeon phi and nvidia graphics processing units . biological system models are diverse and even a model from a single research group changes significantly over a relatively short period. this imposes a challenge in software reusability, which is problematic considering the high development cost of parallel software. biocellion asks users to express their model specifics by filling the function body of pre-defined model routines. biocellion executes and evaluates the user-provided model routines in parallel using efficient solvers. this approach provides biocellion users having no hpc expertise with the flexibility needed to support a variety of models and the performance required to simulate large systems.we implement three different models using biocellion as case studies. the following presents cell sorting , microbial patterning in communities of different yeast strains engaging in metabolic interactions and a bacterial system in complex soil structures . full source code for the presented model implementations is included in the biocellion release, and steps to port the microbial patterning model to biocellion are described in .  
