data and text mining bioclipse-r: integrating management and visualization of life science data with statistical analysis bioclipse, a graphical workbench for the life sciences, provides functionality for managing and visualizing life science data. we introduce bioclipse-r, which integrates bioclipse and the statistical programming language r. the synergy between bioclipse and r is demonstrated by the construction of a decision support system for anticancer drug screening and mutagenicity prediction, which shows how bioclipse-r can be used to perform complex tasks from within a single software system. availability and implementation: bioclipse-r is implemented as a set of java plug-ins for bioclipse based on the r-package rj. source code and binary packages are available from https://github.com/bioclipse and http://www.bioclipse.net/bioclipse-r, respectively.bioclipse and r (r development core) are free and open source software systems for the life sciences and for statistics, respectively. although bioclipse has excellent functionality for managing, editing and visualizing chemical and biological information, it lacks data analytical capabilities. r, on the other hand, is outstanding for statistics and data analysis, but does not provide functionality for interactively reading, editing and visualizing chemical structures or protein sequences. in this applications note, we describe and demonstrate bioclipse-r, a set of bioclipse plug-ins that link bioclipse to r and provide access to r methods from within bioclipse. the bioconductor project has equipped r with tailor made functionality for biology. however, bioconductor is primarily targeted at genomics and has no functionality for chemistry. the r package rcdk adds core cheminformatics functionality to r but is not focused on providing a rich graphical user experience with functionality for editing and visualizing chemical data in 2d and 3d. other tools for integrating r in graphical user interfaces with applications in biology and chemistry include the workflow tools konstanz information miner (knime) and taverna . these provide nodes in a workflow that are capable of containing r code, but they are focused on constructing reproducible workflows and do not expose r in a workbench environment where it can be used programmatically and in combination with other tools in a more investigative fashion. in contrast to these tools, bioclipse-r integrates r with the rich client bioclipse and, thus, provides cross-fertilization between r and all other functionality in bioclipse, for example, advanced visualizations, help systems and semantic data management . we demonstrate the synergy between bioclipse and r by constructing a decision support system for virtual screening and mutagenicity testing of new cancer drugs. constructing this system without the integration between bioclipse and r would require extensive efforts of copying data between various software tools and file formats, but is almost trivial with bioclipse-r. here, we outline the basic steps of the demonstration and refer to http://bioclipse.net/bioclipse-r for a detailed step-by-step description. the operations can be performed both in the bioclipse scripting language (bsl) and in bioclipse graphical user interface.  
