data and text mining bioclojure: a functional library for the manipulation of biological sequences motivation: bioclojure is an open-source library for the manipulation of biological sequence data written in the language clojure. bioclojure aims to provide a functional framework for the processing of biological sequence data that provides simple mechanisms for concurrency and lazy evaluation of large datasets. results: bioclojure provides parsers and accessors for a range of biological sequence formats, including uniprotxml, genbank xml, fasta and fastq. in addition, it provides wrappers for key analysis programs, including blast, signalp, tmhmm and interproscan, and parsers for analyzing their output. all interfaces leverage clojures functional style and emphasize laziness and composability, so that bioclojure, and user-defined, functions can be chained into simple pipelines that are thread-safe and seamlessly integrate lazy evaluation. availability and implementation: bioclojure is distributed under the lesser gpl, and the source code is freely available from githubfunctional programming is a programming style that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions . in its purest form, functional programming removes the need for variable assignment by using immutable data structures that eliminate the use of state and side effects . this ensures that functions will always return the same value given the same input. this greatly simplifies debugging and testing, as individual functions can be assessed in isolation regardless of a global state. immutability also greatly simplifies concurrency and facilitates leveraging of multi-core computing facilities with little or no modifications to functionally written code. accordingly, as a programming style, functional programming offers advantages for software development, including (i) brevity, (ii) simple handling of concurrency and (iii) seamless integration of lazy evaluation, simplifying the handling of large datasets. clojure is a lisp variant that encourages a functional style of programming by providing immutable data structures, functions as first-class objects and uses recursive iteration as opposed to state-based looping . clojure is built on the java virtual machine (jvm), and thus, applications developed using bioclojure can be compiled into java byte code and ran on any platform that runs the jvm. moreover, libraries constructed using clojure can be called in java programs and, conversely, java classes and methods can be called from clojure programs, making available a large number of thirdparty java libraries. bioclojure aims to leverage the tools provided by clojure to provide a functional interface with biological sequence data and associated programs. bioclojure is similar in intent to other bioinformatics packages such as bioperl , biopython , bio++ and biojava but differs from these bioinformatics software libraries in its embrace of the functional style. with the decreasing cost of biological analyses, for example, next-generation sequencing, biologists are dealing with greater amounts of data, and bioclojure is an attempt to provide tools, emphasizing concurrency and lazy evaluation, for manipulating these data.bioclojure is a functional software library specifically designed for parsing and processing biological sequence data. it provides a lazy and thread-safe framework for accessing and streaming these data while using minimal amounts of memory. presently, we extensively use the library for the annotation of nucleotide and peptide sequences arising from next-generation sequencing and the proteomic analysis of complex protein mixtures. we plan to extend the functionality of the library by incorporating modules for phylogenetic and proteomic analyses, and we welcome contributions from the community.  
