data and text mining biocontext: an integrated text mining system for large-scale extraction and contextualization of biomolecular events motivation: although the amount of data in biology is rapidly increasing, critical information for understanding biological events like phosphorylation or gene expression remains locked in the biomedical literature. most current text mining (tm) approaches to extract information about biological events are focused on either limited-scale studies and/or abstracts, with data extracted lacking context and rarely available to support further research. results: here we present biocontext, an integrated tm system which extracts, extends and integrates results from a number of tools performing entity recognition, biomolecular event extraction and contextualization. application of our system to 10.9 million medline abstracts and 234 000 open-access full-text articles from pubmed central yielded over 36 million mentions representing 11.4 million distinct events. event participants included over 290 000 distinct genes/proteins that are mentioned more than 80 million times and linked where possible to entrez gene identifiers. over a third of events contain contextual information such as the anatomical location of the event occurrence or whether the event is reported as negated or speculative.the amount of information available in the biomedical literature is increasing rapidly, with over 2000 articles published daily (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/index_stats_comp.html). while the information available in these articles (now exceeding 18 million in number) represents a vast source of knowledge, its sheer size also presents challenges to researchers in terms of discovering relevant information. efforts in biomedical text mining (tm) seek to mitigate this problem through systematic extraction of structured data from literature . to date, progress in biomedical tm research has primarily focused on tools for entity recognition (locating mentions of species, genes, diseases, etc.) and the extraction of gene/protein relationships . recently, there has been increasing interest to develop tm tools for the extraction of information about a wider array of biological and molecular processes (often referred to as events), such as expression, phosphorylation, binding and regulation of genes and proteins. community challenges have shown that extracting such events is often difficult because of the complex and inconsistent ways in which such processes are reported in the literature . in addition, most efforts to extract events have been restricted to limited-scale studies or abstracts. although some event extraction tools are now publicly available, their usefulness for supporting biological discovery is still unknown given the difficulties in applying and integrating data from these systems on a large scale. in this article we present biocontext, an integrated tm system which extracts, extends and integrates results from a number of tm tools for entity recognition and event extraction. the system also provides contextual information about extracted events including anatomical association and whether extracted processes have been reported as speculative or negated (i.e. not taking place). in addition to making the integration platform available under an open-source license, we also provide the data resulting from processing the whole medline and the open-access subset of pubmed central (pmc) for batch download and online browsing.in this article we present an integrated tm system, biocontext and the data produced by it when applied to 10.9 million abstracts in medline and 234 000 full-text articles in the open-access subset of pmc. the data contain 36.1 million event mentions, representing 11.4 million distinct events describing processes such as gene expression, transcription, catabolism, localization, phosphorylation, binding and regulation of genes and proteins. over a million of additional event mentions were created through enumerated entity mentions. event participants are whenever possible linked to entrez gene identifiers. the data contain contextual information regarding the associated anatomical locations and whether events are reported as negated or speculative. the process of generating and integrating this huge volume of data proved challenging and differences observed between the output of individual tools indicate that the identification of events in text is not always easily reproducible on a large scale. nevertheless, differences among tools in recognized entity and event mentions can be useful when deciding the balance between precision and recall for different applications. as expected, we find that for both gene/protein ner and event extraction, the intersection of multiple tools shifts the balance towards increased precision while the union favours increased recall. we have made the data available at www.biocontext.org both for batch download and for browsing through a web search interface, giving biologists not only more comprehensive access to data in the literature, but allowing bioinformaticians to run more powerful integrative analyses using information extracted from literature. we also provide the entire set of intermediary data files as well as the integration framework, textpipe, which can be used either for completely new tm projects or to construct and deploy modified versions of the system described here. several tasks remain for future work. data interfaces could be enhanced by allowing restrictions on which documents results are returned for the search interface, or by importing and integrating the biocontext data into a pubmed2ensembl-style biological data mining portal . we would also like to improve the accuracy through improved filtering techniques. further, as protein complexes currently are not linked to any reference source, we would like to enable normalization of these entities, either to their constitutive genes or directly to protein complex databases. finally, a more detailed analysis of the extracted data is also warranted, which will hopefully shed new light on biomolecular events at an unprecedented scale of global understanding.  
