genetics and population analysis biogranat-ig: a network analysis tool to suggest mechanisms of genetic heterogeneity from exome-sequencing data motivation: recent exome-sequencing studies have successfully identified disease-causing sequence variants for several rare mono-genic diseases by examining variants common to a group of patients. however, the current data analysis strategies are only insufficiently able to deal with confounding factors such as genetic heterogeneity, incomplete penetrance, individuals lacking data and involvement of several genes. results: we introduce biogranat-ig, an analysis strategy that incorporates the information contained in biological networks to the analysis of exome-sequencing data. to identify genes that may have a disease-causing role, we label all nodes of the network according to the individuals that are carrying a sequence variant and subsequently identify small subnetworks linked to all or most individuals. using simulated exome-sequencing data, we demonstrate that biogranat-ig is able to recover the genes responsible for two diseases known to be caused by variants in an underlying complex. we also examine the performance of biogranat-ig under various conditions likely to be faced by the user, and show that its network-based approach is more powerful than a set-cover-based approach. availability: we implemented our methods in java as biogranat-ig, a bundle within our biogranat graph analysis and visualization tool (www.biogranat.org).improvements in sequencing technology have made sequencing the entire human exome both practical and affordable. this has led to considerable successes in the identification of diseasecausing sequence variants for several rare mendelian diseases such as kabuki syndrome and hajducheney syndrome . typically, whole-exome sequencing is undertaken for a small number of patients. comparison with a reference genome yields, for each individual, a list of genes carrying sequence variants. these lists are filtered, by removing, for example, genes in which all mutations are predicted to be without severe impact on protein function, in which mutations occur too frequently relative to the prevalence of the disease or in which no mutations were observed when sequencing affected relatives . finally, the filtered lists can be inspected to find their intersection. in the best cases, only one remaining gene is shared between all affected individuals, becoming a natural candidate for experimental follow-up studies, for examples see and the review paper . however, depending on the disease, one might not observe any genes in the intersection of the filtered lists. one phenomenon that can cause this is genetic heterogeneity, where one phenotypic outcome results from any one of a number of possible mutations, possibly in different loci . an example would be two genes that are functionally related through their protein products, both playing a critical role in some cellular function and such that a mutation in either gene leads to the failure of that function. one possible way to deal with this problem would be to look for the smallest set of genes such that all individuals carry a sequence variant in the set. this frames the problem as one of minimal set cover and will not guarantee any biological meaning or functional relatedness for the set of genes found. instead, in this article, we present biogranat-ig (biogranat individuals-grouping), a tool that uses the additional structure found in biological networks to analyse sequence data for multiple individuals and suggest possible sources of genetic heterogeneity. biological networks connect genes or proteins for which a functional relationship is knownor predictedto exist. these networks can be represented as graphs. for example, an edge in a proteinprotein interaction network graph connects two nodes (genes) where the proteins coded by those genes interact. other possible graphs might connect genes based on co-expression, genomic location or cell signalling , text mining of published literature or integrated evidence for interaction based on several of the above measures . several tools, such as genemania and string , exist that use biological networks to suggest additional functionally related genes for a given input gene list. conversely, our tool will use the networks to focus on which of the input genes are likely to be causative and provide a relatively short list of candidate genes for follow-up study. to whom correspondence should be addressed.the premise behind biogranat-ig is that if a disease has an underlying mechanism of genetic heterogeneity, the genes involved may be functionally related and therefore closely connected in a biological network; if not directly connected, they might be interacting with one or more common neighbours. to identify disease gene candidates, given a number of individuals and for each individual a list of genes with sequence variants (filtered as described above), we mark each node in our network with the individuals who carry a mutant version of that gene. subsequently, we seek the smallest connected subnetwork marked with all individuals. our network thus consists of marked nodes, representing genes where a sequence variant was observed in some individual, and empty nodes, where no mutation was observed for any individual. as an additional constraint on the subnetwork we seek, we require that each marked node is connected to another marked node via at most one empty node. that is, the subnetwork is allowed to incorporate jumps of one empty node, but not more (see). the rationale underlying this is that biological networks tend to exhibit the small world phenomenon, meaning that the average path length between any two nodes is short, typically four to six edges . we are therefore interested only in localized connections, and allowing too many empty nodes into our subnetwork could reduce the chance of it having any biological meaning. this constraint allows a computationally efficient implementation, making it possible to run biogranat-ig on large sets of permuted data to establish statistical significance. we will present the methods implemented by biogranat-ig and demonstrate the validity of our approach using simulated exome-sequence output. we then analyse the performance of the tool under various conditions, before considering the outstanding challenges of this approach. to our knowledge, biogranat-ig is the first tool developed to tackle the problem of finding disease-causing genes from exomesequence data for mendelian diseases with heterogenetic background. while finding dysregulated subgraphs is an intensively studied problem , few approaches consider data for individuals separately. rather, most approaches work with summary statistics. notably, approaches by), degas and keypathwayminer use differential expression data for individuals to find subnetworks containing genes differentially expressed in patients versus controls. while for differential gene-expression data one usually expects to find clusters of co-expressed functionally related genes, our problem differs because we expect all individuals to carry only a limited number (probably less than tens) of disease causing genes hidden among a large number (hundreds) of variants not related to the disease of interest. therefore, the problem addressed by keypathwayminer and degas is similar to the problem we address here in general, but there are important differences in the detail that have an impact on the algorithm design. the dapple tool prioritizes genes in genomic regions associated with a disease using a network-based approach conceptually related to biogranat-ig. however, dapple is designed to improve understanding of disease-associated loci, and is not readily applicable to the sequencing problem we describe.in this section, we firstly demonstrate that the principle underlying biogranat-ig is sound and that the program produces valid results, using two diseases known to have a basis of genetic heterogeneity. we show that biogranat-ig can recover the genes responsible for acne inversa (ai) andpseudohypoaldosteronism type i (pha-i) using simulated exome-sequencing data. we then examine the performance of biogranat-ig under various conditions, including the nature of the underlying disease complex and the amount and quality of input data. all testing has been performed on a human proteinprotein interaction network (huppi2) derived as described earlier by integration of data from six public databases. it is undirected, self-loops have been removed and each interaction has been reported in two or more scientific publications. seefor network properties. the choice of network to use with biogranat-ig, as with other network-based analysis methods, involves consideration of competing factors. there is typically a trade-off between network coverage (number of genes represented in the network) and the degree of confidence that can be placed on network interactions. the choice of network will also be influenced by whether a particular type of genetic mechanism is predicted and by the sequence data available. when sequencing small groups of affected individuals, it makes sense to run biogranat-ig on smaller high-quality networks initially (this minimizes the risk of connecting the individuals using falsepositive connections, as would be more likely in a larger network) and proceed to larger networks if no positive results are found. smaller networks also have the added advantage of reduced computation time. the huppi2 network is a high-confidence network, but note that the tests on simulated ai and pha-i data were repeated in a range of other networks of varying size with comparable results. see the supplementary material for additional results.  
