bioimaging-based detection of mislocalized proteins in human cancers by semi-supervised learning motivation: there is a long-term interest in the challenging task of finding translocated and mislo-cated cancer biomarker proteins. bioimages of subcellular protein distribution are new data sources which have attracted much attention in recent years because of their intuitive and detailed descriptions of protein distribution. however, automated methods in large-scale biomarker screening suffer significantly from the lack of subcellular location annotations for bioimages from cancer tissues. the transfer prediction idea of applying models trained on normal tissue proteins to predict the subcellular locations of cancerous ones is arbitrary because the protein distribution patterns may differ in normal and cancerous states. results: we developed a new semi-supervised protocol that can use unlabeled cancer protein data in model construction by an iterative and incremental training strategy. our approach enables us to selectively use the low-quality images in normal states to expand the training sample space and provides a general way for dealing with the small size of annotated images used together with large unannotated ones. experiments demonstrate that the new semi-supervised protocol can result in improved accuracy and sensitivity of subcellular location difference detection.knowing the subcellular locations of proteins in human cancer tissues can improve the understanding of protein functions and cancer pathogenesis . it has been demonstrated that the translocation of protein might be a signal of cancer . the cyclin d1 protein is an example: it shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm in a healthy cell and the reduction of exportation from the nucleus can lead to overexpression in the nucleus and the inactivation of the tumor-suppressing protein retinoblastoma . accurately detecting protein translocations in human cancer tissues can thus be of important help for clinical diagnosis and treatment. because traditional wet lab experiments are expensive in time and costs , automated methods are highly desired for handling the increasing amounts of biomedical data. despite its importance, only a few studies have reported automated methods to detect translocation details in cancerous tissues until now. one reason is that sequence-based analysis by itself is not v c the author 2014. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com sensitive enough for detection of protein translocation as translocation can be strongly effected by mutations outside the target sequence. for example, mutations in nucleoporin complexes can have dramatic effects on the nuclear localization of multiple other proteins . due to recent advances in microscopic imaging, image-based pattern analysis methods have gained popularity due to the intuitive and detailed information the images contain. for example, the murphy group discussed the potential applications of their models based on automated analysis of fluorescence microscopy images to the analysis and classification of skin cancers .compared the abilities of automated image analysis and pathologist visual examination in quantifying protein expression in ovarian cancer. recently, our group developed a multilabel subcellular location predictor, ilocator, and identified several translocated proteins as potential cancer biomarkers . to compare the localization difference of a protein in normal and cancerous tissues, we have to know its subcellular locations in both normal and cancerous states first. this can be achieved either through wet-lab experiments or computational predictions. since image data with experimentally annotated subcellular locations in cancerous states are rare, prediction models have been used instead, especially in the large-scale screening. due to the lack of location labels for proteins in cancerous states, however, most of the existing methods employed an approach named transfer learning, where models are first trained on proteins in normal tissues and then used to predict the localization of proteins in cancerous tissues . the performance of these approaches is poor, where one reason is the subtle differences in subcellular location patterns between cancer and normal states, which are influenced by cell mutations and morphological changes. in fact, there are a large number of images of proteins with cancerous tissues. the human protein atlas (hpa, version 11, http:// www.proteinatlas.org/) database, for example, currently contains more than 1 million immunohistochemistry (ihc) microscopy images of proteins in cancerous tissues. but due to the lack of explicit subcellular annotations, no attempt has been made in using these images from cancerous tissues for constructing supervised models for cancer localization prediction. to address the issues, we present a heuristic semi-supervised learning framework for subcellular location prediction by taking advantage of the unannotated cancer samples in developing predictors. the key advantage of the proposed semi-supervised method, in comparison to the traditional supervised learning algorithms, is that it can train prediction models with only a few labeled image samples and a large pool of unlabeled samples . an iterative and incremental strategy was designed to select unlabeled samples into the training set. to choose the most discriminative samples, we developed three different training modes: a single-training model consisting of only one classifier , a co-training model consisting of two classifiers and a tri-training model consisting of three classifiers . also, as the incorporation of prior knowledge can improve the performance of semi-supervised methods , we took the location information from the corresponding normal tissues as prior knowledge to guide the selection process. another advantage of the proposed semi-supervised framework is that the training samples become typically much more enriched compared with the traditional supervised learning. first, it selected useful lower-quality images from normal tissues for training. in general, researchers prefer using well-stained images in the training set . but selecting only high-quality images may introduce bias into modeling because the number of high expression level images in the hpa is relatively small . therefore, instead of being discarded, some images of normal tissues with weak expression levels were selected for use in training by the semi-supervised strategy used in this study. then, also the large cancer dataset was used for model construction by using the semi-supervised strategy of this study, which results in a much larger dataset useable for model construction. the final predictor by the semi-supervised training can be used for images from both normal and cancer tissues. we have tested the method on an independent cancer biomarker dataset composed of translocated or mislocated proteins, which have been confirmed by biological experiments. comparing the prediction results from models trained with and without data from cancerous tissues shows that using the cancer data improves the sensitivity of detecting protein translocations or mislocations in human cancer tissues.shows the percentages of normal protein images with different levels of expression reliability in hpa version 11. protein images with high and medium reliability corresponding to six subcellular locations in 11 tissues were collected (supplementary). the overlapping part of two circles represents overlap on the protein level because some proteins have different reliability levels in different tissues. for example, ornithine carbamoyltransferase is one such protein because its reliability of expression in liver is high while in the colon it is medium. the idn is randomly selected from the nonoverlapping proteins and avoids protein overlap with the training set. the adn and bdn are composed of the remaining images with high and medium reliability levels, respectively. note that idn has intersection with neither adn nor bdn at the protein level. (b) some examples of protein images with different reliability levels and subcellular locations. (c) summary of all the datasets used in this study. the cdc is built by images of 348 proteins in cancerous tissues, where the 348 proteins are proteins whose images in corresponding normal tissues are of high reliability of protein expression. the ibd contains 10 proteins that were reported being translocated in human cancers by the literatures (supplementary). in the column of expression reliability, h means high and m means medium  
