gene expression biological impact of missing-value imputation on downstream analyses of gene expression profiles motivation: microarray experiments frequently produce multiple missing values (mvs) due to flaws such as dust, scratches, insufficient resolution or hybridization errors on the chips. unfortunately, many downstream algorithms require a complete data matrix. the motivation of this work is to determine the impact of mv imputation on downstream analysis, and whether ranking of imputation methods by imputation accuracy correlates well with the biological impact of the imputation. methods: using eight datasets for differential expression (de) and classification analysis and eight datasets for gene clustering, we demonstrate the biological impact of missing-value imputation on statistical downstream analyses, including three commonly employed de methods, four classifiers and three gene-clustering methods. correlation between the rankings of imputation methods based on three root-mean squared error (rmse) measures and the rankings based on the downstream analysis methods was used to investigate which rmse measure was most consistent with the biological impact measures, and which downstream analysis methods were the most sensitive to the choice of imputation procedure. results: de was the most sensitive to the choice of imputation procedure, while classification was the least sensitive and clustering was intermediate between the two. the logged rmse (lrmse) measure had the highest correlation with the imputation rankings based on the de results, indicating that the lrmse is the best representative surrogate among the three rmse-based measures. bayesian principal component analysis and least squares adaptive appeared to be the best performing methods in the empirical downstream evaluation.gene expression data obtained from microarray experiments are usually peppered with missing values (mvs) that occur from a variety of reasons. even though the technology has been improved over the past decade, mv imputation remains a necessary key step in data preprocessing. randomly scattered mvs may be due to spotting problems, poor hybridization, inadequate resolution, fabrication errors or contaminants on the chip including scratches, dust and fingerprints. these mvs are usually flagged by absent/present calls in the affymetrix platform, detection p-values in the illumina system or other outlier detection algorithms in cdna arrays. since many downstream analyses require a complete dataset for implementation, mv imputation is a common practice. many mv imputation methods have been developed in the literature . all these methods are based on the fact that genes do not function individually, but are usually highly correlated with co-regulated genes. mv imputation methods generally belong to two categories. in the first category, expression information of a missing entry is borrowed from neighboring genes whose closeness is determined by a distance measure (e.g. correlation, euclidean distance). famous local methods in this category include k-nearest neighbors (knn;), ordinary least squares (ols;), least squares adaptive (lsa;) and local least squares (lls;). for the second category, dimension reduction techniques are applied to decompose the data matrix and iteratively reconstruct the missing entries. singular value decomposition (svd;), partial least squares (pls;) and bayesian principal component analysis (bpca;) belong to this global method category. in most methodological papers, evaluations comparing relatively few (35) mv imputation methods in a small number (35) of datasets are commonly seen. this can result in over-optimism of the newly developed algorithm, an issue that has been recently discussed in. the issue of whether an overall best mv imputation method exists or which mv imputation method is best suited to a given dataset was not clear until a recent comprehensive comparative study by. they investigated the mv imputation performance of eight popular methods in various types of datasets (time series, multiple exposure and time series multiple exposure) and concluded that no universally best mv imputation method exists, although three top methods (lsa, lls and bpca) consistently performed among the best. they further proposed an entropy-based selection scheme that predicts performance of local-based (knn, ols, lsa and lls) versus global-based (pls, svd and bpca) mv imputation methods in different kinds of data structures, classified by an entropypage: 79 7886  
