databases and ontologies biological knowledge bases using wikis: combining the flexibility of wikis with the structure of databases in recent years, the number of knowledge bases developed using wiki technology has exploded. unfortunately, next to their numerous advantages, classical wikis present a critical limitation: the invaluable knowledge they gather is represented as free text, which hinders their computational exploitation. this is in sharp contrast with the current practice for biological databases where the data is made available in a structured way. here, we present wikiopener an extension for the classical mediawiki engine that augments wiki pages by allowing on-the-fly querying and formatting resources external to the wiki. those resources may provide data extracted from databases or das tracks, or even results returned by local or remote bioinformatics analysis tools. this also implies that structured data can be edited via dedicated forms. hence, this generic resource combines the structure of biological databases with the flexibility of collaborative wikis. availability: the source code and its documentation are freely available on the mediawiki website: http://www.mediawiki.org/ wiki/extension:wikiopener.biological databases are essential tools for many biologists in all research areas. the number of these online resources is constantly increasing. indeed, as an illustration, the issue of the nucleic acids research journal dedicated to biological databases has already described about 1200 online repositories which only represent a small part of all the existing ones . maintenance is the key issue for many biological databases. indeed, with the large number of new papers published each day, it is increasingly difficult to efficiently update smaller databases, maintained by a small group of people. moreover, often small databases will stop being maintained when the project funding comes to its end or when the main curator leaves the lab. to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors.a new way to tackle this problem consists in building collaborative databases which are curated by all the people in the field wanting to share their knowledge with the community according to their area of expertise. the implementation of some of these databases is based on the mediawiki engine which is used in well-known collaborative projects, such as wikipedia. among these, in biology, we can cite the cases of wikipathways for the curation of biological pathways , proteopedia, for 3d structures of biochemical compounds or metabolomics.jp for the annotation of metabolites . mediawiki presents numerous advantages: fast and easy set up of a new collaborative database, user rights and statistics management, simple and appealing for users, etc. however, mediawiki in itself presents some limitations. first, the web site can only be based on one unique underlying database. second, classically, the data of this database are not structured and are generally represented in a free text format, which makes difficult any query different from the built-in queries. these limitations are somewhat contradictory with the current common sense practice for biological databases where the available data come from wellstructured repositories. moreover, a lot of web accessible biological databases mainly consists of a set of entries extracted from relational database tables. third, a lot of online biological databases offers bioinformatics tools to the scientific community (e.g. blast), which is a functionality not supported by the mediawiki engine. these limitations prevent from using only mediawiki to develop collaborative databases that would be comparable with current biological databases. some solutions, including semantic web strategies, have already emerged to tackle these limitations. we followed a totally different direction by developing wikiopener, an extension to mediawiki, not linked to concepts and closer to the original wikipedia look and feel.  
