systems biology bionetcad: design, simulation and experimental validation of synthetic biochemical networks motivation: synthetic biology studies how to design and construct biological systems with functions that do not exist in nature. biochemical networks, although easier to control, have been used less frequently than genetic networks as a base to build a synthetic system. to date, no clear engineering principles exist to design such cell-free biochemical networks. results: we describe a methodology for the construction of synthetic biochemical networks based on three main steps: design, simulation and experimental validation. we developed bionetcad to help users to go through these steps. bionetcad allows designing abstract networks that can be implemented thanks to compubioticdb, a database of parts for synthetic biology. bionetcad enables also simulations with the hsim software and the classical ordinary differential equations (ode). we demonstrate with a case study that bionetcad can rationalize and reduce further experimental validation during the construction of a biochemical network. availability and implementation: bionetcad is freely available at http://www.sysdiag.cnrs.fr/bionetcad. it is implemented in java and supported on ms windows. compubioticdb is freely accessible atsynthetic biology focuses on designing biological systems that are characterized by non-natural functions and wide-ranging domains of application: from bio-compatible devices , biofuels , drugs production , creation of smart therapeutic systems , to genetically modified organisms for environmental purposes . to this aim engineering principles (i.e. a rigorous methodology that includes several key steps such as specifications, design, modeling, to whom correspondence should be addressed. fabrication and quality control) are commonly used. a pioneer example is the biobricks project which focuses on the design and construction of genetic circuits and on their expression in host cells to produce a useful behavior or compound. to help in this long term goal, the registry of standard biological parts was initiated by the massachusetts institute of technology (http://partsregistry.org/ main_page) in order to conceptualize, standardize, organize in a hierarchy and register compatible dna parts. another exciting approach is the use of biological parts, such as enzymes and metabolites, as signals and compounds to reproduce logic operations like those performed by electronic circuits . given the complex nature of the biological material, most of the engineering principles have not been exploited as yet for the construction of artificial biological systems. moreover, all the current achievements are hand-made approaches that are difficult to generalize. the clear necessity to develop concepts, methods and technologies to support synthetic biology projects has been emphasized repeatedly and particularly the lack of computer-aided design (cad) tools that could facilitate the conceptualization, design and simulation of such synthetic systems . ideally, cad tools should be linked to registries of standardized, modular and re-usable biological parts, since well-defined independent parts will ease the efficient development of synthetic biological systems . several computational tools that specifically support the design of artificial gene circuits are currently available . for instance, biojade is a graphical design tool to engineer genetic systems by graphical representation of abstract components (like promoters, ribosome binding sites, coding sequences, etc.). genocad is a genetic design web tool based on context-free grammar and a library of genetic parts which allows the design of an easily downloadable dna sequence. tinkercell (; http://www.tinkercell.com) is a synthetic biology cad tool for visually constructing and analyzing biological networks. it allows the design and the simulation of biological networks from a hierarchy of parts and modules that can be defined by the user. most of the currently available cad applications for synthetic biology aim to develop genetic networks to be implemented in modified microorganisms. however, the use of host cells produces noise and not controllable behaviors, leading to poorly robustpage: 2299 22982304  
