bionetgen 2.2: advances in rule-based modeling bionetgen is an open-source software package for rule-based modeling of complex biochemical systems. version 2.2 of the software introduces numerous new features for both model specification and simulation. here, we report on these additions, discussing how they facilitate the construction, simulation and analysis of larger and more complex models than previously possible. availability and implementation: stable bionetgen releases (linux, mac os/x and windows), with documentation, are available atrule-based modeling is an approach for addressing combinatorial complexity in models of biochemical systems . instead of manually enumerating all possible species and reactions that can exist within a system, a rule-based model defines only the reactive motifs within macromolecular complexes and the interactions and modifications that involve those motifs. bionetgen is an open-source software package for constructing and simulating rule-based models . it has been used to model a variety of biological processes, including cell signaling, gene regulation and metabolism (, and references therein; see also bionetgen.org/index.php/ model_examples). models are written in a human-readable, textbased modeling language known as bngl (bionetgen language). numerous user-specified actions can be added to a bngl model file, including generating a reaction network and performing deterministic or stochastic simulations. models can also be exported to different formats, such as sbml and matlab language (the mathworks inc., natick, ma). furthermore, bionetgen interfaces with nfsim , a network-free simulator that avoids enumeration of species and reactions, which may be intractable for large models. rulebender is a). taken together, the bionetgen/nfsim/rulebender suite of tools provides powerful capabilities for rule-based modeling and simulation. until recently, however, there were several significant shortcomings: (i) bngl models were limited to mass-action kinetics; (ii) network-based stochastic simulations were limited to computationally expensive exact methods; (iii) network-free simulations were limited to fewer than a few million particles due to high memory load; (iv) there was no facility for importing models from sbml format. each of these shortcomings has been addressed in the recent bionetgen 2.2.x series of releases, as described below. additional information can be found in extensive online documentation at http://bionetgen.org/index.php/documentation (see supplementary information for specific links).bionetgen is an active, open-source project that highly encourages contributions from interested members of the modeling community. contact information, as well as numerous links to online documentation, is provided in the supplementary information. ongoing development efforts include interfacing with spatial simulators , free-energy-based modeling , and improved support for community standards (e.g. sbml-multi, sed-ml). recent independent efforts that leverage the bionetgen framework include a standard for annotation of rule-based models specified in bngl or kappa , another widely-used rule-based modeling language and bionetfit , a parameter estimation tool for models simulated using either bionetgen or nfsim.  
