biopartsbuilder: a synthetic biology tool for combinatorial assembly of biological parts combinatorial assembly of dna elements is an efficient method for building large-scale synthetic pathways from standardized, reusable components. these methods are particularly useful because they enable assembly of multiple dna fragments in one reaction, at the cost of requiring that each fragment satisfies design constraints. we developed biopartsbuilder as a biologist-friendly web tool to design biological parts that are compatible with dna combinatorial assembly methods, such as golden gate and related methods. it retrieves biological sequences, enforces compliance with assembly design standards and provides a fabrication plan for each fragment. availability and implementation: biopartsbuilder is accessible at http://public.biopartsbuilder.org and an amazon web services image is available from the aws market place (ami id: ami-508acf38). source code is released under the mit license, and available for download at https://dna synthesis technologies are improving faster than moores law, allowing the synthesis of genes, pathways , bacterial genomes , eukaryotic chromosomes and eventually entire eukaryotic genomes. many projects have individual parts as synthetic targets, such as promoters, coding domains and transcriptional terminators. while individual parts can be characterized, predicting how parts will operate together remains a challenge. rather than building a single construct, therefore, it can be more efficient to specify multiple alternatives for each part, then use massively parallel synthesis and assembly to generate a combinatorial library that can be screened for the desired function. in particular, golden gate assembly is an efficient and effective strategy to assemble combinatorial libraries . however, golden gate assembly requires a computationally challenging design step to create standardized parts that have compatible overhangs, lack pre-defined restriction sites and comply with other constraints. to streamline the process of designing standardized biological parts for golden gate assembly, we developed biopartsbuilder, which retrieves sequence data from different sources and ensures compliance with design standards that are compatible with combinatorial assembly. though there are tools for automated parts retrieval and subsequent primer design for dna assembly , the choices for golden gate assembly are limited. compared with existing golden gate designers , biopartsbuilder is distributed open source software and freely modified by both academic and commercial users. biopartsbuilder also provides a repository system that stores the designed parts and shares data within members associated with the same laboratory. biopartsbuilder therefore provides useful, new, integrated and extendable functionality for the synthetic biology community.  
