bioruby: bioinformatics software for the ruby programming language the bioruby software toolkit contains a comprehensive set of free development tools and libraries for bioinformatics and molecular biology, written in the ruby programming language.research in molecular biology depends critically on access to databases and web services. the bioruby project was conceived in 2000 to provide easy access to bioinformatics resources through free and open source tools and libraries for ruby, a dynamic open source programming language with a focus on simplicity and productivity (www.ruby-lang.org). the bioruby software components cover a wide range of functionality that is comparable to that offered by other bio projects, each targeting a different computer programming language , such as bioperl , biopython and biojava . bioruby software components are written in standard ruby, so they run on all operating systems that support ruby itself, including linux, os x, freebsd, solaris and windows. with jruby, bioruby to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. also can run inside a java virtual machine (jvm), allowing interaction with java applications and libraries, like cytoscape for visualization . both bioruby and ruby are used in bioinformatics for scripting , scripting against applications , modelling , analysis , visualization and service integration . the web development framework ruby on rails is used to create web applications and web services . bioruby provides connection functionality for major web services, such as the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg; see example in) , and the togows service, which provides a uniform web service front-end for the major bioinformatics databases . the bioruby source tree contains over 580 documented classes, 2800 public methods and 20 000 unit test assertions. source code is kept under git version control, which allows anyone to clone the source tree and start submitting. we have found that git substantially lowers the barrier for new people to start contributing to the project. in the last 2 years, the source tree has gained 100 people tracking changes and 32 people cloned the repository. the bioruby project is part of the open bioinformatics foundation, which hosts the project website and mailing list, and organizes the annual bioinformatics open source conference together with the other bio projects. a number of bioruby features support bio cross-project standards, such as the biosql relational model for interoperable storage of certain data objects or their implementation is coordinated across the bio projects, including support for the fastq and phyloxml data exchange formats.the bioruby software toolkit provides a broad range of functionality for molecular biology and easy access to bioinformaticsobject sequence, pathway, tree, bibliography reference sequence manipulation, translation, alignment, location, mapping, feature table, molecular weight, design sirna, restriction enzyme format genbank, embl, uniprot, kegg, pdb, medline, rebase, fasta, fastq, gff, msf, abif, scf, gcg, lasergene, geo soft, gene ontology tool blast, fasta, emboss, hmmer, interproscan, genscan, blat, sim4, spidey, meme, clustalw, muscle, mafft, t-coffee, probcons phylogeny phylip, paml, phyloxml, nexus, newick web service ncbi, ebi, ddbj, kegg, togows, psort, targetp, pts1, sosui, tmhmm obda biosql, biofetch, indexed flat files refer to www.bioruby.org for an explanation of all acronyms.). after installing bioruby, the bioruby command starts the interactive shell. with the bfind command, the kegg module database is queried for entries involved in the metabolic cytrate cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle. the purple and blue colours, in input and output, reflect two modules in the carbon oxidation pathway. the user loads and confirms entries by using flatparse and pathways commands. next, kegg orthology database ids are fetched and the colours are assigned to enzymes in each module. finally, kegg generates the coloured image of the cytrate cycle pathway and the image is saved locally.resources. bioruby is written in ruby, a dynamic programming language with a focus on simplicity and productivity, which targets all popular operating systems and the jvm. the bioruby project is an international and vibrant collaborative software initiative that delivers life science programming resources for those researchers who want to benefit from the productivity features of the ruby language, as well as from the larger ruby ecosystem of reusable open source components.  
