data and text mining biotextquest: a web-based biomedical text mining suite for concept discovery biotextquest combines automated discovery of significant terms in article clusters with structured knowledge annotation, via named entity recognition services, offering interactive user-friendly visualization. a tag-cloud-based illustration of terms labeling each document cluster are semantically annotated according to the biological entity, and a list of document titles enable users to simultaneously compare terms and documents of each cluster, facilitating concept association and hypothesis generation. biotextquest allows customization of analysis parameters, e.g. clustering/stemming algorithms, exclusion of documents/significant terms, to better match the biological question addressed. availability: http://biotextquest.several information retrieval tools are available to the scientific community, each attempting to analyze the large amount of biomedical information from a different perspective . most of the currently available literature mining systems are based on natural language processing, supervised machine learning or their combination . an alternative approach is the summarizing of large query outputs by document clustering, where similar documents are grouped on the basis of particular, meaningful terms . it is an unsupervised technique, thus its success does not depend on prior knowledge or domain expertise . existing biomedical literature clustering systems include clustermed (http://demos .vivisimo.com/clustermed) and pured-mcl . clustermed is a commercial software whose free version supports the clustering of at most 100 abstracts. pured-mcl is a downloadable collection of perl and r scripts, mostly addressing expert users . with biotextquest, our aim has been to provide researchers with a user-friendly web application that enables online queries for defining corpora of biomedical abstracts followed by document clustering and visualization. biotextquest is an application that offers an array of visualization tools for efficient navigation among biomedical records, and concept extraction. it also supports the depiction of term associations within clusters and can be easily customized. in the following sections, we describe the biotextquest architecture and demonstrate its functionality, based on a reworked query example of a drosophila developmental pattern presented in the original textquest publication .we describe biotextquest, an online text mining system, enabling concept discovery from the biomedical literature recorded in pubmed via a clustering-based procedure. further exploration of literature information is facilitated by intuitive graphical depictions of biologically relevant terms and interactive re-/subclustering capabilities. biotextquest is designed with simplicity for end-users, while advanced options enable further analyses.  
