sequence analysis biovlab-mmia-ngs: microrna–mrna integrated analysis using high-throughput sequencing data motivation: it is now well established that micrornas (mirnas) play a critical role in regulating gene expression in a sequence-specific manner, and genome-wide efforts are underway to predict known and novel mirna targets. however, the integrated mirnamrna analysis remains a major computational challenge, requiring powerful informatics systems and bioinformatics expertise. results: the objective of this study was to modify our widely recognized web server for the integrated mrnamirna analysis (mmia) and its subsequent deployment on the amazon cloud (biovlab-mmia) to be compatible with high-throughput platforms, including next-generation sequencing (ngs) data (e.g. rna-seq). we developed a new version called the biovlab-mmia-ngs, deployed on both amazon cloud and on a high-performance publicly available server called maha. by using ngs data and integrating various bio-informatics tools and databases, biovlab-mmia-ngs offers several advantages. first, sequencing data is more accurate than array-based methods for determining mirna expression levels. second, potential novel mirnas can be detected by using various computational methods for characterizing mirnas. third, because mirna-mediated gene regulation is due to hybridization of an mirna to its target mrna, sequencing data can be used to identify many-to-many relationship between mirnas and target genes with high accuracy. availability and implementation: http://epigenomics.snu.ac.kr/ biovlab_mmia_ngs/mirnas are small (1924 nt) single-stranded non-coding rnas that regulate gene expression by specific targeting mechanism to mrna molecules via complementary sequence pairing. due to their critical implication in post-transcriptional regulation and impact on the developmental process, a number of (microrna) mirnamrna integrated analysis tools have been developed. magia uses mirna mrna expression profile matrices as input and provides gene set analysis and mirna target prediction. diana-mirextra accepts gene sets and computationally compares mirna-associated motifs. mirgator (provides pre-compiled public resources with browser interface to navigate data. however, several limitations exist for these and other existing tools, including the following: (i) support only microarray or sequencing data but not both; (ii) require preprocessing or manual data compiling step; (iii) demand cumbersome installation procedures with interdependent tools and databases; (iv) run on limited computational resources that are not capable of handling large datasets. here we present the next-generation sequencing (ngs) data-compatible biovlabmmia-ngs, an updated version of our array-based mirna mrna integrated analysis system mrnamirna analysis (mmia) (3 features workflow: in biovlab-mmia-ngs, the integrated analysis workflow begins with extracting differentially and (or) significantly expressed mirnas (demir) as in our previous published methodology . to identify mirnas and their expression level, we adopted the mirdeep (, and the quantifier module measures expression levels based on read counts. quality control and adaptor clipping processes are performed if necessary. significance of expressed mirnas is tested and visualized by deseq based on read count measures. differentially expressed mrnas/genes (deg)s are extracted by using the tophatcufflinks pipeline with junction aligning based on the rpkm measure. statistical significance is visualized by cummerbund . for microarray data, degs and demirs are detected by limma package . once degs and demirs are extracted, the next step, mirnamrna combined analysis, is performed. for the combined analysis, we used mirna target prediction algorithms/databases, targetscan , pita , mirsvr and pmted , as well as negative correlations between mirnas and mrnas, to extract degs targeted by demirs. gene set analysis is performed using extracted degs. gene sets are automatically submitted to david to provide functional annotation and clustering, biocarta and kegg pathways mapping, and disease association.shows biovlab-mmia-ngs workflow.user interface: biovlab-mmia-ngs keeps the user-friendly web-based interface for sample information, analysis options and parameters, and computing nodes. to provide extended analysis interface, we integrated igv for visualizing the alignment results with zoom in/out functionality with annotation tracks and cytoscape for illustrating identified mirnamrna target networks. by using jaws, igv and cytoscape automatically visualize the results; manual installation and data handling processes are not required. a web page summarizing all the results helps the users to view and further investigate the data.  
