systems biology bipace 2d—graph-based multiple alignment for comprehensive 2d gas chromatography-mass spectrometry motivation: comprehensive 2d gas chromatography-mass spec-trometry is an established method for the analysis of complex mixtures in analytical chemistry and metabolomics. it produces large amounts of data that require semiautomatic, but preferably automatic handling. this involves the location of significant signals (peaks) and their matching and alignment across different measurements. to date, there exist only a few openly available algorithms for the retention time alignment of peaks originating from such experiments that scale well with increasing sample and peak numbers, while providing reliable alignment results. results: we describe bipace 2d, an automated algorithm for retention time alignment of peaks from 2d gas chromatography-mass spectrometry experiments and evaluate it on three previously published datasets against the mspa, swpa and guineu algorithms. we also provide a fourth dataset from an experiment studying the h 2 production of two different strains of chlamydomonas reinhardtii that is available from the metabolights database together with the experimental protocol, peak-detection results and manually curated multiple peak alignment for future comparability with newly developed algorithms. availability and implementation: bipace 2d is contained in the freely available maltcms framework, version 1.3, hosted at http://maltcms.sf. net, under the terms of the l-gpl v3 or eclipse open source licenses. the software used for the evaluation along with the underlying datasets is available at the same location. the c.reinhardtii dataset is freely available atcomprehensive 2d gas chromatography (gc gc) has developed into a de facto standard analytical technique to resolve complex mixtures of volatile chemical compounds in various areas of research. it is often used for the separation and characterization of petrol and gasoline mixtures . it couples two chromatographic columns, with possibly different characteristics, to achieve an improved separation of complex mixtures over one-dimensional gas chromatography. however, identification of analytes in gc gc with a one-dimensional detector such as a flame ionization detector is often limited to the use of retention index calculations and can be improved by coupling a mass spectrometer to the chromatograph (gc gc-ms). in the field of metabolomics, which studies the multitude of organic molecules produced, modified and consumed by living organisms (metabolites), both gc gc and gc gc-ms have been successfully used to characterize and quantify volatile metabolites in different organisms . the variability of retention times (rts) in both gc gc and gc gc-ms requires sophisticated algorithms for automatic alignment of corresponding analyte signals between different samples. additionally, the size and number of acquired sample data pose a significant challenge to automated methods and effectively prevent large-scale manual intervention by human experts . preprocessing of gc gc-ms data involves the filtering and noise reduction of the raw signal, the localization, deconvolution, integration and normalization of analyte signals of interest (peaks) , as well as downstream matching of peaks to create a multiple alignment of related signals from different samples. then, statistical methods like analysis of variance, principal components analysis , partial least squares and variants thereof may be applied to compare samples for significant differences and similarities within and between experimental factor groups. a more complete overview of current data processing methods and programs for gc gc and gc gc-ms data may be found in. in this article, a novel automated method for the multiple alignment of gc gc-ms peaks is introduced: bidirectional best-hit peak assignment and clique extension for 2d chromatograms (bipace 2d), which is based on comparing peak mass spectra and rts in two dimensions between a large number of samples.  
