bismark: a flexible aligner and methylation caller for bisulfite-seq applications a combination of bisulfite treatment of dna and high-throughput sequencing (bs-seq) can capture a snapshot of a cells epigenomic state by revealing its genome-wide cytosine methylation at single base resolution. bismark is a flexible tool for the time-efficient analysis of bs-seq data which performs both read mapping and methylation calling in a single convenient step. its output discriminates between cytosines in cpg, chg and chh context and enables bench scientists to visualize and interpret their methylation data soon after the sequencing run is completed. availability and implementation: bismark is released under the gnu gplv3+ licence. the source code is freely available from www.bioinformatics.bbsrc.ac.uk/projects/bismark/.cytosine methylation of dna serves as an important epigenetic mechanism to control gene expression, silencing or genomic imprinting both during development and in the adult . aberrant methylation has been associated with a variety of diseases, including cancer . current massively parallel sequencing methods to study dna methylation include enrichment-based methods such as methylated dna immunoprecipitation (medip-seq) or methylated dna binding domain sequencing (mbd-seq), as well as direct sequencing of sodium bisulfite-treated dna (bs-seq) [methods compared in (. bisulfite treatment of dna leaves methylated cytosines unaffected, while non-methylated cytosines are converted into uracils. subsequent pcr amplification converts these uracils into thymines. for any given genomic locus, bisulfite treatment and subsequent pcr amplification give rise to four individual strands of dna which can potentially all end up in a sequencing experiment (supplementary material). mapping of bisulfite-treated sequences to a reference genome constitutes a significant computational challenge due to the combination of: (i) the reduced complexity of the dna code; (ii) up to four dna strands to be analysed; and (iii) the fact that each read can theoretically exist in all possible methylation states. even though there are a number of excellent short read mapping to whom correspondence should be addressed. tools available, e.g. bowtie , these do not perform bisulfite mapping themselves.the methylation state of positions involving cytosines is determined by comparing the read sequence with the corresponding genomic sequence. depending on the strand a read mapped against this can involve looking for c-to-t (as shown here) or g-to-a substitutions.a requires library to be constructed with an initial sequence tag . na: not available. data required a lot of post-processing and computational knowledge. bismark aims to generate a bisulfite mapping output that can be readily explored by bench scientists. thus, in addition to the alignment process bismark determines the methylation state of each cytosine position in the read . dna methylation in mammals is thought to occur predominantly at cpg dinucleotides; however, a certain amount of non-cpg methylation has been shown in embryonic stem cells . in plants, methylation is quite common in both the symmetric cpg or chg, and asymmetric chh context (whereby h can be either a, t or c) (  
