genome analysis blastgraph: a comparative genomics tool based on blast and graph algorithms blastgraph is an interactive java program for comparative genome analysis based on basic local alignment search tool (blast), graph clustering and data visualization. the software generates clusters of sequences of multiple genomes from all-to-all blast results and visualizes the results in graph plots together with related information such as sequence features, gene conservation and similarity relationships. pruning algorithms are used to reduce results to more meaningful subclusters. subsequent analyses can then be conducted based on the predicted clusters, including gene content, genome phylogenetics and gene gain and loss. availability and implementation: https://github.com/bigwiv/sequence analysis, especially comparative genomics, often starts with a sequence similarity search using standard tools such as basic local alignment search tool (blast) or blat , and homology/orthology detection and clustering using additional tools such as blastclust (in the blastall package), clustering database at high identity with tolerance (cd-hit) , inparanoid, orthomcl (markov cluster algorithm), eukaryotic orthologous groups (kog) and tribmcl . nevertheless, blast remains the most widely used method and is central to the majority of associated secondary packages. additionally, although there are many clustering tools based on blast and graph clustering algorithms, including blastclust using single-linkage clustering, orthomcl and tribmcl using the markov cluster algorithm (mcl) , these command line tools provide only a simple clustering result. currently, there is no single integrated tool available for post clustering analyses, such as phyletic pattern study, genome level phylogenetics or gene gain and loss analysis. we have developed blastgraph for the generation and visualization of clusters as a graph with accompanying statistics, evaluation metrics and associated background information. the user can check the coherence of a cluster, identify useful relationships (such as indels and fusion events) or gene types and interactively split and edit the cluster. this is especially useful when remote homologies with low similarities exist among sequences. thus, we present a user-friendly workflow (supplementary data s1) for integrated comparative genomics analyses.  
