genome analysis bless 2: accurate, memory-efficient and fast error correction method the most important features of error correction tools for sequencing data are accuracy, memory efficiency and fast runtime. the previous version of bless was highly memory-efficient and accurate, but it was too slow to handle reads from large genomes. we have developed a new version of bless to improve runtime and accuracy while maintaining a small memory usage. the new version , called bless 2, has an error correction algorithm that is more accurate than bless, and the algorithm has been parallelized using hybrid mpi and openmp programming. bless 2 was compared with five top-performing tools, and it was found to be the fastest when it was executed on two computing nodes using mpi, with each node containing twelve cores. also, bless 2 showed at least 11 higher gain while retaining the memory efficiency of the previous version for large genomes.correcting errors in sequencing reads is a time-consuming and memory-intensive process. the occurrences of patterns (k-mers in many tools) in reads should be counted, and patterns with a small number of occurrences have to be replaced with ones having a large number of occurrences. storing patterns requires a lot of memory, and searching for alternative patterns takes a long time for large genomes. therefore, memory efficiency and fast runtime are as important as accuracy in error correction methods. to provide a memory-efficient error correction method, bless, which uses a bloom filter as the main data structure, was developed . while bless could generate accurate results with a much smaller amount of memory than previous tools, it was too slow to be applied to reads from large genomes. recently, some new error correction methods that can correct errors in a large dataset in a short period of time have been developed . however, to the best of our knowledge, none of the present tools satisfy all the three constraints (i.e. memory efficiency, runtime and accuracy). to address the three requirements, we have developed a new version of bless. in bless 2, the accuracy of the error correction algorithm has been further improved over that of bless by adding new algorithmic steps. bless 2 corrects errors even in solid k-mers, k-mers that exist multiple times in reads, using the quality score distribution of input reads. solid k-mers were originally treated as error-free k-mers. there is also a new algorithm introduced in bless 2 for trimming reads where errors cannot be corrected or corrections are ambiguous. in addition to quality improvements, the overall execution has been parallelized using hybrid mpi and openmp programming, which make bless 2 the fastest tool when executed on multiple computing nodes. all these improvements were made without hurting the memory efficiency of the predecessor.  
