genetics and population analysis bluesnp: r package for highly scalable genome-wide association studies using hadoop clusters computational workloads for genome-wide association studies (gwas) are growing in scale and complexity outpacing the capabilities of single-threaded software designed for personal computers. the bluesnp r package implements gwas statistical tests in the r programming language and executes the calculations across computer clusters configured with apache hadoop, a de facto standard framework for distributed data processing using the mapreduce formalism. bluesnp makes computationally intensive analyses, such as estimating empirical p-values via data permutation, and searching for expression quantitative trait loci over thousands of genes, feasible for large genotypephenotype datasets. availability and implementation:depending on the study design and statistical methodology, gwas statistics can be handily computed on a personal computer, or require substantially greater computational resources. usually, study designs and statistical methodologies that entail massive computation are avoided for practical reasons. yet, there are times when intensive computation can not be avoided. an example of a computationally demanding task is estimating empirical p-values via data permutation when a test statistic does not follow a standard distribution. up to 10 8 permutations of the data can be required to assess genome-wide significance, a massive computational burden. another example is in the analysis of expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) study designs with tens of thousands of gene expression phenotypes . the superb genetics software, plink , is an open-source whole genome association analysis program written in c that is extremely fast and efficient at computing commonplace association statistics (e.g. allelic test, linear regression, etc.). however, it can be a logistical challenge to run plink on computer clusters, manually partitioning large jobs into sub-parts and stitching-together potentially thousands of output files.  
