bmix: probabilistic modeling of occurring substitutions in par-clip data motivation: photoactivatable ribonucleoside-enhanced cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (par-clip) is an experimental method based on next-generation sequencing for identifying the rna interaction sites of a given protein. the method deliberately inserts t-to-c substitutions at the rna-protein interaction sites, which provides a second layer of evidence compared with other clip methods. however, the experiment includes several sources of noise which cause both low-frequency errors and spurious high-frequency alterations. therefore, rigorous statistical analysis is required in order to separate true t-to-c base changes, following cross-linking, from noise. so far, most of the existing par-clip data analysis methods focus on discarding the low-frequency errors and rely on high-frequency substitutions to report binding sites, not taking into account the possibility of high-frequency false positive substitutions. results: here, we introduce bmix, a new probabilistic method which explicitly accounts for the sources of noise in par-clip data and distinguishes cross-link induced t-to-c substitutions from low and high-frequency erroneous alterations. we demonstrate the superior speed and accuracy of our method compared with existing approaches on both simulated and real, publicly available human datasets. availability and implementation: the model is freely accessible within the bmix toolbox at www. cbg.bsse.ethz.ch/software/bmix, available for matlab and r.rna molecules interact with proteins and form ribonucleoprotein complexes actively involved in a plethora of essential biological processes such as translational regulation, alternative splicing or rna transport . a well-known example of rna-binding proteins (rbps) consists of members of the argonaute family, components of the rna-induced silencing complex (risc), which bind to diverse small rna molecules and regulate gene silencing .report 1542 rbps in humans, many of these having been found dysregulated in diseases including cancer . therefore, characterizing the interactions between rna and rbps represents an important step towards understanding rna function. high-throughput sequencing technology allows querying the binding sites of a specific rbp in a transcriptome-wide fashion . one of the recently developed high-throughput sequencing-based experimental v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com protocols aiming to identify the binding sites of rbps throughout the transcriptome is photo-activatable ribonucleoside-enhanced crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (par-clip) . according to this method , a synthetic photoactivatable ribonucleoside such as 4s u (4-thiouridine) or, less commonly, 6s g (6-thioguanosine) is integrated into the rna of cultured cells. upon exposure to ultraviolet (uv) light, cross-linking of rbps to rna occurs. the cross-linked rna-rbp pairs are subsequently isolated using immunoprecipitation with an antibody targeting the protein of interest, and the rna fragment is retrieved upon protein digestion. a complementary dna (cdna) sequencing library is generated by reverse complementing the rna fragments. due to the incorporated nucleoside, systematic t-to-c (for 4s u) or g-to-a (for 6s g) substitutions appear in the cdna library at the interaction sites . therefore, par-clip brings the advantage of having an additional layer of evidence by introducing specific base changes at the binding sites. par-clip data are characterized by prevalent t-to-c substitutions observed at different mismatch frequencies . however, compared with rna-seq, par-clip has been observed to also introduce a large number of other substitutions, different from t-to-c, notably at low and high mismatch frequency (see section 3). this indicates the presence of noise and contamination in the par-clip procedure which can as well introduce erroneous t-to-c substitutions, with high potential to be mistaken for true cross-link alterations. therefore, of great importance in parclip data analysis is discarding the low-frequency sequencing errors, as well as high-frequency spurious substitutions. currently, there is a handful of methods available for analyzing par-clip data, trying to identify the rna-rbp-binding sites using various techniques, such as kernel density estimation , non-parametric mixture models , bayesian hidden markov models and binomial tests . some of the available methods focus on analyzing data from one specific type of rbp, such as, e.g. ago2 par-clip data . however, the non-cross-link, high-frequency substitutions are usually reported within high-confidence-binding sites by most of these methods. to the best of our knowledge, only one of the currently existing parclip analysis methods, namely wavcluster , accounts for these substitutions.show that cross-link loci reside in moderately altered sites and, within the wavcluster package, use a mixture model based on the relative substitution frequencies to exclude sites with too low or high nucleotide substitution rates. however, the method is not widely used due to complex implementation and long execution time. additionally, the approach underlying the wavcluster package does not explicitly model read counts within the genome and eventually uses a fixed cutoff of the substitution frequencies to select high-confidence t-to-c alterations, which leads to a higher error rate, especially in low-coverage regions. here, we present a novel probabilistic approach, based on a constrained three-component binomial mixture, to explicitly describe substitution counts observed in par-clip data. the method, coined bmix, uses a maximum likelihood approach to estimate the substitution rates induced by parclip and separates both low-and high-frequency erroneous t-to-c alterations from the true cross-link substitutions . we perform an exhaustive comparison of bmix to existing approaches and show its increased performance in terms of speed, accuracy and consistency on synthetic and real data.we validated our model on synthetic and real human par-clip data and assessed its performance compared with paralyzer and wavcluster methods (see section 2).  
