structural bioinformatics boctopus: improved topology prediction of transmembrane β barrel proteins motivation: transmembrane barrel proteins (tmbs) are found in the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, chloroplast and mitochondria. they play a major role in the translocation machinery, pore formation, membrane anchoring and ion exchange. tmbs are also promising targets for antimicrobial drugs and vaccines. given the difficulty in membrane protein structure determination, computational methods to identify tmbs and predict the topology of tmbs are important. results: here, we present boctopus; an improved method for the topology prediction of tmbs by employing a combination of support vector machines (svms) and hidden markov models (hmms). the svms and hmms account for local and global residue preferences, respectively. based on a 10-fold cross-validation test, boctopus performs better than all existing methods, reaching a q3 accuracy of 87. further, boctopus predicted the correct number of strands for 83 proteins in the dataset. boctopus might also help in reliable identification of tmbs by using it as an additional filter to methods specialized in this task. availability: boctopus is freely available as a web server at: http://boctopus.cbr.su.se/. the datasets used for training and evaluations are also available from this site.two types of transmembrane proteins are known to exist, -helical membrane proteins and transmembrane barrel proteins (tmbs). the former class has been the major focus of computational methods, as they are known to constitute 2030 of a typical proteome . however, tmbs are worthy of attention as they play an important role in the translocation machinery of both inner and outer membrane proteins in bacteria, chloroplast and mitochondria. moreover, tmbs are involved in transport of molecules, voltage gating, membrane anchoring, pore formation and are also candidate molecular targets for development of antimicrobial drugs and vaccines . however, the number to whom correspondence should be addressed. of solved tmb structures in pdb is limited, since they are difficult to crystalize; consequently, better computational methods for the topology prediction of tmbs are needed. such a predicted topology can function as a template for experimental investigations and can further aid in elucidating the structure and function of putative tmbs. tmbs typically consist of a central pore region made up of anti-parallel strands and residues in the strands follow a strict dyad repeat pattern . the general construction principles of tmbs have been employed for the topology prediction and genome-wide identification of tmbs. however, the low number of known tmb structures and a less prominent hydrophobicity profile pose problems in the development of computational methods for the identification and topology prediction of tmbs. the computational methods in the realm of tmbs can be divided into two parts (i) methods that aim to identify tmbs from genomic data and (ii) methods that predict the tmb topology assuming that the given sequence is a putative tmb. the first group consists of a variety of methods including methods that combine statistical propensities and c-terminal pattern identification , empirical scores , k-nearest neighbor methods , svms , neural networks , hidden markov models (hmm) , amino acid composition and secondary structure element alignments . the hhomp method for the identification of tmbs employs hmmprofile comparison and is based on the observation that almost all -barrel omp have a common ancestry . methods aiming at the prediction of topologies include hmmbased methods such as pred-tmbb , tmbhmm and proftmb , svm-based methods such as tmbetapred-rbf , neural network-based methods such as tmbpro and methods based on statistical potentials such as transfold . proftmb , tmbeta-net and pred-tmbb also predict the topology of the identified tmbs. a comparison and evaluation carried out indicated that hmm-based methods outperform methods based on other types of machine learning . here, we present an improved topology predictor for tmbs named boctopus. boctopus is based on the ideas used in twopage: 517 516522  
