borrowing strength: a likelihood ratio test for related sparse signals motivation: cancer biology is a field where the complexity of the phenomena battles against the availability of data. often only a few observations per signal source, i.e. genes, are available. such scenarios are becoming increasingly more relevant as modern sensing technologies generally have no trouble in measuring lots of channels, but where the number of subjects, such as patients or samples, is limited. in statistics, this problem falls under the heading large p, small n. moreover, in such situations the use of asymptotic analytical results should generally be mistrusted. results: we consider two cancer datasets, with the aim to mine the activity of functional groups of genes. we propose a hierarchical model with two layers in which the individual signals share a common variance component. a likelihood ratio test is defined for the difference between two collections of corresponding signals. the small number of observations requires a careful consideration of the bias of the statistic, which is corrected through an explicit bartlett correction. the test is validated on monte carlo simulations, which show improved detection of differences compared with other methods. in a leukaemia study and a cancerous fibroblast cell line, we find that the method also works better in practice, i.e. it gives a richer picture of the underlying biology.in this article, we develop a likelihood ratio (lr) test that aims to detect small concordant changes in a collection of related signals under two experimental conditions. under certain conditions, it can be shown that the lr test is the most powerful test in many practical testing problems and potentially offers deeper insight into complex phenomena, e.g. the biological processes underlying cancer development. exact calculation, however, is not always easy. previous work used lr tests for evaluating changes in a single signal in the area of microarray analysis. our approach here differs from theirs by considering multiple concordant changes. suggested to use hotellings t 2 statistic for this purpose, but this is only a viable alternative when the number of observations exceeds the number of channels. this is to whom correspondence should be addressed. in many modern genomic applications not the case. alternatives are ancova approaches , but compared with the hotelling t 2 test they lose some power for correlated channels. our approach is further motivated by recent work that developed a global gene expression estimation method for testing association with clinical outcome , although that test either makes asymptotic assumptions for calculating significance, which may be too liberal, or uses permutation, which may not be optimal. the test we propose takes into account the magnitude and uncertainty of the changes. in the field of microarray analyses, two-stage methods have been proposed that look for over-represented functional classes, e.g. as defined by gene ontology (go), among differentially expressed genes . although these methods are very powerful and simple, they tend to look at clearly differentially expressed genes among which patterns are to be found. these methods are exploratory in nature and often require an arbitrary cutoff for the second stage analyses. our method is more a higher level exploratory method, which is more sensitive to concordant small changes and does not require arbitrary dichotomies.this section applies the method both to simulated and real data. it is important to note that the computational performance of the method does not deteriorate with larger number of observations or channels. in fact, the numerical maximization described in section 3.1 converges slower with a small number of channels, since the optimum is more likely obtained for a degenerate channel variance (, ), which is computationally more expensive.  
