braker1: unsupervised rna-seq-based genome annotation with genemark-et and augustus motivation: gene finding in eukaryotic genomes is notoriously difficult to automate. the task is to design a work flow with a minimal set of tools that would reach state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of species. genemark-et is a gene prediction tool that incorporates rna-seq data into unsupervised training and subsequently generates ab initio gene predictions. augustus is a gene finder that usually requires supervised training and uses information from rna-seq reads in the prediction step. complementary strengths of genemark-et and augustus provided motivation for designing a new combined tool for automatic gene prediction. results: we present braker1, a pipeline for unsupervised rna-seq-based genome annotation that combines the advantages of genemark-et and augustus. as input, braker1 requires a genome assembly file and a file in bam-format with spliced alignments of rna-seq reads to the genome. first, genemark-et performs iterative training and generates initial gene structures. second, augustus uses predicted genes for training and then integrates rna-seq read information into final gene predictions. in our experiments, we observed that braker1 was more accurate than maker2 when it is using rna-seq as sole source for training and prediction. braker1 does not require pre-trained parameters or a separate expert-prepared training step. availability and implementation: braker1 is available for download attranscriptome sequencing data, rna-seq reads, aligned to a genome sequence have great potential to improve the accuracy of structural genome annotation: spliced alignments may indicate intron positions, and coverage increase and decrease along genomic sequence may indicate locations of exon-noncoding region borders. nevertheless, rna-seq coverage alone is no reliable indicator of protein coding regions . the prediction of protein coding regions in genomes is often accomplished by tools that use statistical models. some gene prediction tools can additionally use rna-seq to improve prediction accuracy.statistical models used in gene prediction usually require a training step to identify species specific parameters. for many tools, including augustus, the training has to be performed on a set of example genes. in the past, training sets have often been produced with help of expressed sequence tags (ests) or protein data, and sometimes have been subject to validation by experts. with the rapidly growing number of novel sequenced genomes, this approach becomes infeasible. fast and fully automated training methods, ideally using the nowadays often available rna-seq data, can provide significant advantages. in principle, rna-seq reads can be assembled into longer contigs; such contigs can be used similarly to est data both in training of gene finders and in the prediction step. one of the tools that follow this idea is the maker2 pipeline . however, the rna-seq genome annotation assessment project (rgasp) has shown that transcriptome assembly is prone to errors. to avoid transferring assembly errors into gene prediction, it is advantageous to use the transcript information contained in unassembled mapped reads. we have developed braker1, a pipeline that combines the complementary strengths of two gene prediction tools: genemarket incorporates unassembled rna-seq reads into unsupervised training and subsequently generates ab initio gene predictions. a subset of genes predicted by genemark-et are used to train augustus . augustus lacks an unsupervised training procedure and requires a good training set. additionally, augustus incorporates information derived from mapped unassembled rna-seq reads into the prediction step; in rgasp, augustus was one of the most accurate tools for predicting protein coding genes with rna-seq support. we report accuracy results for braker1 on four model organisms and compare to the accuracy of maker2. recently,published codingquarry, a pipeline for rna-seq assembly supported training and gene prediction, but recommend its application only to fungi. therefore, we include codingquarry into the comparison on schizosaccharomyces pombe.  
