genome analysis breakpointer: using local mapping artifacts to support sequence breakpoint discovery from single-end reads we developed breakpointer, a fast algorithm to locate breakpoints of structural variants (svs) from single-end reads produced by next-generation sequencing. by taking advantage of local non-uniform read distribution and misalignments created by svs, breakpointer scans the alignment of single-end reads to identify regions containing potential breakpoints. the detection of such breakpoints can indicate insertions longer than the read length and svs located in repetitve regions which might be missd by other methods. thus, breakpointer complements existing methods to locate svs from single-end reads. availability: https://github.com/ruping/breakpointeridentifying structural variants (svs) from short sequencing reads remains challenging. existing next-generation sequencing (ngs)based methods for sv detection are primarily based on the analysis of paired-end reads (pe) assuming that deviations from the expected mapping distance are caused by svs . alternatively, to characterize svs from single-end reads (se), split-read methods can be adopted to generate pseudo pe . however, the short length of the artificial pe limits the mappability and the size of detectable insertions (up to medium size). alternative se-based methods are needed to facilitate the discovery of breakpoints of longer insertions and svs located in repetitive regions. svs usually cause specific mapping artifacts in the vicinity of the sv boundaries. reads slightly crossing the breakpoint of an sv can be mapped only if they contain a few bases of the variant (depending on the allowed edit distance). this case usually leads to consistent misalignments next to the breakpoint. such misalignments have already been used to clean snp calls or to determine the regions for local realignment . in contrast, reads spanning the breakpoint will be unmappable. consequently, on the left or right side of the sv boundary, fewer read alignments will start or end, respectively (and supplementary). our tool breakpointer locates sv breakpoints by analyzing both to whom correspondence should be addressed. misalignment artifacts and local non-uniform read distribution created by svs.  
