a co-module approach for elucidating drug–disease associations and revealing their molecular basis motivation: understanding how drugs and diseases are associated in the molecular level is of critical importance to unveil disease mechanisms and treatments. until recently, few studies attempt end to discover important gene modules shared by both drugs and diseases. results: here, we propose a novel presentation of druggene disease relationship, a co-module, which is characterized by closely related drugs, diseases and genes. we first define a network-based gene closeness profile to relate drug to disease. then, we develop a bayesian partition method to identify druggene disease co-modules underlying the gene closeness data. genes share similar notable patterns with respect not only to the drugs but also the diseases within a co-module. simulations show that our method, comcipher, achieves a better performance compared with a popular co-module detection method, ppa. we apply comcipher to a set consisting of 723 drugs, 275 diseases and 1442 genes and demonstrate that our co-module approach is able to identify new drugdisease associations and highlight their molecular basis. disease co-morbidity emerges as well. three co-modules are further illustrated in which new drug applications, including the anti-cancer metastasis activity of an anti-asthma drug pranlukast, and a cardiovascular stress-testing agent arbutamine for obesity, as well as potential side-effects, e.g. hypotension for triamterene, are computationally identified. availability: the compiled version of comcipher can be found atdrugs achieve their therapeutic functions by targeting gene products relevant to an abnormal state. on the one hand, drugs do not always follow a one gene, one drug, one disease paradigm . such promiscuities result in unanticipated actions, some of which may lead to serious side-effects ; others may induce drug new applications and therefore guide drug to whom correspondence should be addressed. repositioning . on the other hand, complex human diseases are often multi-factor-driven, involving dysfunctions of dozens of genes . identifying such disease-relevant gene modules helps us decipher how an abnormal phenotype is induced and therefore in turn offers opportunities for the development of new therapies . with this understanding, it is of great importance to investigate how drugs exert their activities directly or indirectly via those gene modules, how pathophenotypes are influenced by the abnormality of gene modules, and most notably, how drugs and disease phenotypes are associated on the basis of gene modules . however, few analyses address these questions together in a systematic view.initiatively characterized different tumor types by predefined gene modules using gene expression data. however, their method is largely dependent on the prior knowledge of gene modules and does not involve drugs.connected gene modules with human cancers by defining a module map, which was shown to guide new disease therapies.demonstrated that common functional gene modules underlie similar diseases, and highlighted the therapeutic importance of those modules.proposed a network-based approach to discover new drug indications by connecting disease pairs sharing therapies. novel drug uses were predicted. recently,developed a computational method, predict, to identify drug disease associations and predict new drug indications. a 0.9 area under the curve (auc) demonstrates the power of their method. nevertheless, few existing studies attempt to identify gene modules important both in drugs and diseases. in current study, we aim to investigate drugdisease associations and their shared gene modules on a network basis. it has been widely shown that the modularity of genes can be characterized by a tightly interconnected subnetwork of their products in the proteinprotein interaction network or the interactome network . in our previous studies, we proposed a measurement termed gene closeness to describe such interconnectedness and then used it to predict drug targets and disease genes . the gene closeness is calculated according to known drugtarget (diseasegene) relations as well as the shortest distance in the interactome network. a gene whose products is more highly interconnected in interactome network with drug targets (disease gene products) receives a higher closeness score with respect to that drug (disease) (section 4). here, we use such a closeness index to define a gene closeness profile to relate drugs to diseases, and then identify important gene modules that both tightly interconnect with drug targets and disease genes from this profile.we selected fda-approved promiscuous drugs with multiple targets and diseases with multiple susceptibility genes in current study for co-module analysis. as we were also interested in human cancers, antineoplastic drugs and cancers were included. finally, 723 drugs and 275 diseases from the drugbank and online mendelian inheritance in man (omim) databases, respectively, were selected as our candidate set. the interactome network data was an integration of five protein interaction databases (section 4). we mapped drug targets and disease genes onto the integrated interactome network, generating 3702 drugtarget and 877 diseasegene relations.in this study, we propose a novel interpretation of drugdisease relationships and seek to decipher their molecular basis by proposing the druggenedisease co-module using computational means. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to present and investigate druggene-disease relationships using functionally related co-modules. then, we develop a bayesian partition method to identify druggenedisease co-modules from gene closeness data. the simulation study demonstrates the superior performance of comcipher in co-module detection. as discussed, modular presentation of biological data has several advantages. first, it can discover subtle associations between biological elements that are too weak to detect by considering all of their features as a whole , which also was noted in microarray data analysis . second, the complex interconnections between elements suggest that modular measurements are more robust than treating each element individually . the approach used in the current study possesses several merits. first, we find that drugs and diseases in the 86 co-modules tend to share targets or disease genes and may therefore serve as another way to identify new drug targets and disease genes. moreover, disease co-morbidities also tend to enrich in co-modules, suggesting the potential application of co-modules in disease diagnosis and prognosis. second, compared with ppa method, the indicator variables used in comcipher provide a relatively clear structure of co-modules, which facilitates the interpretation of results. moreover, simulations show that as long as m is sufficiently large comcipher can identify not only the real co-modules but also pure drug and disease modules, which could be missed by ppa. these single dimensional modules serve to find common molecular interconnections between different drugs or diseases and thus are also of value. third, those unselected co-modules in which no significant drugdisease associations are found are still useful. on the one hand, the incompleteness in current knowledge might suggest unknown associations existing in those co-modules. on the other hand, even though prior knowledge indicates no association in a co-module, understanding why those network-related drug disease relations do not tend to yield associations may provide new insights into the mechanistic understanding of drugdisease relations and generate new hypotheses . some aspects of the implementation of comcipher are worth mentioning. although the mcmc method theoretically guarantees that the markov chain will converge to the target distribution, because the number of iterations is always finite, it is possible that the chain will be trapped in a local mode. we handled this problem by adopting parallel tempering with multiple chains under different temperatures and with different initial points. still, the chain must be monitored carefully to determine its burn-in state and convergence. moreover, when the dimension becomes very large, the chain will move very slowly. therefore, we only focused on a small subset of genes in this study, though this may make us lose some useful information. in addition, if we choose m larger, comcipher tends to break data  
