genome analysis bwtool: a tool for bigwig files bigwig files are a compressed, indexed, binary format for genome-wide signal data for calculations (e.g. gc percent) or experiments (e.g. chip-seq/rna-seq read depth). bwtool is a tool designed to read bigwig files rapidly and efficiently, providing functionality for extracting data and summarizing it in several ways, globally or at specific regions. additionally, the tool enables the conversion of the positions of signal data from one genome assembly to another, also known as lifting. we believe bwtool can be useful for the analyst frequently working with bigwig data, which is becoming a standard format to represent functional signals along genomes. the article includes supplementary examples of running the software. availability and implementation: the c source code is freely available under the gnu public license v3 atfor many laboratories, it has become an everyday task to generate or to analyze genome-wide data such as chip-seq read depth. to facilitate visualization of these data with tools such as the ucsc genome browser or ensembl , or for further processing, it is common to use the wiggle (wig) file format. this format is not without a few disadvantages, principally that the files can become large, particularly when care is not taken to store the data at a minimally necessary decimal precision. another disadvantage is that wiggles exist in three different forms, the choice of which depends on the sparseness of the data. programs that expect wig data do not always allow all three formats interchangeably. the bigwig format was created as a means for the ucsc genome browser to access real-valued signal data remotely hosted on http/ftp servers worldwide. the format is binary, compressed, indexed and allows random access to directly query a subset of the larger dataset. in general, programs designed to read bigwig files should treat remote urls of bigwigs the same as they would treat urls local to that computer. bigwig uses an indexing strategy similar to other binary/ indexed formats such as bigbed , binary sam (bam) and tabix-based formats , but unlike bam or tabix-based formats, bigwig is specific to numerical data. wig and bam are both common data formats and are used by many applications, e.g. model-based analysis of chip-seq (macs) and mixture of isoforms (miso) , respectively, but, to date, there are not many applications that accommodate bigwig data. we have created command-line software under the unix operating system called bwtool in a similar spirit to bedtools or samtools that offers the possibility to carry out a number of diverse operations on bigwigs in a convenient way. until now, the common procedure to access the data within bigwig files has been to use the tools available from ucsc: bigwigtowig, bigwigsummary, bigwigaverageover bed, bigwigmerge, bigwigcorrelate or bigwiginfo. these offer some basic usability for bigwigs. bigwiginfo provides instant information about a bigwig file and is useful for glancing at the overall mean and standard deviation as well as seeing how many bases are covered by the signal. bigwigtowig is indispensible, as it is occasionally necessary to convert a bigwig into the original wig to use legacy software. beyond those two, bwtool provides additional features and flexibility not found in other software.  
