caged-opossum: motif enrichment analysis from cage-derived tsss with the emergence of large-scale cap analysis of gene expression (cage) datasets from individual labs and the fantom consortium, one can now analyze the cis-regulatory regions associated with gene transcription at an unprecedented level of refinement. by coupling transcription factor binding site (tfbs) enrichment analysis with cage-derived genomic regions, caged-opossum can identify tfs that act as key regulators of genes involved in specific mammalian cell and tissue types. the webtool allows for the analysis of cage-derived transcription start sites (tsss) either provided by the user or selected from $1300 mammalian samples from the fantom5 project with pre-computed tfbs predicted with jaspar tf binding profiles. the tool helps power insights into the regulation of genes through the study of the specific usage of tsss within specific cell types and/or under specific conditions. availability and implementation: the caged-oposum web tool is implemented in perl, mysql and apache and is available atthe cap analysis of gene expression (cage) technology has revolutionized our capacity to analyze the promoter and enhancer regionsthe cis-regulatory regionsthat are active in cell types and tissues at specific timepoints. over 1 10 6 human and 6 10 5 mouse cage peaks were identified through the fantom5 project , providing both the precise location of transcription start sites (tsss) and a quantitative measure of transcriptional activity in the studied samples. it provides the scientific community with an unprecedented opportunity to analyze the cis-regulatory regions acting upon the transcription of rnas from the identified tsss.tfs acting upon them (for instance, gene promoter regions). specifically, the tools look for the enrichment of motifs in a set of foreground sequences compared to a set of background ones. by combining sample-specific cage-derived tsss with tf binding profile enrichment analysis, it now becomes possible to predict the tfs that are likely involved in the regulation of active genes associated with tsss. we hereby introduce the caged-opossum tool to perform tf binding profile enrichment analysis from genomic regions derived from cage data. this work is part of the fantom5 project. data downloads, genomic tools and co-published manuscripts are summarized here http://fantom.gsc.riken.jp/5/.  
