gene expression cagexplorer: an r package for the analysis and visualization of promoter dynamics across multiple experiments alternate promoter usage is an important molecular mechanism for generating rna and protein diversity. cap analysis gene expression (cage) is a powerful approach for revealing the multiplicity of transcription start site (tss) events across experiments and conditions. an understanding of the dynamics of tss choice across these conditions requires both sensitive quantification and comparative visu-alization. we have developed cagexplorer, an r package to detect and visualize changes in the use of specific tss in wider promoter regions in the context of changes in overall gene expression when comparing different cage samples. these changes provide insight into the modification of transcript isoform generation and regulatory network alterations associated with cell types and conditions. cagexplorer is based on the fantom5 and mpromdb promoter set definitions but can also work with user-supplied regions. the package compares multiple cage libraries simultaneously. supplementary materials describe methods in detail, and a vignette demonstrates a workflow with a real data example. availability and implementation: the package is freely available under the mit license from cran (http://cran.r-project.org/web/ packages/cagexplorer).it has been predicted that the majority of human genes have multiple promoters. the differential use of transcription start sites (tsss) in alternative promoters is a complementary mechanism to alternate splicing for the generation of rna diversity that is now becoming better understood . tissuespecific tss usage has been identified in mammalian genomes , and alternate tss usage has been identified in cancers when compared with normal cells , implying that promoter-specific transcription coupled with gene expression exists as hallmarks of cell state. the profound impact of switches in transcript isoform production is well recognized for its role in regulation . cap analysis gene expression (cage) captures, sequences and maps capped 5 0 rna tags. in addition to being a platform for measuring gene expression, it has more importantly provided molecular biologists with enhanced resolution of gene regulation by revealing the precise locations of transcription initiation events . cage data have recently become more plentiful, thanks to the recent encode (2012) and fantom5 (forrest a.r.r) publications. analysis of tss choice provides insight into the variation of transcription factor binding, epigenetic modifications and regulatory network activation between different cell types. although cage allows for the identification of individual tss, it is more convenient to group clusters of tsss detected in close vicinity into promoter regions. this makes cage an attractive platform for de novo promoter identification. the relative transcription occurring at tsss among alternative promoters of a gene is termed promoter composition (pc). we describe cagexplorer, an r package that conveniently summarizes, visualizes and ranks changes in pc (also called promoter switching) genome-wide across different samples. the dynamics of differential pc is especially intriguing when this phenomenon leads to changes in the abundance of different transcript isoforms or protein products within the cell population under study.highlights the conceptual difference between pc and differential gene expression. four samples, ad, are evaluated at four color-coded promoter regions located near or within a gene. total gene expression measured as mapped tags per million sequenced following optional library normalization with edger is obtained by summing the number of tags that map to the union of the gene region, all four promoters including the regions between them and dividing by effective library size. pc is measured as a proportion vector. a and b have no change in pc, but the gene is differentially expressed. a and c have no differential gene expression but there is differential pc. finally, a and d demonstrate both differential gene expression and differential pc. existing bioinformatics tools that analyze count data from sequencing technologies treat genes as elementary indivisible units and usually measure differences in expression via a contrast between two groups of samples. examples include edger to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2014. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com and cuffdiff for differential gene expression and transcription analysis, respectively. unlike these tools, cagexplorer treats genes as multiunit blocks composed of promoter subunits and compares their relative expression within the gene across samples. it is not restricted to the analysis of contrasts between pairs of experiments but rather is designed to scale to any number of experiments for simultaneous comparison.we present cagexplorer, the r package that addresses the important task of detecting changes in pc in cage experiments. the method is scalable to any number of conditions and/or promoter regions for simultaneous comparison. the method is flexible and can be applied to any experiment that produces tag counts grouped by classification factors in which the detection of switching or changes in composition is of interest, e.g. gene expression switching within gene sets, pathway activity switching within regulatory and molecular networks, isoform and exon switching using rna-seq. to use this software for any of the aforementioned applications, the user need only to change the genomic region definitions from promoter regions to other regions of interest. this work is part of the fantom5 project. data download, genomic tools and copublished manuscripts have been summarized at http://fantom.gsc. riken.jp/5/top/.  
