genome analysis cambervis: visualization software to support comparative analysis of multiple bacterial strains motivation: a number of inconsistencies in genome annotations are documented among bacterial strains. visualization of the differences may help biologists to make correct decisions in spurious cases. results: we have developed a visualization tool, cambervis, to support comparative analysis of multiple bacterial strains. the software manages simultaneous visualization of multiple bacterial genomes, enabling visual analysis focused on genome structure annotations. availability: the cambervis software is freely available at the project website: http://bioputer.mimuw.edu.pl/camber. input datasets for mycobacterium tuberculosis and staphylocacus aureus are integrated with the software as examples.the large amount of genomic data that is being generated enables exciting new ways for comparative analysis of genomes. in particular, revealing drug resistance mechanisms in pathogenic bacteria is currently one of the important applications of comparative genomics. systematic comparison of drug resistant and drug susceptible strains can bring us new clues on how drug resistance emerges. however, since the presence of a single gene or mutation can lead to drug resistance, we may require very precise genome structure annotations to carry out reasonable drug resistance studies. a recent comparative study considered three pathogenic bacteria: mycobacterium tuberculosis, staphylocacus aureus and escherichia coli. the results showed many inconsistencies in genome structure annotations. moreover, lots of the inconsistencies are not due to real sequence differences, but are apparently caused by the use of different gene annotation methodologies by different laboratories. the problem of inconsistencies in genome annotations of translation initiation start sites (tiss) was also reported by another recent study . the authors compared gene starts annotations of orthologous gene families among five bacterial strains of burkholderia. the analysis showed that 53 of the ortholog gene families have inconsistent gene starts annotations in genbank. to whom correspondence should be addressed. furthermore, inconsistencies for only 17 of all the ortholog gene families could be explained by sequence divergences. therefore, manual curation by biologists is necessary in cases where standard genome annotation tools produce inconsistencies. in order to better support this type of analysis, we have implemented cambervisa software that allows for visual comparison of the genome structure annotations of multiple bacterial strains.  
