systems biology cam-cm: a signal deconvolution tool for in vivo dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging of complex tissues in vivo dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging tools provide non-invasive methods for analyzing various functional changes associated with disease initiation, progression and responses to therapy. the quantitative application of these tools has been hindered by its inability to accurately resolve and characterize targeted tissues due to spatially mixed tissue heterogeneity. convex analysis of mixtures compartment modeling (cam-cm) signal deconvolution tool has been developed to automatically identify pure-volume pixels located at the corners of the clustered pixel time series scatter simplex and subsequently estimate tissue-specific pharmacokinetic parameters. cam-cm can dissect complex tissues into regions with differential tracer kinetics at pixel-wise resolution and provide a systems biology tool for defining imaging signatures predictive of phenotypes.in vivo dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging tools provide noninvasive methods for analyzing various functional changes associated with disease initiation, progression and responses to therapy . typical modalities include dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (dcemri) , dynamic contrast-enhanced optical imaging , positron emission tomography and spectroscopic computed tomography to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors.. these tools exploit the dynamics of contrast accumulation and washout to produce functionally relevant images of vascular perfusion and permeability, metabolism or gene expression, and can potentially test novel hypotheses and predict drug efficacy. however, due to spatially mixed tissue heterogeneity, the precise imaging-based phenotyping by these tools has been hindered by its inability to accurately resolve and characterize targeted functional tissue compartments . this indistinction between contributions of different tissues to the mixed tracer signals could significantly confound subsequent pharmacokinetics compartmental modeling (cm) and affect the accuracy of genotypephenotype association studies . we developed convex analysis of mixtures compartment modeling (cam-cm) signal deconvolution tool that enables geometrically principled, unsupervised and accurate characterization and delineation of major functional tissue structures from dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging data, not only dissecting complex tissue into regions with differential tracer kinetics at pixel-wise resolution, but also substantially improving tissue-specific pharmacokinetic parameter estimation . cam-cm is supported by a well-grounded mathematical framework, and combines the advantages of multivariate clustering, convex geometry analysis and compartmental modeling. the algorithm possesses a novel, powerful feature allowing purevolume pixels to be readily identified from the measured pixel time series, without any knowledge of the associated compartmental pharmacokinetics, leading to a completely unsupervised approach. we provide cam-cm software as an open-source standalone matlab application.cam-cm spatial-temporal analysis can be very effective at revealing multi-compartment structure within dynamic contrastenhanced imaging data of complex tissues, estimating tissue-specific kinetic parameter values and characterizing the roles of different functional tissue compartments. we would expect the cam-cm method, with publicly available open-source software package, to be a very useful tool for the exploratory analysis of dynamic functional imaging data in many research and clinical applications. we plan to develop and deliver future versions of the software written in both r and java languages.  
