camur: knowledge extraction from rna-seq cancer data through equivalent classification rules motivation: nowadays, knowledge extraction methods from next generation sequencing data are highly requested. in this work, we focus on rna-seq gene expression analysis and specifically on casecontrol studies with rule-based supervised classification algorithms that build a model able to discriminate cases from controls. state of the art algorithms compute a single classification model that contains few features (genes). on the contrary, our goal is to elicit a higher amount of knowledge by computing many classification models, and therefore to identify most of the genes related to the predicted class. results: we propose camur, a new method that extracts multiple and equivalent classification models. camur iteratively computes a rule-based classification model, calculates the power set of the genes present in the rules, iteratively eliminates those combinations from the data set, and performs again the classification procedure until a stopping criterion is verified. camur includes an ad-hoc knowledge repository (database) and a querying tool. we analyze three different types of rna-seq data sets (breast, head and neck, and stomach cancer) from the cancer genome atlas (tcga) and we validate camur and its models also on non-tcga data. our experimental results show the efficacy of camur: we obtain several reliable equivalent classification models, from which the most frequent genes, their relationships, and the relation with a particular cancer are deduced. availability and implementation:among next generation sequencing experiments, rna-seq gene expression profiling stands out as the process of quantifying the transcriptome abundance by counting the rna fragments (reads) that are aligned on a reference genome (in this work, we propose a new method for classifying rna-seq casecontrol samples, which is able to compute multiple human readable classification models. we call this method and its software implementation camur classifier with alternative and multiple rule-based models. although rna-seq data analysis tools (howe v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.in this work, we presented camur, a new method for multiple solutions extraction in rule-based classification problems. we showed that the amount of knowledge extracted by our algorithm is higher than a standard supervised classification. we described the two parts of camur software package: mse that performs the classification procedure and msa that analyzes the obtained results. additionally, we designed and developed a database for an effective and comprehensive knowledge extraction. we proved the efficacy of our algorithm on large sets of rna-seq data, focusing on breast, head and neck and stomach cancer from tcga, and validating it on external data sets from target and geo. to conclude, camur results as a reliable technique for solving classification problems by extracting many alternative and equally accurate solutions. in future, we intend to test our method on other rna-seq data sets in order to build a large knowledge repository of classification models related to a particular disease. the extracted genes may then be analyzed by domain experts with functional and enrichment analyses (d). it would be also interesting to perform a simulation study for evaluating the performance of camur under different scenarios in a quantitative manner. additionally, we plan to integrate in our software other rule-based classifiers, as well as to enrich the software with new functions and higher performances. finally, we plan to extend the analysis to other biological data sets as sequences classification, e.g. dna-barcoding.  
