genetics and population analysis candisnper: a web tool for the identification of candidate snps for causal variants human single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) chips which are used in genome-wide association studies (gwas) permit the genotyping of up to 4 million snps simultaneously. to date, about 1000 human snps have been identified as statistically significantly associated with a disease or another trait of interest. the identified snp is not necessarily the causal variant, but it is rather in linkage disequilibrium (ld) with it. candisnper is a software tool that determines the ld region around a significant snp from a gwas. it provides a list with functional annotation and ld values for the snps found in the ld region. this list contains not only the snps for which genotyping data are available, but all snps with rs-ids, thus increasing the likelihood to include the causal variant. furthermore, plots showing the ld values are generated. candisnper facilitates the preselection of candidate snps for causal variants. availability and implementation: the candisnper server is freely available at http://www2.hu-berlin.de/wikizbnutztier/software/ candisnper. the source code is available to academic users as is upon request. the web site is implemented in perl and r and runs on an apache server. the ensembl database is queried for snp data via perl apis.whole-genome genotyping has become established in medical, biological and agricultural research to elucidate the genetic basis of phenotypic traits such as disease or economically important features. typically, the result of a genome-wide association study (gwas) consists of a list of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) with p-values that characterize the strength of association with the phenotype under investigation. further analysis is necessary to associate a significant snp with a gene or to decide if a significant snp is a candidate for a causal variant for a disease or just in linkage disequilibrium (ld) with it. a causal variant is a genomic locus that has a direct qualitative or quantitative effect on the phenotype. snps can alter a protein directly (non-synonymous snps, stop gained or stop lost snps, frameshift snps or snps in splice sites) or they can influence gene expression if they are located in regulatory regions. snap proved to be a valuable tool for the analysis of snps that are in ld with a significant snp, but has the to whom correspondence should be addressed. shortcoming that only snps that are present on snp chips of the major genotyping platforms are considered. the main motivation to develop candisnper was that much more human snps are known than systematically genotyped within the hapmap project or included on the major genotyping platforms. these snps represent potential candidate snps for causal variants, although they will not be observed directly as significant snp in a gwas. the number of reference snps (rs-snps) is currently 17 804 034 (dbsnp build 130; genome build 36.3), of which 6 573 584 are validated. in the caucasian population, 4 030 774 snps were genotyped by the hapmap project (release 27, february 2009) and 4 million snps can be typed, for example, with illuminas humanomni1-quad beadchip. thus, restricting the search for the causal variant of a phenotype to snps present on a genotyping chip or to hapmap snps would mean to neglect three-quarters of all known snps. to simplify the maintenance of candisnper and to guarantee upto-dateness genotype and snp data are retrieved from the ensembl database during runtime. this is at the cost of a response time that is higher than if primary data were stored locally and ld was precomputed.  
