genome analysis cansnper: a hierarchical genotype classifier of clonal pathogens advances in typing methodologies have recently reformed the field of molecular epidemiology of pathogens. the falling cost of sequencing technologies is creating a deluge of whole genome sequencing data that burdens bioinformatics resources and tool development. in particular, single nucleotide polymorphisms in core gen-omes of pathogens are recognized as the most important markers for inferring genetic relationships because they are evolutionarily stable and amenable to high-throughput detection methods. sequence data will provide an excellent opportunity to extend our understanding of infectious disease when the challenge of extracting knowledge from available sequence resources is met. here, we present an efficient and user-friendly genotype classification pipeline, cansnper, based on an easily expandable database of predefined canonical single nucleotide polymorphisms. availability and implementation: all documentation and python-based source code for the cansnper are freely available at http:// github.com/adrlar/cansnper.whole genome sequencing of pathogen isolates will continue to improve epidemiological investigations and microbial forensics through the ability to reconstruct genetic relationships among isolates. the vast amount of information generated by whole genome sequencing can overcome the hurdles of other lessinformative rich epidemiological typing methods in establishing genetic relationships among pathogens. the overall goal is to identify similarities among strains that are a result of vertically inherited variation indicative of recent common descent. confounding sources of polymorphisms must, however, be addressed, including sequencing errors and sequence polymorphisms introduced through horizontal transfer of sequences by both homologous and non-homologous recombination. no single typing method handles all levels of bacterial diversity. multilocus sequence typing has been used for a decade as a portable sequence-based method for identifying clonal relationships among bacteria with various amount of recombination. in highly monomorphic and slowly evolving bacterial species such as mycobacterium tuberculosis or bacillus anthracis, identification of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), in comparison with a defined archetypal strain, could provide more robust phylogeny and higher resolution. in such pathogens, the inheritance pattern of specific sets of snps is strictly clonal . several snp detection technologies developed for this purpose over the past decades, e.g. based on real-time pcr or microarrays are predicted to be replaced by next-generation sequencing. for example, relationships among isolates of francisella tularensis, coxiella burnetii, yersinia pestis and b.anthracis are amenable for characterization using specific sets of snps, often denoted canonical snps (cansnps). it has been demonstrated that a small number of snps can be used to define genetic groups efficiently and to infer evolutionary relationships within f.tularensis , c.burnetii , y.pestis and b.anthracis . using the new low-cost sequencing technology for snp detection, there are vast amounts of data that can be used to characterize an isolate and its relationship with others. wholegenome sequence typing is a powerful tool for genotyping and molecular epidemiological analysis but not completely accessible for scientists with limited computer skills . the current bottleneck is time and computationally intensive generation of high-quality genome sequences. to take advantage of the new low-cost sequencing technology, sequence information must be presented and analyzed in a way that, for example, public health experts in epidemiology can easily interpret. therefore, alternative methods are needed for whole-genome sequence typing data to be used in real time. here, we present an analysis pipeline for easy genotype classification of clonal pathogens. this program should have vast applications in clinical genomic research and will aid the expanding efforts to identify and trace pathogens during outbreaks.  
