databases and ontologies canto: an online tool for community literature curation motivation: detailed curation of published molecular data is essential for any model organism database. community curation enables researchers to contribute data from their papers directly to databases, supplementing the activity of professional curators and improving coverage of a growing body of literature. we have developed canto, a web-based tool that provides an intuitive curation interface for both curators and researchers, to support community curation in the fission yeast database, pombase. canto supports curation using obo ontol-ogies, and can be easily configured for use with any species. availability: canto code and documentation are available under an open source license from http://curation.pombase.org/. canto is a component of the generic model organism database (gmod) project (http://www.gmod.org/).the major activity of any model organism database (mod) is the manual curation of gene-specific information from peerreviewed research articles, a time-and labour-intensive process that involves reading publications and associating novel biological information with genes or other biological features. several factors now motivate databases to develop alternative curation strategies to supplement the efforts of professional curators to maintain comprehensive annotation. most pressingly, continuing growth in both the number of papers published, and the amount and complexity of information contained in a typical paper, threatens to outstrip the capacity of database staff. in addition, curators biological knowledge tends towards breadth rather than depth; a curator may annotate a paper on an unfamiliar topic in less than optimal detail, or make errors that experts would avoid. pombase , the mod for the fission yeast schizosaccharomyces pombe, has introduced a community curation initiative that engages researchers in direct curation of their publications, addressing issues of both literature volume and specialized knowledge simultaneously. to support this, we have developed canto, a web-based tool that enables professional curators and publication authors to capture detailed biological knowledge accurately and consistently, using ontologies from the obo foundry collection . canto can be configured to use gene (or gene product) identifiers for any species, as well as any of several ontologies, and can therefore be readily adapted for diverse uses.  
