cardinal: an r package for statistical analysis of mass spectrometry-based imaging experiments cardinal is an r package for statistical analysis of mass spectrometry-based imaging (msi) experiments of biological samples such as tissues. cardinal supports both matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (maldi) and desorption electrospray ionization-based msi workflows, and experiments with multiple tissues and complex designs. the main analytical functionalities include (1) image segmentation, which partitions a tissue into regions of homogeneous chemical composition , selects the number of segments and the subset of informative ions, and characterizes the associated uncertainty and (2) image classification, which assigns locations on the tissue to pre-defined classes, selects the subset of informative ions, and estimates the resulting classification error by (cross-) validation. the statistical methods are based on mixture modeling and regularization. contact: o.vitek@neu.edu availability and implementation: the code, the documentation, and examples are available open-source at www.cardinalmsi.org under the artistic-2.0 license. the package is available at www. bioconductor.org.mass spectrometry-based imaging (msi) experiments characterize the chemical composition of biological samples (such as tissues) or non-biological samples at spatial resolution . the experiments repeatedly acquire mass spectra at gridded locations on a tissue. two typical goals of statistical analysis of msi are image segmentation, which partitions a tissue into regions of homogeneous spectral profiles, and image classification, which assigns locations of the tissue to pre-defined classes based on their spectral profiles. however, achieving these goals is often quite difficult due to the large and complex nature of the datasets, and due to the biological and technical variation in intensities of spectral features. statistical inference is key for distinguishing the systematic signals in the spectra from noise. the availability of statistical methods and software for msi experiments is currently limited. we introduce cardinal, an open-source r-based software package for processing and visualization of mass spectra, and for statistical segmentation and classification of the resulting images. cardinal differs from other publicly available software tools such as biomap, datacube explorer and msireader in its emphasis on statistical modeling and inference. it differs from commercial tools such as scils lab (scils), fleximaging (bruker), hdi (waters) and tissueview (ab sciex) in being open-source. it differs from the  
