cart—a chemical annotation retrieval toolkit motivation: data on bioactivities of drug-like chemicals are rapidly accumulating in public repositories , creating new opportunities for research in computational systems pharmacology. however, integrative analysis of these data sets is difficult due to prevailing ambiguity between chemical names and identifiers and a lack of cross-references between databases. results: to address this challenge, we have developed cart, a chemical annotation retrieval toolkit. as a key functionality, it matches an input list of chemical names into a comprehensive reference space to assign unambiguous chemical identifiers. in this unified space, bioactivity annotations can be easily retrieved from databases covering a wide variety of chemical effects on biological systems. subsequently, cart can determine annotations enriched in the input set of chemicals and display these in tabular format and interactive network visualizations, thereby facilitating integrative analysis of chemical bioactivity data. availability and implementation: cart is available as a galaxy web service (cart.embl.de). source code and an easy-to-install command line tool can also be obtained from the web site.coherent functional themes, analogous to gene ontology annotation tools, such as david . this makes cart useful, e.g. for the automatic characterization of hits derived from chemical screens (, for instance). also in other contexts, annotating chemicals with various biological effects is becoming an important task, which has so far largely required expert manual annotation, but can be greatly simplified by cart. is established using fishers exact test with fdr correction for multiple testing. in a typical use case, users may want to subject a set of hits resulting from a high-throughput chemical screen to cart analysis. after name matching, the enrichment analysis can be done relative to a user-specified background, in this case the library of all chemicals probed in the screen. enriched annotations are subsequently retrieved from databases describing chemical effects at various scales, including molecular targets, metabolizing enzymes, functional classifications, indication areas and side effects (, supplementary material s2). the results are visualized as a network linking the input set of chemicals to enriched annotations (, supplementary material s3, supplementary). implemented in cytoscape.js , this network can be interactively explored. the galaxy front-end of cart enables users to combine individual modules into new workflows, allowing for easy customization and extension of the standard use case described above. galaxy moreover facilitates reproducibility due to its history and sharing functionalities .cart uses a comprehensive chemical reference space of about 98.8 million names and synonyms and 68.3 million inchikeys that are disambiguated to 37.7 million chemical identifiers based on information from the stitch database version 4.0 . matching user-provided chemical names into this reference space is very fast, e.g. processing 1,000 chemicals takes 40 s (supplementary figureand supplementary material s2.. typical cart workflow including chemical name matching, annotation retrieval and enrichment analysis. the lower panels contain a toy example of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (nsaid) compounds and show excerpts of how these are matched and annotated by cart, the rightmost panel displays a (partial) enrichment network; ptgs, prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase targets; m01a, atc code for nsaids, adj. p, fdr-corrected p-value, nephritis and vasculitis are nsaid-associated side effects. see supplementary material s3 and supplementaryfor an application of cart to hits from a drug screen.  
