cas-offinder: a fast and versatile algorithm that searches for potential off-target sites of cas9 rna-guided endonucleases the type ii clustered regularly interspaced short palin-dromic repeats (crispr)/cas system is an adaptive immune response in prokaryotes, protecting host cells against invading phages or plasmids by cleaving these foreign dna species in a targeted manner. crispr/cas-derived rna-guided engineered nucleases (rgens) enable genome editing in cultured cells, animals and plants, but are limited by off-target mutations. here, we present a novel algorithm termed cas-offinder that searches for potential off-target sites in a given genome or user-defined sequences. unlike other algorithms currently available for identification of rgen off-target sites, cas-offinder is not limited by the number of mismatches and allows variations in protospacer-adjacent motif sequences recognized by cas9, the essential protein component in rgens. cas-offinder is available as a command-line program or accessible via our website. availability and implementation: cas-offinder free access atgenome editing with engineered nucleases is broadly useful for biomedical research, biotechnology and medicine. engineered nucleases cleave chromosomal dna in a targeted manner, and the repair of the resulting double-strand breaks by endogenous systems gives rise to targeted genome modifications in cultured cells, animals and plants. we and others have developed three different types of engineered nucleases: zinc finger nucleases (zfns) , transcription activator-like effector nucleases (talens) and rna-guided engineered nucleases (rgens) derived from the type ii clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (crispr)/crisprassociated (cas) system, an adaptive immune response in bacteria and archaea. unlike zfns and talens whose dna specificities are determined by dna-binding proteins, rgens use complementary base pairing to recognize target sites. rgens consist of (i) dual rna components comprising sequence-invariant tracrrna and sequence-variable guide rna termed crrna [or single-chain guide rna (sgrna) constructed by linking essential portions of tracrrna and crrna (and (ii) a fixed protein component, cas9, that recognizes the protospacer-adjacent motif (pam) downstream of target dna sequences corresponding to guide rna. custom-designed rgens are produced simply by replacing guide rnas, making this system easy to access. unfortunately, rgens cleave not only on-target sites but also off-target sites that differ by up to several nucleotides from the on-target sites , causing unwanted off-target mutations and chromosomal rearrangements. these undesired off-target effects raise significant concerns for using rgens as genome editing tools in diverse applications. to address this issue, researchers must be able to search for potential off-target sites in the genome. sequence alignment tools such as tagscan , bowtie or gpgpu-enabled cushaw can be used to find potential offtarget sites, but are limited by the number of mismatched bases allowed and a requirement for a fixed pam sequence. here we introduce a fast and highly versatile off-target searching tool, cas-offinder. importantly, cas-offinder is written in opencl, an open standard language for parallel programming in heterogeneous environments, enabling operation in diverse platforms such as central processing units (cpus), graphics processing units (gpus) and digital signal processors (dsps).  
