genome analysis casot: a genome-wide cas9/grna off-target searching tool the crispr/cas or cas9/guide rna system is a newly developed, easily engineered and highly effective tool for gene targeting ; it has considerable off-target effects in cultured human cells and in several organisms. however, the cas9/guide rna target site is too short for existing alignment tools to exhaustively and effectively identify potential off-target sites. casot is a local tool designed to find potential off-target sites in any given genome or user-provided sequence , with user-specified types of protospacer adjacent motif, and number of mismatches allowed in the seed and non-seed regions.cas9/grna (guide rna), or cas9/single guide rna, a customized type of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat/crispr-associated (crispr/cas) system, has recently been used for effective gene targeting in many organisms and cultured cells . this system is easy to design and engineer; only a single short grna, which contains 20-nt region reverse complementary to one strand of the target dna (the protospacer) with an-ngg motif in 3 0-end (the protospacer adjacent motif, pam) of the target site, has to be synthesized for a particular target site. the same cas9 nuclease can be used universally; this notably reduces the cost of both time and labor, promoting the broad and rapidly developing application of this system . however, the specificity of cas9/grna needs careful evaluation. for example, cas9/grna seems to have considerable offtarget effects in cultured human cells and in several organisms . in vitro experiments suggest that the pam type could influence the cleavage activity: the-ngg type of pam shows the highest activity, pam of-nag comes second and pam of-nngg shows the weakest activity. mismatches in different regions of the protospacer in the target site also have different effects: a mismatch in the region of the first 12 nt adjacent to the pam (called the seed region) may cause a notable reduction of the cleavage activity of cas9/grna, whereas mismatches in the other region of the protospacer (the non-seed region) have a much weaker effect . an approach to identify potential off-target sites in any given genome or other sequence is necessary to evaluate the off-target effects of cas9/grna in vivo. an online tool used for cas9/ grna target design also supports the prediction of certain potential off-target sites ; however, neither a detailed scoring algorithm nor an adjustable option is available in this tool, and only a few genomes can be searched for target or off-target sites. other online tools, tagscan or pattern match (http://viewer.shigen.info/medakavw/patternmatch/), are available to search for regions in some commonly used genomes or only in the medaka genome, with up to two mismatches. on the other hand, widely used heuristic alignment tools like blastn and blat are not designed for exhaustive searching for short nucleotide sequences (as short as 20 nt). in addition, the variable types of pam with random nucleotides also need to be considered during the search for potential offtarget sites. here, we report casot, a downloadable and open-source tool designed to identify potential off-target sites of given cas9/ grna targets or target pairs in any user-specified sequence or genome, with several tunable parameters like pam type and the mismatch number in the seed (up to 46 nt) and non-seed regions (supplementary material s1).  
