sequence analysis catrapid omics: a web server for large-scale prediction of protein–rna interactions here we introduce catrapid omics, a server for large-scale calculations of proteinrna interactions. our web server allows (i) predictions at proteomic and transcriptomic level; (ii) use of protein and rna sequences without size restriction; (iii) analysis of nucleic acid binding regions in proteins; and (iv) detection of rna motifs involved in protein recognition. results: we developed a web server to allow fast calculation of ribonucleoprotein associations in caenorhabditis elegans, danio rerio, drosophila melanogaster, homo sapiens, mus musculus, rattus norvegicus, saccharomyces cerevisiae and xenopus tropicalis (custom libraries can be also generated). the catrapid omics was benchmarked on the recently published rna interactomes of serine/ arginine-rich splicing factor 1 (srsf1), histone-lysine n-methyltrans-ferase ezh2 (ezh2), tar dna-binding protein 43 (tdp43) and rna-binding protein fus (fus) as well as on the protein interactomes of u1/u2 small nucleolar rnas, x inactive specific transcript (xist) repeat a region (repa) and crumbs homolog 3 (crb3) 3 0-untranslated region rnas. our predictions are highly significant (p50.05) and will help the experimentalist to identify candidates for further validation. availability: catrapid omics can be freely accessed on the web atincreasing evidence indicates that ribonucleoprotein interactions are fundamental for cellular regulation . moreover, several studies highlighted the involvement of rna molecules in the onset and progression of human diseases including neurological disorders . to our knowledge, there are two sequence-based methods for prediction of proteinrna interactions: catrapid and rpiseq . the catrapid algorithm exploits predictions of secondary structure, hydrogen bonding and van der waals contributions to estimate the binding propensity of protein and rna molecules. rpiseq is based on support vector machine (svm) and random forest (rf) models predicting proteinrna interactions from primary structure alone . both methods show remarkable performances, but catrapid discriminates positive and negative cases with higher accuracy and has been tested on long non-coding rnas . here we introduce catrapid omics to perform high-throughput predictions of proteinrna interactions using the information on protein and rna domains involved in macromolecular recognition.  
