sequence analysis catrapid signature: identification of ribonucleoproteins and rna-binding regions motivation: recent technological advances revealed that an unexpected large number of proteins interact with transcripts even if the rna-binding domains are not annotated. we introduce catrapid signature to identify ribonucleoproteins based on physico-chemical features instead of sequence similarity searches. the algorithm, trained on human proteins and tested on model organisms , calculates the overall rna-binding propensity followed by the prediction of rna-binding regions. catrapid signature outperforms other algorithms in the identification of rna-binding proteins and detection of non-classical rna-binding regions. results are visualized on a webpage and can be downloaded or forwarded to catrapid omics for predictions of rna targets. availability and implementation: catrapid signature can be accessed atrna-binding proteins (rbps) use rna-binding domains (rds) to recognize target rnas and to regulate co-/post-transcriptional processes. examples of classical rds include rna-recognition motif (rrm), double-stranded rna-binding domain (dsrrm), k-homology (kh), rgg box and the pumilio/fbf (pum) domain . in addition to classical rds, recent experimental studies on hela , hek298 and mesc cells, indicate that a number of rna-interacting proteins contain non-classical rds (ncrds) for which annotation is not yet available. discovery of new rds is a challenging task: domaindetection tools, such as hmmer and blast rely on sequence similarity searches to identify annotated rds and fail to recognize newly discovered rbps. similarly, other methods such as rnapred predict rnabinding ability using features of annotated rds that might be different in ncrds. alternatives to identify rna-binding regions include bindn , pprint and rnabindr , but the algorithms have been trained to identify single amino acids and not contiguous regions. catrapid signature overcomes these limitations by (i) predicting the propensity of a protein to interact with rna and (ii) identifying rna-binding regions through physico-chemical properties instead of sequence patterns. the algorithm is an extension of the catrapid approach to predict protein-rna interactions and the cleversuite algorithm to classify protein groups using physico-chemical features.  
