systems biology causal analysis approaches in ingenuity pathway analysis motivation: prior biological knowledge greatly facilitates the meaningful interpretation of gene-expression data. causal networks constructed from individual relationships curated from the literature are particularly suited for this task, since they create mechanistic hypotheses that explain the expression changes observed in datasets. results: we present and discuss a suite of algorithms and tools for inferring and scoring regulator networks upstream of gene-expression data based on a large-scale causal network derived from the ingenuity knowledge base. we extend the method to predict downstream effects on biological functions and diseases and demonstrate the validity of our approach by applying it to example datasets.the interpretation of high-throughput gene-expression data is greatly facilitated by the consideration of prior biological knowledge. traditionally this has been done using statistical gene-set-enrichment methods where differentially expressed genes are intersected with sets of genes that are associated with a particular biological function or pathway . one more recent approach involves the application of causal networks that integrate previously observed causeeffect relationships reported in the literature . while still depending on statistics, this is more powerful than gene-set enrichment since it leverages knowledge about the direction of effects rather than mere associations. in this article, we describe causal analysis approaches that have been implemented in ingenuity pathway analysis (ipa) with particular focus on the details of the underlying algorithms, and the application to a number of real-world use cases. ipa is a commercial software package and is described in the supplementary material. given a gene-expression dataset, our main goals are to elucidate the upstream biological causes and probable downstream effects on cellular and organismal biology. it is critical to infer the identity of upstream regulatory molecules and associated mechanisms to provide biological insight to the observed expression changes. we also aim to predict whether such regulators are activated or inhibited based on the distinct up-and downregulation pattern of the expressed genes, and determine which causal relationships previously reported in the literature are likely relevant for the biological mechanisms underlying the data. upstream regulators are not limited to transcription factors; they can be any gene or small molecule that has been observed experimentally to affect gene expression in some direct or indirect way. a similar approach, relying on the same methodology is also used to predict downstream functional effects and phenotypes. apart from generating likely mechanistic hypotheses, causal inference can also be used to find potential upstream regulators with a response opposite to the observed expression pattern, which is useful for the prediction of therapeutic compound effects. this application is similar to the approach taken by the connectivity map tool , except that here we rely on the wide range of literaturecurated biological findings about compounds and their interactions instead of a gene-expression database derived from in vitro tested compounds. the causal network underlying our algorithms is based on the ingenuity knowledge base, a large structured collection of observations in various experimental contexts with nearly 5 million findings manually curated from the biomedical literature or integrated from third-party databases. the network contains $40 000 nodes that represent mammalian genes and their products, chemical compounds, microrna molecules and biological functions. nodes are connected by $1 480 000 edges representing experimentally observed causeeffect relationships that relate to expression, transcription, activation, molecular modification and transport as well as binding events. network edges are also associated with a direction of the causal effect, i.e. either activating or inhibiting. we describe four causal analytics algorithms that are available in ipa: (i) upstream regulator analysis (ura) determines likely upstream regulators that are connected to dataset genes through a set of direct or indirect relationships; (ii) mechanistic networks (mn) builds on ura by connecting regulators that are likely part of the same signaling or causal mechanism in hypothesis networks; (iii) causal network analysis (cna) is a generalization of ura that connects upstream regulators to dataset molecules but takes advantage of paths that involve more than one link (i.e. through intermediate regulators), and can be used to generate a more complete picture of possible root causes for the observed expression changes; and (iv) downstream effects to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.analysis (dea) applies the methodology of ura to the inference of and impact on biological functions and diseases that are downstream of the genes whose expression has been altered in a dataset. using several examples we show how these tools are applied to gene-expression data in practice.this article describes algorithms, tools and visualizations recently added to ipa that enable scientists to combine the directional information encoded in their gene-expression datasets with knowledge extracted from the literature to infer the underlying causes of their observed transcriptional changes and to predict likely outcomes. this is a significant advance compared to tools that just look for statistical enrichment in overlap to sets of genes. an aspect of upstream analysis that makes it especially powerful is that it is essentially an activity-based prediction, in that the measurement of the activity of a transcriptional regulator is via the measurement of genes known to be differentially expressed by it in a defined direction. the data being analyzed. cna result for sost (see section 5.3). sost is the master regulator (or root regulator) of a small causal network containing five intermediate regulators that may explain the up and down regulation of the 26 dataset molecules shown in the bottom row (red indicates up-regulation and green down-regulation). the regulators are colored by their predicted activation state: activated (orange) or inhibited (blue). darker colors indicate higher absolute z-scores. the edges connecting the nodes are colored orange when leading to activation of the downstream node, blue when leading to its inhibition, and yellow if the findings underlying the relationship are inconsistent with the state of the downstream node. pointed arrowheads indicate that the downstream node is expected to be activated if the upstream node connected to it is activated, while blunt arrowheads indicate that the downstream node is expected to be inhibited if the upstream node that connects to it is activated causal analysis in ipa has measured that differential expression. this can be contrasted with for example pathway overlap prediction, where in general there is no guarantee that the members of the pathway are differentially expressed upon pathway activation or inhibition. as described above, the algorithms operate over a large-scale causal graph assembled from individual literature-supported relationships between molecules, diseases and biological processes in the ingenuity knowledge base. these relationships are derived from a myriad of experimental systems in mouse, rat and human. though possibly counter-intuitive to mix relationships derived from a variety of contexts to analyze data from a particular context, the results are generally valid due to the conserved activity of most genes and proteins across tissues and cell types. that being said, it may be possible in the future to automatically infer a context based on the expression data and to filter accordingly to only relevant relationships for a particular analysis. there are at least 30 papers that have already made use of these new causal tools in ipa. one of the first to use ura demonstrated how transcription factor activation differs between mouse, macaque, and swine in response to infection by the 2009 pandemic h1n1 influenza virus . another used both ura and dea to help characterize the mechanisms that provide breast cancer protection during pregnancy (meier). there are certain to be additional applications of these powerful analytics as scientists discover and adopt them in their research.  
