causal stability ranking genotypic causes of a phenotypic trait are typically determined via randomized controlled intervention experiments. such experiments are often prohibitive with respect to durations and costs, and informative prioritization of experiments is desirable. we therefore consider predicting stable rankings of genes (covariates), according to their total causal effects on a phenotype (response), from observational data. since causal effects are generally non-identifiable from observational data only, we use a method that can infer lower bounds for the total causal effect under some assumptions. we validated our method, which we call causal stability ranking (cstar), in two situations. first, we performed knockout experiments with arabidopsis thaliana according to a predicted ranking based on observational gene expression data, using flowering time as phenotype of interest. besides several known regulators of flowering time, we found almost half of the tested top ranking mutants to have a significantly changed flowering time. second, we compared cstar to established regression-based methods on a gene expression dataset of saccharomyces cerevisiae. we found that cstar outperforms these established methods. our method allows for efficient design and pri-oritization of future intervention experiments, and due to its generality it can be used for a broad spectrum of applications. availability: the full table of ranked genes, all raw data and an example r script for cstar are available from the bioinformaticsthe growing interest in causal inference (e.g.) has increased the need not only for methods able to handle this task but also for designed experimental validation. it is of general interest to infer the genotypic causes of a complex phenotypic trait . the classical approach relies on randomized controlled intervention experiments, e.g. knocking out a gene and observing the effect on the phenotype relative to the wild-type organism. however, such intervention experiments are time consuming and expensive, and a prioritization with respect to most informative new experiments is very desirable. a genetic method to identify loci causing phenotypes or gene expression patterns is based on quantitative trait loci (qtl) and expression qtl . this can be a very powerful approach but it is limited to loci where genetic variation exists and to situations where segregating progeny of control crosses is available. often, however, it is desirable to predict causal effects from purely observational data. we therefore consider the problem of predicting total causal effects from data obtained by observing a system without subjecting it to targeted interventions (observational data). this problem is generally ill-posed, but the recently proposed ida method provides estimated lower bounds of total causal effects from observational data under some assumptions (supplementary section s1). however, these bounds come without a measure of uncertainty. we address this issue by introducing a new method combining ida and a version of stability selection , which we call causal stability ranking (cstar;). the addition of stability selection to ida provides two advantages. first, cstar leads to a stable ranking of genes (covariates) according to the sizes of lower bounds for their predicted total causal effects, irrespective of the choice of the tuning parameter in stability selection. second, under some additional assumptions, cstar allows controlling an error rate of false-positive findings, namely the expected number of false positives and hence also the per-comparison error rate (pcer). cstar results were confirmed in two biological scenarios using the simple model saccharomyces cerevisiae and the more complex model arabidopsis thaliana. together, the built-in error measure and the success in finding relevant regulator genes make cstar an excellent ranking method for the targeted design of experiments based on easily available resources.we propose cstar as a general method to obtain a stable ranking of genes in terms of the strengths of their total causal effects on a phenotype of interest. an added value of our method is that, under some assumptions, this ranking comes with an error measure controlling false-positive selections. we showed that cstar exhibits a large increase in sensitivity when compared with plain ida and modern regression-type methods in s. cerevisiae . moreover, we demonstrated the success of cstar for the biologically much more complex multicellular organism a. thaliana. however, in view of uncheckable assumptions (supplementary section s1), cstar is not a tool for confirmatory causal inference. we used insertion mutant lines for experimental validation. this approach can provide very strong evidence for hypotheses about gene function but it often suffers from a high false-negative rate. genetic networks are characterized by a high degree of functional redundancy, which can buffer effects of single mutations. the a. thaliana genome, for instance, underwent a relatively recent duplication causing partial redundancy between many orthologous gene pairs. thus, often double mutants need to be tested to observe alterations in phenotype. in addition, the function of essential genes cannot be tested with insertion mutants. therefore, the high proportion of confirmation in the test set of insertion mutants is highly reassuring. this makes it plausible that cstar is relevant for commercial crops, by pointing to better target genes for marker-assisted breeding and transgenic approaches. in fact since cstar is mathematically justified under clearly stated assumptions , it has the potential to generalize many other settings in biology, agriculture and other fields where efficient design and prioritization of new intervention experiments is a core aim.only genes are shown for which the insertion was experimentally verified and for which in at least one of the following three settings at least four replicates could be harvested for validation: days to bolting in short days (dtb-sd), days to bolting in long days (dtb-ld) and rosette leave number in long days (rln-ld). each mutant was tested versus a control group. p-values50.05 are written in bold (for complete results see supplementary tables s2s4). a missing entry indicates insufficient number of replicates for testing, i.e. less than four plants.  
