sequence analysis ccsol omics: a webserver for solubility prediction of endogenous and heterologous expression in escherichia coli here we introduce ccsol omics, a webserver for large-scale calculations of protein solubility. our method allows (i) prote-ome-wide predictions; (ii) identification of soluble fragments within each sequences; (iii) exhaustive single-point mutation analysis. results: using coil/disorder, hydrophobicity, hydrophilicity,-sheet and-helix propensities, we built a predictor of protein solubility. our approach shows an accuracy of 79 on the training set (36 990 target track entries). validation on three independent sets indicates that ccsol omics discriminates soluble and insoluble proteins with an accuracy of 74 on 31 760 proteins sharing 530 sequence similarity. availability and implementation: ccsol omics can be freely ac-cessed on the web atalgorithms for prediction of protein solubility and aggregation provide a solid basis to investigate physico-chemical determinants of amyloid fibril formation and associated diseases . in the past years, an in vitro reconstituted translation system allowed the large-scale investigation of escherichia coli proteins solubility , thus providing the opportunity for the development of predictive methods such as ccsol . in ccsol, coil/disorder, hydrophobicity, hydrophilicity,-sheet and-helical propensities are combined together into a solubility propensity score that is useful to investigate protein expression as well as bacterial evolution . other methods have been developed to predict protein solubility based on amino acid characteristics. for instance, proso ii exploits occurrence of monopeptides and dipeptides to estimate heterologous expression in e.coli. proso ii was trained on the pepcdb database [now target track ] that stores target and protocol information provided by protein structure initiative centers. both ccsol and proso ii perform accurate predictions when used to respectively predict endogenous or heterologous soluble expressions [ccsol: 76 accuracy; proso ii: 75 accuracy (. we found that the experimental status of several target track entries (http://sbkb.org/tt/) has been recently updated and new data are available to train predictive methods (see supplementary material). here, we introduce a novel implementation of the ccsol method, called ccsol omics, to perform large-scale predictions of endogenous and heterologous expression in e.coli. our algorithm has been trained on non-redundant target track entries to identify soluble and insoluble regions within protein sequences. we envisage that ccsol omics will be useful for protein engineering studies, as it allows the investigation of sequence variants in large datasets.  
