ccsvm: correcting support vector machines for confounding factors in biological data classification motivation: classifying biological data into different groups is a central task of bioinformatics: for instance, to predict the function of a gene or protein, the disease state of a patient or the phenotype of an individual based on its genotype. support vector machines are a wide spread approach for classifying biological data, due to their high accuracy, their ability to deal with structured data such as strings, and the ease to integrate various types of data. however, it is unclear how to correct for confounding factors such as population structure, age or gender or experimental conditions in support vector machine classification. results: in this article, we present a support vector machine classifier that can correct the prediction for observed confounding factors. this is achieved by minimizing the statistical dependence between the classifier and the confounding factors. we prove that this formulation can be transformed into a standard support vector machine with rescaled input data. in our experiments, our confounder correcting svm (ccsvm) improves tumor diagnosis based on samples from different labs, tuberculosis diagnosis in patients of varying age, ethnicity and gender, and phenotype prediction in the presence of population structure and outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of prediction accuracy. availability: a ccsvm-implementation in matlab is available fromseveral of the most intensively studied problems in computational biology are classification tasks: for instance, predicting the function of a gene, the disease state of a patient, the reaction of a patient to a therapy and the phenotype of an individual based on its genotype. the abstract task is to predict the class y of an biological subject based on its features x. emerging and existing high-throughput technologies allow us to measure the features of genes, proteins and individuals at an unprecedented resolution and scale, and the hope is that this rich knowledge will lead to ever more accurate data classification. one of the most prominent and most successful classification algorithms are support vector machines (svms) . they are based on the idea to separate objects from two classes by means of a hyperplane; new test objects are then predicted to belong to one of these two classes depending on which half-space they are to whom correspondence should be addressed. located in. their popularity is due to several reasons: first, svms have shown excellent prediction accuracy in many studies . second, svms can be directly applied to structured data, such as strings or graphs , which are abundant in bioinformatics. third, svms allow for straightforward data integration of several data types . however, svms suffer from one limitation: it is unclear how to correct for confounding variables in svm predictions. according to meinert , a confounder is defined as a variable which is related to two factors of interest, and which falsely obscures or accentuates the relationship between them. in this article, we present an svm which can correct for observed confounding variables. the detrimental effects of confounders are observable in many classification tasks in molecular biology, as illustrated by the following two examples: one may want to predict the phenotypes of plants based on their genotype, typically represented by single nucleotide polymorphisms that represent sequence variation in an individual. in this task, population structure, that is systematic ancestry differences between plants with different phenotypes, may have a confounding effect on the prediction . for instance, if there is a correlation between population structure and phenotype, the classifier may rely on snps that correlate with population structure, and subsequently, its predictions may be wrong on datasets from different geographic origins where the phenotypepopulation correlation is less pronounced or not present. another example is drug treatment response in patients from gene expression profiles. confounding factors may be the age, the gender or the ethnicity of the patients, each of which may correlate with the treatment response and the expression levels of certain genes . when predicting on patients with different age, sex or ethnic background, the learnt classifier may poorly generalize. our goal in this article is to define a confounder-correcting support vector machine (ccsvm) that removes the confounding side information to the largest extent possible. to achieve this, we strive to make the classifier base its prediction on features that do not correlate with the confounding variable. the remainder of this article is structured as follows. in section 2, we present the ccsvm (section 2.3), and the classifier (section 2.1) and the statistical dependence measure (section 2.2) it is based upon. we prove that the ccsvm can be computed highly efficiently with existing software packages in section 2.4. in section 3, we show that our method improves upon several state-of-the-art classifiers in tumor diagnosis (section 3.3), tuberculosis diagnosis (section 3.4)page: i343 i342i348  
