cd30 cell graphs of hodgkin lymphoma are not scale-free—an image analysis approach downloaded from motivation: hodgkin lymphoma (hl) is a type of b-cell lymphoma. to diagnose the subtypes, biopsies are taken and immunostained. the slides are scanned to produce high-resolution digital whole slide images (wsi). pathologists manually inspect the spatial distribution of cells, but little is known on the statistical properties of cell distributions in wsis. such properties would give valuable information for the construction of theoretical models that describe the invasion of malignant cells in the lymph node and the intercellular interactions. results: in this work, we define and discuss hl cell graphs. we identify cd30 cells in hl wsis, bringing together the fields of digital imaging and network analysis. we define special graphs based on the positions of the immunostained cells. we present an automatic analysis of complete wsis to determine significant morphological and immunohistochemical features of hl cells and their spatial distribution in the lymph node tissue under three different medical conditions: lymph-adenitis (la) and two types of hl. we analyze the vertex degree distributions of cd30 cell graphs and compare them to a null model. cd30 cell graphs show higher vertex degrees than expected by a random unit disk graph, suggesting clustering of the cells. we found that a gamma distribution is suitable to model the vertex degree distributions of cd30 cell graphs, meaning that they are not scale-free. moreover, we compare the graphs for la and two subtypes of hl. la and classical hl showed different vertex degree distributions. the vertex degree distributions of the two hl sub-types nschl and mixed cellularity hl (mxchl) were similar. availability and implementation: the cellprofiler pipeline used for cell detection is available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/cellgraphs/.hodgkin lymphoma (hl) is one of the most common types of lymphoid malignancies and one of the most common cancer types in adolescents and younger adults . hl can be divided into classical hl (chl) and the rare nodular lymphocyte predominant hl forms. in chl, the tumor cells are called hodgkin and reed-sternberg (hrs) cells. hrs cells are often large and multinucleated with a diameter of up to 100 lm. the mononucleated forms are smaller with a diameter of about 2030 lm . hrs cells usually originate from b cells . in hl, tumor cells are distributed in the lymphoid tissue and make up about 1 of the infiltrating cells in a background of reactive bystander cells such as t-cells, b-cells, histiocytes and others. the hrs cells are known to express cd30 and usually cd15 . they also produce various chemokines and cytokines which shape the microenvironment according to their needs . a review of hl biology can be found in k ppers et al. (2012). hrs cells can easily be detected by an antibody which is specific for cd30. it is used for diagnosis of the subtypes. cd30 is a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family and a marker for hl . malignant lymphomas are diagnostically defined by morphology. histological samples are visualized by light microscopy and are interpreted by a trained pathologist according to the rules of the world health organization in the context of experience in the diagnostic field. nschl and mxchl are differentiated by the presence of sclerotic bands in nschl, which confine at least one nodular compartment containing typical hrs cells. in the absence of these sclerotic bands, a case is assigned to the mxchl category. cd30 is present not only in lymphoid neoplasms but also on virus-infected lymphocytes and special types of activated t cells . thus, the hrs cells form a subset of the cd30 cells. this explains that cd30 cells are also found in lymphadenitis (la). la with abundant cd30 blasts and hl can be hard to distinguish. because of the spread of digital pathology, public databases of hl whole slide images (wsis) like the cancer digital slide archive , as well as internal databases at hospitals and institutes like the dr. senckenbergisches institut f r pathologie, are currently emerging. for some example wsis, see supplementary figures s2s4 in the supplementary material. here, we were interested in the distribution of cd30 cells in wsis of hl biopsies to detect significant patterns of hrs cells in the tissue. we wanted to explore the biological behavior of cd30 cells under neoplastic (hl) and reactive (la) conditions. we focused on hl because the clinical co-authors provided the data and have more than 30 years of experience with hl. we defined cd30 cell graphs based on cd30 cell positions (see section 3.5 for the exact definition of a cells position.). many biological phenomena can be represented as graphs, and graphs have also been applied to model cell distributions and cancer. in, the authors have considered graphs based on all cells in low-resolution brain tissue samples and have applied them to classify the samples into tumor, inflammatory and healthy tissue. for automated cancer diagnosis, an augmented version of the method, using weighted graphs, has been published, representing cell clusters instead of single cells (, b). in, features extracted from nucleiand cytoplasm-based cell graphs have been used in combination with other descriptors to grade follicular lymphoma. texture-based methods have been used to describe clinically relevant characteristics of tissue . texture-based methods do not explicitly determine cell positions. while cell detection is a very common task in biology, only a few studies have tried to detect all cells in wsis . in, neuroblastomas have been classified based on wsis. to the best of our knowledge, no systematic analysis of wsis exists for hl. our approach uses cell positions to create cell graphs of cd30 cells in wsis. we use individual cells due to the low density of cd30 cells in hl. in contrast to other graph-based methods, we analyzed high-resolution images and did not rely on pre-selected regions. this gave us the opportunity to gather data on the whole lymph node in contrast to restrict the analysis to a specific region. for reasons of clarity and comprehensibility, we divided the section 3 into five parts. a definition of cell graphs is given in section 3.1. section 3.2 considers scale-freeness. afterward, we describe a null model in section 3.3. section 3.4 introduces the image format and the three image sets we analyzed. we briefly describe our imaging pipeline and its implementation in section 3.5. section 4 presents a validation of the imaging pipeline and the analysis of the vertex degree distributions of the cell graphs.in this article, we describe the first systematic, graph-based exploration of stained cancer tissue, here, of cd30-stained tissues of hl. our contributions are (i) the automated analysis of wsis, using an own image pipeline, (ii) the definition of a graph-based data structure, the cd30 cell graphs, to abstract from images, which enables for computational analysis, (iii) the statistical analysis of the cell graphs which shows that they differ significantly from randomly generated cell graphs, (iv) the analysis of vertex degree distributions in the cell graphs which follow a gamma distribution and are thus not scale-free, which is unusual for biological networks and (v) the application to hl subtypes which shows unexpected results. we performed an image analysis on a dataset of hl images to detect cd30 cells. mxchl cases had the highest average cell density, followed by nschl. the la cases showed considerably lower cd30 cell densities than the two forms of chl. we defined a new data structure, the cell graph, which describes the spatial neighborhood of cells. we analyzed the vertex degree distributions of cd30 cell graphs. the comparisons with poisson distributions indicate that the distributions in cell graphs differ significantly from those of simulated unit disk graphs. the vertex degree distributions of cell graphs follow a gamma distribution for which moments of arbitrary degree exist. this finding rules out the hypothesis of scale-free cell graph networks.for the cell graph of an image of lymphadenitis (a), nodular sclerosis (b) and mixed cellularity (c). the filled circles depict the observed degree distribution. the distribution deviates significantly from the corresponding poisson distribution (null model, dotted line) but is much better described by the gamma distribution (solid line). we simulated unit disk graphs according to the null model. the error bars illustrate the mean and standard deviation of 10 simulations. the rate parameter, b, and shape parameter, a, of the gamma distribution fitted to observed vertex degree distributions. each data point represents a wsi of mxchl, la or nschl cd30 cell graphs of hl are not scale-freescale-free network models, e.g. the barabasialbert model, are not suitable to describe the complex, cooperative system of cells in the hl tissue. this means that no key regulators exist in the network of hl cells. the lack of key regulators could mean that the distribution of cd30 cells is mainly influenced by external factors, e.g. the lymph node structure or the microenvironment. if the cd30 cells shape the network topology, they all show a similar behavior. we found that the cd30 cells cluster in the tissue, and the clustering is usually high for nschl and low for la. the reason is unknown. we discuss several possible scenarios: high proliferation and rather immobile cells, or mobile cells which are attracted to each other or to certain lymph node regions. for nschl, the sclerotic bands may increase the clustering of cd30 cells in the nonsclerotic lymph node tissue. we demonstrate that cell graphs enable the analysis of hl tissue properties. the investigation of the vertex degree distributions in cell graphs already gave new insights. the cell graph concept can be extended by data on locations of other cell types from the tumor micro-environment and blood vessels to help in better understanding how tumor cells spread through the lymph system. findings of this investigation provide objective parameters for cd30 cells in hl. the method can be extended for different immuno cell types, their shapes and localizations as well as their interactions. these data can be used for a deeper understanding of the biological meaning of interactions between cd30 tumor cells and possibly also in the future to assess the impact of antitumor drugs, help with the prognosis and develop new therapies.  
