sequence analysis cdc45: the missing recj ortholog in eukaryotes? dna replication is one of the most ancient of cellular processes and functional similarities among its molecular machinery are apparent across all cellular life. cdc45 is one of the essential components of the eukaryotic replication fork and is required for the initiation and elongation of dna replication, but its molecular function is currently unknown. in order to trace its evolutionary history and to identify functional domains, we embarked on a computational sequence analysis of the cdc45 protein family. our findings reveal eukaryotic cdc45 and prokaryotic recj to possess a common ancestry and cdc45 to contain a catalytic site within a predicted exonuclease domain. the likely orthology between cdc45 and recj reveals new lines of enquiry into dna replication mechanisms in eukaryotes.archaea and eukarya possess dna replication machineries that are evolutionarily related, indicative of a common ancestry prior to the divergence of these two ancient lineages . in particular, progression at eukaryotic replication forks requires a large multimolecular complex (the replisome progression complex) consisting of cdc45, the gins (go-ichi-ni-san) complex (sld5, psf1-3) and mcm2-7 . archaea possess homologs of only gins subunits and mcm2-7, the macromolecular machine presumed to unwind dna during replication . in eukaryotes, the third component of this complex, cdc45, is essential, ubiquitous and critical for the initiation and elongation of dna replication . despite this fundamental contribution to eukaryotic dna replication, orthologues of cdc45 are not apparent among either archaea or bacteria. is cdc45, therefore, an innovation of early eukaryotic life, one that has since become essential in eukaryotic species from across this diverse kingdom ? such innovations are very common. there is, for example, no known dna repair protein possessing the same arrangement of protein domains across bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes, and only one repair protein, the 5 3 exonuclease recj , to whom correspondence should be addressed. which is conserved in most bacteria and archaea, but that is absent from eukarya . for most prokaryotic species, recj is the only 5 3 exonuclease that is specific for single-stranded dna (ssdna). it is known to be involved in homologous recombination, base excision repair, mismatch repair and, of particular importance here, in the rescue of stalled replication forks . in order to better understand the molecular function of cdc45, which remains far from clear, and to trace its evolutionary ancestry, we embarked on an extensive analysis of cdc45 sequences.we have identified a statistically significant sequence similarity between the n-terminal conserved dhh domains of cdc45 and recj families. we postulate that cdc45 possesses a divalent cation (mg 2+ or mn 2+ ) dependent 5 3 exonuclease activity important for dna replication. experimental approaches are now required to investigate these evolutionary, molecular and cellular hypotheses.  
