cd-hit suite: a web server for clustering and comparing biological sequences cd-hit is a widely used program for clustering and comparing large biological sequence datasets. in order to further assist the cd-hit users, we significantly improved this program with more functions and better accuracy, scalability and flexibility. most importantly, we developed a new web server, cd-hit suite, for clustering a user-uploaded sequence dataset or comparing it to another dataset at different identity levels. users can now interactively explore the clusters within web browsers. we also provide downloadable clusters for several public databases (ncbi nr, swissprot and pdb) at different identity levels. availability: free access at http://cd-hit.orgthe size of the biological sequence databases is rapidly growing due to large-scale genome projects and the emerging field of metagenomics . new sequencing technologies are now producing sequence data at a very high rate, and this has created a greater need for bioinformatics tools to effectively organize and analyze the data. fortunately, biological sequences are related and may share homology, and thus clustering these sequences into groups and finding a representative or a consensus for each group are practical ways to solve the sequence analysis problems. our previous works introduced cd-hit based on short word filtering and a greedy incremental clustering algorithm to cluster and compare large biological sequence datasets. one advantage of cd-hit is its ultrahigh speed and the ability to handle large datasets. since its release, cd-hit has been widely used by many groups in various fields, including uniref , smart and metagenome data analyses . in the last few years, we have been continuously improving this program with more functions and better accuracy, scalability and flexibility. we also implemented a new web server to allow to whom correspondence should be addressed. present address: department of medicine, university of california san diego, la jolla, ca, usa. users to cluster or compare sequences without installing and executing the command-line version of cd-hit locally. the server provides interactive interface and additional visualization tools. it also provides precalculated and regularly updated sequence clusters for several widely used databases, including ncbi nr, swissprot and pdb.cd-hit has been significantly improved from our previous work. cd-hit suite provides users with a friendly web interface to perform biological sequence clustering and comparison with additional visualization tools. it also provides precalculated clusters for several public sequence databases which are regularly updated.  
