data and text mining cdrug: a web server for predicting anticancer activity of chemical compounds cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide. screening anticancer candidates from tens of millions of chemical compounds is expensive and time-consuming. a rapid and user-friendly web server, known as cdrug, is described here to predict the anticancer activity of chemical compounds. in cdrug, a hybrid score was developed to measure the similarity of different compounds. the performance analysis shows that cdrug has the area under curve of 0.878, indicating that cdrug is effective to distinguish active and inactive compounds. availability: the cdrug web server and the standard-alone version are freely available at http://bsb.kiz.ac.cn/cdrug/.cancer causes millions of deaths per year. screening candidates from natural or synthetic compounds is an efficient way for cancer drug discovery . in the past decades, tens of millions of chemical compounds have been deposited in the public database . discovering anticancer compounds from this huge database through experimental methods is expensive and time-consuming . although the national cancer institute (nci) has been screening the anticancer compounds for tens of years, only 1 ($70 000) compounds were tested for screening anticancer compounds . therefore, a rapid and effectively computational method is required for prediction of anticancer activity of chemical compounds. here, we constructed a web server, termed cancer drug (cdrug), to predict the anticancer activity of given compound(s). cdrug uses a novel molecular description method (relative frequency-weighted fingerprint) to implement the compound fingerprints. then, a hybrid score was calculated to measure the similarity between the query and the active compounds. finally, a confidence level (p-value) is calculated to predict whether the query compound(s) have, or do not have, the activity of anticancer.cdrug web server provides an effective, rapid and user-friendly interface to predict anticancer activity of chemical compounds.  
