systems biology cellaging: a tool to study segregation and partitioning in division in cell lineages of escherichia coli motivation: cell division in escherichia coli is morphologically symmetric. however, as unwanted protein aggregates are segregated to the cell poles and, after divisions, accumulate at older poles, generate asymmetries in sister cells vitality. novel single-molecule detection techniques allow observing aging-related processes in vivo, over multiple generations, informing on the underlying mechanisms. results: cellaging is a tool to automatically extract information on polar segregation and partitioning in division of aggregates in e.coli, and on cellular vitality. from time-lapse, parallel brightfield and fluor-escence microscopy images, it performs cell segmentation, alignment of brightfield and fluorescence images, lineage construction and pole age determination, and it computes aging-related features. we exemplify its use by analyzing spatial distributions of fluorescent protein aggregates from images of cells across generations. availability: cellaging, instructions and an example are available atthe division process of escherichia coli is morphologically symmetric. in favorable environments, the process can be sustained indefinitely. however, to be sustainable, e.coli needs to deal with the accumulation of unwanted substances and degradation of internal structures. recent evidence suggests that in growing populations of isogenic cells, there is a continuous emergence of functional asymmetries in the vitality of sister cells, which are associated to the accumulation of unwanted protein aggregates at the cell poles . namely, e.coli appears to use a bet-hedging strategy during cell division , in that the daughter cell inheriting the older pole of mother cell (and the unwanted aggregates within) exhibits slower growth and division rates, as well as an increased incidence of death. a recent study observed this process, one event at a time, showing that aggregates of rna molecules tagged with ms2green fluorescent protein, produced in the midcell region, are quickly transported to the poles, where they remain thereafter . also, the choice of pole was biased in that, on average, more aggregates moved toward the older pole. little is known about the mechanisms underlying the process of segregation and partitioning in division of unwanted aggregates. in, it was hypothesized that the limited diffusion of the aggregates, along with cell division and nucleoid occlusion, may suffice to explain the observations. other studies suggest that active transport mechanisms may be involved . to study these processes and underlying sources, one needs to observe them in vivo, using single-molecule visualization techniques, in growing isogenic cell populations over several generations. information extraction from time-lapse microscope images of growing cell populations is fastidious and technically difficult. it requires large data sets, involves multiple steps, such as cell segmentation and tracking, and requires identifying, e.g. cell lineages. also, it is necessary to extract spatiotemporal distributions of fluorescent proteins and quantify their partitioning in divisions. there are tools available to perform some of these steps, e.g. of cell segmentation . however, some steps, e.g. cell tracking, remain problematic. also, no tool performs all the steps needed to, from the images, outputting information on segregation to the cell poles and partitioning on unwanted aggregates in cell division. we present cellaging, a tool that performs segmentation of e.coli cells in brightfield images, aligns the segmentation results with fluorescence images of the same cells and establishes temporal relationships between the cells. additionally, cellaging outputs both aging-related statistics of choice and the information on the temporal evolution of the fluorescence in each cell at the pixel level in the established hierarchy of cells. the program is operated via a graphical user interface. aside from studies of cellular aging, it allows studying the in vivo dynamics of the spatial distribution and the partitioning in division of any fluorescence-tagged intracellular elements. an example application is provided in supplement, along with a detailed description of the methods used by cellaging.segmentation is seeded by gradient path labeling , and it relies on classifiers for merging and discarding segments. the classifiers were constructed using the classification and regression trees algorithm , and they were trained by an expert . inter-frame information is used to enhance the quality of the segmentation. after the automated segmentation, the results can be manually corrected. as a side note, we observed that cellaging, because of thorough training, and given consistency between images from multiple time series, consistently outperformed currently available state-of-the-art tools for the set of images that we produced in laboratory. cellaging then automatically aligns the fluorescence images with the segmentation results. then, it finds cell divisions and establishes the correspondence of the same cells between consecutive frames (supplementary material). we observed that the number of errors in this step is negligible in the images used in our case study (51). the result can be visualized by a graphical tool, from which features can be selected and exported. there are three categories of features (see manual). features relative to time series of individual cells include their area, total fluorescence intensity, bias in intensity of old and new poles and the distribution of fluorescence along the major axis of the cell. these features are extracted as a function of time. features relative to cell division include the area and the total fluorescence of the mother cell, when last observed, its division time and the bias in daughter cell areas or intensities after their appearance. features relative to cell populations include mean cell area and mean fluorescence intensity during their lifetime, the bias in fluorescence intensity in the frame where the cells were first or last observed and the division time of each cell. from the exported results, one can either extract the full distribution of values or calculate statistics, such as mean and standard deviation. the set of features calculated is intended to suffice to study segregation and partitioning in division of unwanted protein aggregates and consequence aging. however, to ensure applicability of cellaging for other aims, one can extract the information on the temporal evolution of each cell at a pixel level, along with the information on the relationship between the cells and on the orientation of the poles of cells born during the measurement period. in supplement, we exemplify the usage of cellaging (exemplified in) by analyzing images of e.coli k-12 strain sx4 cells harboring the tsr-venus gene under the control of lac promoter , a gift from sunny xie, harvard university, usa. the supplement also features a performance analysis of the segmentation, a description of the alignment of brightfield and confocal images and a description of the construction of lineages. finally, we describe the strain, induction of the target gene and microscopy imaging.. example of cellaging in use. images (upper left) are provided to cellaging (bottom left), which analyze the time series (bottom right). exported results, such as spatial distribution of fluorescence inside the cell, can be computed plotted using, e.g. microsoft excel (upper right)  
