cell-free dna fragment-size distribution analysis for non-invasive prenatal cnv prediction background: non-invasive detection of aneuploidies in a fetal genome through analysis of cell-free dna circulating in the maternal plasma is becoming a routine clinical test. such tests, which rely on analyzing the read coverage or the allelic ratios at single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) loci, are not sensitive enough for smaller sub-chromosomal abnormalities due to sequencing biases and paucity of snps in a genome. results: we have developed an alternative framework for identifying sub-chromosomal copy number variations in a fetal genome. this framework relies on the size distribution of fragments in a sample, as fetal-origin fragments tend to be smaller than those of maternal origin. by analyzing the local distribution of the cell-free dna fragment sizes in each region, our method allows for the identification of sub-megabase cnvs, even in the absence of snp positions. to evaluate the accuracy of our method, we used a plasma sample with the fetal fraction of 13, down-sampled it to samples with coverage of 10x40x and simulated samples with cnvs based on it. our method had a perfect accuracy (both specificity and sensitivity) for detecting 5 mb cnvs, and after reducing the fetal fraction (to 11, 9 and 7), it could correctly identify 98.82100 of the 5 mb cnvs and had a true-negative rate of 95.2999.76. availability and implementation: our source code is available on github at https://github.com/ compbio-uoft/fsda.prenatal testing for genetic abnormalities (aneuploidies and copy number variations; cnvs) is a routine practice for pregnant women . complexities associated with traditional invasive prenatal diagnostic methods, such as chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis, have led to research for safer non-invasive approaches. after the discovery of fetal cell-free dna (cfdna) in maternal plasma , several studies examined the potential of using fetal cfdna for non-invasive prenatal testing (nipt). their results showed that methods using next-generation sequencing were highly accurate for detecting aneuploidies , leading to several companies (e.g. natera, verinata and sequenom) offering clinical nipt today. the two complementary approaches that use fetal cfdna in plasma for detecting aneuploidies or smaller copy number variations (cnvs) are based on read coverage and single-nucleotide polymorphism (snp) allelic ratios. in both cases, cfdna is sequenced using next-generation sequencing technology. while earlier methods have generated this data via whole-genome shotgun sequencing , more recent approaches oftentarget only the chromosomes or regions of interest to reduce the cost of sequencing . in methods that rely on coverage, the copy count of chromosomes (for aneuploidies) and regions (for smaller cnvs) are predicted by comparing the proportion of fragments that align to the target compared to a set of controls. an orthogonal information source is the allelic ratios observed at snp loci. even though fetal-origin dna is only a small fraction of total cfdna [fetal fraction, also called the fetal content, is typically 612 depending on gestation age and maternal weight (, the presence of extra copies of fetal chromosomes changes the observed frequencies of the alleles at the snp positions. while the change may be imperceptible at a single locus due to low fetal fraction, incorporating several snps can allow for accurate prediction of aneuploidies. for example,proposed a bayesian maximum-likelihood method that uses allele counts at snp loci together with genotype information of the parents to predict copy count in target chromosomes. in a recent article, we demonstrated that the information provided by allelic ratios and coverage approaches is complementary and can be unified within a single probabilistic framework, e.g. using hidden markov models . there are multiple issues which complicate the use of coverage and allelic ratios to uncover cnvs. there are significant number of known (e.g. gc content) and unknown biases that affect the coverage. such biases are especially prominent in smaller regions, and extensive control datasets are required to fully model them. allelic ratios at snps, while less affected by biases, are available only in a small fraction of the genome. furthermore, they are not uniformly distributed across the genome, leading to blind spots in the analysis. finally, in some cases, analysis of such snp sites requires the presence of a paternal sample, which is often not readily available. several studies have shown that fetal-and maternal-origin cfdna have distinct size distributions.first reported this by using amplicons of different sizes in a panel of quantitative polymerase chain reaction assays. their results showed that fetal fragments are generally shorter than maternal ones. this result was confirmed bythrough high-throughput pairedend sequencing of the plasma. in a recent study,have used fragment-size distributions to predict aneuploidies using microchip-based capillary electrophoresis. however, their method is unable to detect shorter cnvs as it considers the fragment-size distribution of the whole genome rather than specific regions, and different regions can have different distributions due to epigenetic factors such as the position of nucleosomes . in this work, we develop a novel method for identifying subchromosomal cnvs in a fetal genome from cfdna fragment-size information. for a given target region, the method identifies a set of control regions with similar fragment-size distribution characteristics and utilizes this set of controls for predicting the fetal copy number in the target region. we test our methods on multiple sets of simulated data and show that our method is able to identify submegabase cnvs with high accuracy, which increases with the fetal dna fraction, depth of sequencing and length of cnvs being predicted.in this section, we evaluate the performance of our method by performing tests using the cfdna samples i1 and g1. in section 3.1, we evaluate the performance of our method on cfdna data with altered fetal fractions, reduced coverages and simulated cnvs of different types and sizes, as well as investigating the effects of choosing different thresholds for control bin selection. in section 3.2, we compare the performance of our method with our own previous cnv detection algorithm that is based on combined allele ratio and coverage analysis.in this work, we introduce a novel method for accurate submegabase cnv prediction based on the fragment-size distribution of the cfdna in maternal plasma. to overcome the challenge of variability of the cfdna fragment-size distributions throughout genome, as described in section 2.4 we noted that the regions that have similar distribution signatures are likely to be similar across different samples. our method takes advantage of this by using an orthogonal, reference sample to find such regions. depending on the application, it can be important to have fewer false-positives (calling wrong cnvs) or fewer false-negatives (missing actual cnvs). the prior on the fetal copy number, which we assumed to be uniform in our experiments, can be adjusted to change the cnv calling rate and the sensitivity/specificity trade-off. our model has several shortcomings, which can be addressed in future work. first, while we model the length distribution based on combination of maternal and fetal genomes, we do not directly model the presence of small scale insertion/deletion (indel) variation, which also impacts the distribution of fragment lengths [see e.g.or cnvs in the maternal sample. while these events are rare and lead to changes of the fragment-length distribution that are different from changes by fetal copy count, they could compromise the accuracy of our method and hence should be modeled directly. the accuracy of our method depends highly on the fetal fraction r, which we assume is known. the estimation of r from real data is straightforward at higher fetal fractions and coverages, based on sites where the mother is homozygous for one allele, and the paternally inherited allele is different. as fetal fraction decreases and coverage falls this becomes harder due to allele dropout, and for coverages lower than 10x, we would need orthogonal methods for identifying such fragments. effective methods for directly estimating r from nipt data would improve the robustness of our algorithm. a general weakness of our experiments is in the simulation, where we assume that the size distribution of fetal-origin dna is uniform across the genome. this makes our simulated data cleaner than a realistic sample. a better simulation framework, or availability of real samples with cnvs, would help the development of new methods in this field.  
