systems biology cellminer companion: an interactive web application to explore cellminer nci-60 data the nci-60 human tumor cell line panel is an invaluable resource for cancer researchers , providing drug sensitivity, molecular and phenotypic data for a range of cancer types. cellminer is a web resource that provides tools for the acquisition and analysis of quality-controlled nci-60 data. cellminer supports queries of up to 150 drugs or genes, but the output is an excel file for each drug or gene. this output format makes it difficult for researchers to explore the data from large queries. cellminer companion is a web application that facilitates the exploration and visual-ization of output from cellminer, further increasing the accessibility of nci-60 data. availability and implementation: the web application is freely accessible at https://pul-bioinfor matics.shinyapps.io/cellminercompanion. the r source code can be downloaded at https://github. com/pepascuzzi/cellminercompanion.git.the national cancer institute developmental therapeutics program initiated a 60 human tumor cell line (nci-60) anticancer drug screen over two decades ago . the nci-60 database includes drug sensitivity data from more than 50 000 compounds and molecular data such as gene expression, mirna expression, protein expression, genetic variation and dna copy number. the nci-60 data have been used to determine drug mode of action and potential molecular targets . the nci-60 data have also been used to develop predictive models for drug sensitivity . the cellminer database (http://discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminer/) provides access to quality-controlled nci-60 pharmacological and molecular data . cellminer also provides analysis tools to explore the nci-60 data. the pattern comparison tool enables the discovery of drugs or genes with similar patterns of sensitivity or expression across the nci-60 panel. the query output is a spreadsheet that includes a pearson correlation coefficient between the query drug(s) or gene(s) and every other drug and gene in the database. researchers can then submit up to 150 of these identifiers to cellminer to obtain additional data in a single query. the result is multiple spreadsheets making integrative analysis of the results difficult for researchers that lack computer programming skills. the recent r package, rcellminer , provides a powerful programmatic interface to the nci-60 data, duplicating and enhancing the tools on the cellminer website. however, rcellminer is designed for experienced r users. here, we present cellminer companion, a web application that enables researchers to explore the output of cellminer queries. the data from multiple files is summarized, assembled into a single data matrix, z-score normalized, clustered and visualized both as a heatmap and dendrogram. users can interactively change many parameters to explore the relationship among drugs or genes across the v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com nci-60 cell lines. importantly, this tool increases the accessibility of the nci-60 data to those lacking programming skills. further, cellminer companion could be incorporated easily into workflows that use rcellminer.  
