bioimage informatics cellmissy: a tool for management, storage and analysis of cell migration data produced in wound healing-like assays automated image processing has allowed cell migration research to evolve to a high-throughput research field. as a consequence , there is now an unmet need for data management in this domain. the absence of a generic management system for the quantitative data generated in cell migration assays results in each dataset being treated in isolation, making data comparison across experiments difficult. moreover, by integrating quality control and analysis capabilities into such a data management system, the common practice of having to manually transfer data across different downstream analysis tools will be markedly sped up and made more robust. in addition, access to a data management solution creates gateways for data standardization, meta-analysis and structured public data dissemination. we here present cellmissy, a cross-platform data management system for cell migration data with a focus on wound healing data. cellmissy simplifies and automates data management, storage and analysis from the initial experimental setup to data exploration. availability and implementation: cellmissy is a cross-platform open-source software developed in java. source code and cross-platform binaries are freely available under the apache2 open source license atdynamic cell motility processes are essential for morphogenesis, immune responses, wound healing and cancer metastasis . investigation of the mechanisms and modes of cell migration is therefore important for fundamental scientific insight and for translational research, as molecules involved in deregulated cell migration are attractive targets for therapeutic intervention. as a result, the field has developed methods for the systematic high-throughput analysis of cell migration, with wound healing-like assays currently most amenable to multiple condition comparison or high-throughput approaches . in these assays, a cell layer is allowed to move into a cell-free region, and the decrease in time of this area reflects cell migration velocity. the cell-free zone can be created by scratching a confluent cell layer [typical wound healing assay (or by using non-damaging barriers during cell seeding [cell exclusion zone assay (. advanced microscopes then allow automatic acquisition of images of the migrating cells, and specialized image processing tools are used to quantify cell migration features from these images . specific solutions for tackling the problems in large-scale image management and storage have additionally been reported . however, a major current challenge in the cell migration field lies in the development of suitable software for the annotation, management and sharing of the quantification data obtained from such imaging-based experiments. although software tools are available to help with several of the steps in this workflow, several key functions currently remain unmet (see). we here present cellmissy, a cross-platform system for the annotation, storage, analysis and dissemination of quantitative cell migration data. it aids the user with experimental set-up and annotation, generic data import/export (downstream from image processing) and subsequent data storage, inspection and analysis. it thus provides support for the entire experimental workflow, when coupled to an image analysis algorithm of choice (,). cellmissy is intended to facilitate local storage and analysis of acquired data, but it also provides the basic infrastructure for improved annotation, standardization and dissemination in the migration field, ultimately enabling re-analyses and meta-analyses to take place. the benefit of the latter has already been proven in other fields, where data management and dissemination infrastructure are more mature . the development of useroriented freely available data storage and analysis systems for cell migration data thus provides an important and timely next step for the field.  
