a computational analysis of the antigenic properties of haemagglutinin in influenza a h3n2 motivation: modelling antigenic shift in influenza a h3n2 can help to predict the efficiency of vaccines. the virus is known to exhibit sudden jumps in antigenic distance, and prediction of such novel strains from amino acid sequence differences remains a challenge. results: from analysis of 6624 amino acid sequences of wild-type h3, we propose updates to the frequently referenced list of 131 amino acids located at or near the five identified antibody binding regions in haemagglutinin (ha). we introduce a class of predictive models based on the analysis of amino acid changes in these binding regions, and extend the principle to changes in ha1 as a whole by dividing the molecule into regional bands. our results show that a range of simple models based on banded changes give better predictive performance than models based on the established five canonical regions and can identify a higher proportion of vaccine escape candidates among novel strains than a current state-of-the-art model.seasonal influenza poses a serious world-wide threat to public health, with up to 500 000 deaths being attributable on average to annual influenza epidemics . of particular concern are strains of influenza a. the trimeric viral surface protein haemagglutinin (ha) of influenza a, which contains the host cell receptor binding site, is the primary focus of successful attack by natural antibodies; antibodies binding to the sister surface protein neuriminidase are not generally considered to prevent infection. ha is synthesized as a single polypeptide chain that subsequently cleaves into two chains, ha1 (328 amino acids) and ha2 (221 amino acids). the two chains are covalently attached by a disulfide bond . has rapid evolution through nucleotide polymorphism allows it to escape antibody activity periodically through antigenic drift, leading to epidemics and requiring regular updates to the recommended vaccine composition [a separate mechanism, genetic reassortment between viral strains and between species, is usually responsible for the much larger antigenic shifts causing pandemics to whom correspondence should be addressed.(. influenza h3n2 has been the most frequently occurring subtype of influenza a in human infections over the last 40 years . its ha component, h3, is antigenically distinguishable from that of other numbered subtypes . in the laboratory, the haemagglutinin inhibition (hi) test is used to characterize an influenza strain antigenically (who, 1953). given an antiserum raised against influenza strain i, c ij is the minimum serum concentration that is required to inhibit agglutination of viruses of strain j. in the hi test c ij and c ii are measured by diluting serum until agglutination no longer takes place (hi results are conventionally expressed as dilutions, but in keeping with more general chemical practice we will use concentrations in this summary).proposed the ratioas an indicator of the potential effectiveness of a vaccine based on strain i in controlling a viral infection by strain j. if r ij is four or less then the vaccine is considered effective. this is known as the antigenic escape threshold. it should be noted that in generalthe geometric mean of the above ratios (r ij r ji ) 1/2 was introduced by archetti and horsfall (1950) as a measure of antigenic variation and has been shown to be a superior predictor of vaccine effectiveness against a particular strain than simple concentration ratios . lapedes and farber (2001) demonstrated that a shape space of low dimensionality can be constructed in which antisera and antigens are treated as points, with the distance between them (the antigenic distance) being linearly related to the logarithm of the concentration ratio. the equationwill be used in the current work as a measurement of antigenic distance between strains i and j. five regions of the ha1 monomer have been found to undergo mutations when the virus is cultured in the presence of monoclonal antibodies, eventually leading to antibody escape. these regions are presumed to encompass the sites at which antibodies bind to ha1 ; they are conventionally labelled sites a to e. another factor known to affect immunogenicity is the presence or absence of n-glycosylation sites .in this article, we have presented an updated set of varying amino acid residues close to the five antigenic sites identified in the 1980s by monoclonal antibody studies, using the same mechanism that was used to produce the original set, but taking advantage of the much larger number of ha1 sequences now available (6624 compared to the original 357). the amount of the surface covered by this much larger set, plus the analysis of the predictive models we have presented, lends support to the idea that neutralizing antibody epitopes can occur at many points within 70 , or even 100 , of the distal end of the ha1 monomer. the models we have described are simple in their approach, and we believe that their performance can be further extended by incorporating more sophisticated measures of the region and density of amino acid variation. likewise, while we have focussed on the h3 subtype of influenza a, we anticipate that the approach would extend to other subtypes of interest such as h1 and h5. our artificial sites approach is particularly promising as it is not inherently data dependent; all surface residues within a given range of the distal end of the ha1 molecule can be incorporated irrespective of whether they have been shown to vary within existing strains. use of the models could be combined with the use of an immunodominant page: 1408 14031408  
