cellprofiler analyst: interactive data exploration, analysis and classification of large biological image sets cellprofiler analyst allows the exploration and visualization of image-based data, together with the classification of complex biological phenotypes, via an interactive user interface designed for biologists and data scientists. cellprofiler analyst 2.0, completely rewritten in python, builds on these features and adds enhanced supervised machine learning capabilities (classifier), as well as visualization tools to overview an experiment (plate viewer and image gallery). availability and implementation: cellprofiler analyst 2.0 is free and open source, available atcellprofiler analyst is open-source software for biological imagebased classification, data exploration and visualization with an interactive user interface designed for biologists and data scientists. using data from feature extraction software such as cellprofiler , cellprofiler analyst offers easy-to-use tools for exploration and mining of image data, which is being generated in ever increasing amounts, particularly in high-content screens (hcs). its tools can help identify complex and subtle phenotypes, improve quality control and provide single-cell and population-level information from experiments. some distinctive and critical features of cellprofiler analyst are its user-friendly object-based machine learning interface, its ability to handle the tremendous scale of hcs experiments (millions of cell images), its gating capabilities that allow observing relationships among different data displays, and its exploration tools which enable interactively viewing connections between cell-level data and well-level data, and among raw images, processed/segmented images, extracted features and sample metadata. compared to other commonly-cited open-source biological image classification software like ilastik , cellcognition and wnd-charm , cellprofiler analyst has the advantage of containing companion visualization tools, being suitable for high-throughput datasets, having multiple classifier options, and allowing both cell and fieldof-view classification. advanced cell classifier shares many of the classification features of cellprofiler analyst, but it lacks hcs data exploration and visualization tools. compared to command-line-based data exploration software like cellhts and imagehts and v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.  
