systems biology cellpublisher: a web platform for the intuitive visualization and sharing of metabolic, signalling and regulatory pathways systems biology relies increasingly on collaborations between several groups with different expertise. therefore, the systems biology community is adopting standards that allow effective communication of concepts, as well as transmission and processing of pathway information. the systems biology graphical notation (sbgn) is a graphical language for biological pathways that has both a biological as well as a computational meaning. the program celldesigner allows the codification of biological phenomena in an sbgn compliant form. cellpublisher is a web server that allows the conversion of celldesigner files to web-based navigatable diagrams based on the user interface of google maps. thus, cellpublisher complements celldesigner by facilitating the understanding of complex diagrams and by providing the possibility to share any celldesigner diagram online with collaborators and get their feedback. due to the intuitive interface of the online diagrams, cellpublisher serves as a basis for discovery of novel properties of the modelled networks. availability: the freely available web server and the documentation can be accessed at: http://cellpublisher.gobics.de/. the source code and the offline version for microsoft windows are freely available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/cellpublisher/.the detailed understanding of biological pathways and the design of novel molecular pathways with engineered properties lies at the core of systems biology. to meet these goals, two complementary approaches are combined in modelling: simulation and graphical representation. while the former aims to mimic the behaviour of the pathway in silico, the latter aims to make the pathway properties and structure understandable to humans. the pace of discovery in systems biology has been greatly accelerated by the adoption of standards by the community (e.g. sbml). the systems biology graphical notation (sbgn, le) is likely to become the standard for graphical representation. adequate software tools such as celldesigner are freely available and actively used. to whom correspondence should be addressed.while several online databases such as kegg, biocyc, reactome, panther, pathway projector or subtipathways exist for visualizing centrally curated pathways , only few of them are adopting a standard graphical language (e.g.). moreover, as novel pathways are constantly discovered or designed, there is a specific need for presenting custom pathways and receiving feedback from other scientists. so far, authoring diagrams for online sharing is possible using the web servers biopp, payao and wikipathways . however, these servers do not allow the generation of easily navigatable diagrams which are required for the evaluation of pathway maps by the non-specialist busy lab scientist. with the advent of asynchronous javascript and xml (ajax) technologies in the web, which have given rise to applications such as google maps, the possibilities for navigation of graphical information have been greatly improved. to complement the powerful authoring capabilities of celldesigner with an improved visualization interface and to overcome the limitations of the existing pathway presentation tools, we have developed cellpublisher, a web server for the intuitive visualization, sharing and discussion of metabolic, signalling and regulatory pathways based on the interface of google maps.  
