genome analysis challenges in rna virus bioinformatics motivation: computer-assisted studies of structure, function and evolution of viruses remains a neglected area of research. the attention of bioinformaticians to this interesting and challenging field is far from commensurate with its medical and biotechnological importance. it is telling that out of 4200 talks held at ismb 2013, the largest international bioinformatics conference, only one presentation explicitly dealt with viruses. in contrast to many broad, established and well-organized bioinformatics communities (e.g. structural genomics, ontol-ogies, next-generation sequencing, expression analysis), research groups focusing on viruses can probably be counted on the fingers of two hands. results: the purpose of this review is to increase awareness among bioinformatics researchers about the pressing needs and unsolved problems of computational virology. we focus primarily on rna viruses that pose problems to many standard bioinformatics analyses owing to their compact genome organization, fast mutation rate and low evolutionary conservation. we provide an overview of tools and algorithms for handling viral sequencing data, detecting functionally important rna structures, classifying viral proteins into families and investigating the origin and evolution of viruses.viruses have been the first biological systems for which complete genomic information became available: bacteriophage ms2 in 1976 and x174 in 1977. by the mid 1990s, multiple strains of important human pathogens, in particular hiv, had been sequenced, laying the foundation for a systematic comparative genomics of the diverse virus families. with the completion of the human genome and the sequencing of hundred of eukaryotic and thousands of prokaryotic genomes, however, the bioinformatics community focussed almost entirely on these much larger and more complex systems. with few exceptions, most viral genomes are thus relatively poorly annotated and few computational tools and techniques have been developed specifically for the many idiosyncratic features of individual virus families. the small size of viral genomes makes it possible to sequence large numbers of isolates, usually in clinical context, that are unavailable for any living systems. this flood of sequencing data in itself calls for specific methods of analysis, which so far are available in part at best. in this survey we concentrate on rna viruses. they form a highly diverse grouping, usually classified in terms of their genome organization. they may have a single-stranded (ss) genome in either plus (e.g. poliovirus, enterovirus, hepatitisa-virus) or in minus orientation (e.g. rabiesvirus, maizemosaic-virus), or a double-stranded (ds) rna genome (e.g. rotavirus), or ssrna with a dsdna as an intermediate product (e.g. retroviruses including hiv). nevertheless, they share several common features. in particular, their genomes are small, ranging from 3400 (enterobacteria phage bz13) to 31 000 nt (coronavirus), encoding just a handful of proteins. furthermore, their mutation rates are large enough to form a to whom correspondence should be addressed. quasi-species rather than a single genetically homogenous species in the classical sense. many of the common questions raised in virology call for specific bioinformatics support: how is viral gene expression regulated? how do rna viruses evolve? how common are they? have we already seen the whole diversity of rna virus families or genera? how quickly do they change? how often do variations occur? how important is recombination in viral evolution? is there a single common viral origin or do we find clearly independent origins? in this contribution we review the state of the art of the computational methods that have helped to address some of these questions. in particular, we will be concerned with (i) finding and assembling viral genomes based on rna-seq data, (ii) regulatory rna elements and processed subgenomic rna species, (iii) classification problems regarding viral protein families, (iv) phylogenetics and evolution of rna viruses and (v) virushost associations as a basis for biomedical applications.  
