characteristics of 454 pyrosequencing data—enabling realistic simulation with flowsim motivation: the commercial launch of 454 pyrosequencing in 2005 was a milestone in genome sequencing in terms of performance and cost. throughout the three available releases, average read lengths have increased to 500 base pairs and are thus approaching read lengths obtained from traditional sanger sequencing. study design of sequencing projects would benefit from being able to simulate experiments. results: we explore 454 raw data to investigate its characteristics and derive empirical distributions for the flow values generated by pyrosequencing. based on our findings, we implement flowsim, a simulator that generates realistic pyrosequencing data files of arbitrary size from a given set of input dna sequences. we finally use our simulator to examine the impact of sequence lengths on the results of concrete whole-genome assemblies, and we suggest its use in planning of sequencing projects, benchmarking of assembly methods and other fields.during the last few years novel sequencing technologies have been introduced. the platforms that are currently commercially available are marketed by roche (454), illumina (solexa/genome analyzer), and applied biosystems (solid), and they give new challenges for bioinformatics due to data volumes, short read lengths, and difference in errors and quality compared to traditional sanger sequencing. so far, most bioinformatics methods available have been developed for sanger sequencing data. in this article, we characterize the data produced by the 454 system and in particular by its latest version named gs flx titanium (referred to as titanium in the rest of the article). we analyze titanium data sets from genomes for which the sequence has been determined. specifically, we map each titanium read to the reference and derive empirical distributions for the flowgram data obtained (see below;). this provides an improved basis for analysis and algorithm design, e.g. for base calling and alignment. in this article, we present a simulator that generates realistic flowgram data for any chosen dna sequence. the article is structured as follows: in the rest of section 1, we briefly summarize pyrosequencing, specialized methods for analyzing pyrosequencing data (operating in flowspace, see to whom correspondence should be addressed. section 1.2), and simulations. section 2 follows the results obtained from characterizing pyrosequencing data at the flow level, and in section 3, we present the flowsim simulator and some results obtained from comparing simulated and real data sets. finally, in section 4 a discussion is given.this study aims to sketch the opportunities that arise from analyzing pyrosequencing raw data, culminating in the use of empirical distributions. the empirical distributions give us a very realistic picture of the underlying characteristics of the light signal values that are later translated into dna sequences. in contrast, earlier approaches to modeling flow data have built on parametric i424page: i425 i420i425distributions, and the same distributions were used for whole reads, without respect to flow or read positions. our findings and the empirical distributions are based on large amounts of data from three different species (e.coli, d.labrax, gadus morhua), four sequencing labs, both shotgun and pairedend reads with different gap sizes. the empirical flow value distributions are very similar, and we have not observed any factors which influence the shape of the distributions apart from the 454 generation. thus, we have a good reason to believe that the distributions used in flowsim are representative. the flow values that result from 454 sequencing exhibit many interesting characteristics and artifacts, and we do not address them all here. some of these are generation-specific, some of them have remained stable over the years, and some of them only appear on one certain plate, for one certain species or in one lab. one known artifact, exact or almost-exact duplicates, has been not only described for metagenomics in the literature , but we also observed them in shotgun sequences for e.coli and d.labrax. we do emulate the degradation in empirical flow distributions, and we also calculate the corresponding quality scores. in contrast, we neglect some of the artifacts that we have observed in the empirical distributions, but are not able to interpret properly yet, such as for example: shifts in peaks that lead to systematic over-or under-calls, jumps, neighboring peaks, i.e. subpeaks around the next or preceding integer. these are particularly strong for the noise distribution (with a neighboring peak around 1) and the 1-distribution (with neighboring peaks around 0.1 and 2), but the values causing these peaks are not many in number. analyzing the corresponding data including the related alignments we found that the subpeaks are likely to be caused by real biological differences. this will be explored further in a separate study. in this context, we also performed a weak smoothing process that helped to reduce subpeaks and jumps. furthermore, the 454 image analysis software implements a set of quality filters that sets trimming coordinates to identify the high-quality part of each read. in addition, some reads are eliminated entirely based on quality metrics. although these filters are documented (roche applied science, 2008), the documentation is not sufficient to re-implement them, and the current version of flowsim does not attempt to simulate them. we hope to address this in a future release . in conclusion, our simulator produces sufficiently realistic 454 files as we model all important phenomena that we have observed. furthermore, flowsim allows the user to specify many of its parameters, making it adaptable to new real or hypothetical 454 generations.  
