characterization of the n-atpase, a distinct, laterally transferred na +-translocating form of the bacterial f-type membrane atpase an analysis of the distribution of the na +-translocating atpases/atp synthases among microbial genomes identified an atypical form of the f 1 f o-type atpase that is present in the archaea methanosarcina barkeri and m.acetivorans, in a number of phylogenetically diverse marine and halotolerant bacteria and in pathogens burkholderia spp. in complete genomes, representatives of this form (referred to here as n-atpase) are always present as second copies, in addition to the typical proton-translocating atp synthases. the n-atpase is encoded by a highly conserved atpdcqrbefag operon and its subunits cluster separately from the equivalent subunits of the typical f-type atpases. n-atpase c subunits carry a full set of sodium-binding residues, indicating that most of these enzymes are na +-translocating atpases that likely confer on their hosts the ability to extrude na + ions. other distinctive properties of the n-atpase operons include the absence of the delta subunit from its cytoplasmic sector and the presence of two additional membrane subunits, atpq (formerly gene 1) and atpr (formerly gene x). we argue that n-atpases are an early-diverging branch of membrane atpases that, similarly to the eukaryotic v-type atpases, do not synthesize atp. contact:f 1 f o-type (f-type) and v/a-type atpases are membrane-anchored rotary enzymes that couple translocation of h + or na + ions across the membrane to the synthesis or hydrolysis of atp. although most of their subunits are evolutionarily related, the two classes of atpases have clear differences in structure and phylogenetic distribution: f-type atpases are found in bacteria, mitochondria and chloroplasts, whereas v/a-type atpases are found in eukaryotic cell membranes (in particular, vacuoles), as well as in all archaea and in some bacteria . v/a-type atpases are often subdivided into two classes based (i) on the ability of the prokaryotic (a-type) enzyme to function in the direction of atp synthesis and (ii) presence of additional subunits in the to whom correspondence should be addressed. eukaryotic (v-type) enzyme that normally functions only as an iontranslocating atpase, using the energy of atp hydrolysis to acidify cellular compartments . structural characterization of the na +-binding sites in the c-subunits of f-and v-type atpases allowed unequivocal assignment of the cation specificity for the membrane atpases encoded in numerous sequenced genomes: only those c-subunits that contain full sets of na + ligands appeared to transport na + , the loss of at least one of those ligands correlated with the loss of na + specificity . in the view of several reports on the sodium dependence of energy-coupled reactions in cyanobacteria , we have searched cyanobacterial genomes for the na +-translocating atpases. we found several apparently na +-dependent cyanobacterial atpases, but always as second copies, in addition to the h +-translocating atp synthases. here, we report the common properties of these atpases, which are encoded in apparently highly mobile operons and have a set of specific traits that qualify them as a separate subfamily of the f-type atpases. since these atpases, besides forming a novel subfamily, are always encoded next to the typical rotary atpases and are predominantly na +-dependent, we refer to them hereafter as n-atpases.search of the ncbis refseq database for cyanobacterial c (proteolipid) subunits that would have a full set of na +-binding ligands returned five hits, all coming from marine cyanobacteria (supplementary). in each case, the operon encoding thefollowing the description of an archaebacterial f 1 f o-atpase in m.barkeri , the presence of a methanosarcinalike f-atpase operon was repeatedly noted in bacterial genomes , although the exact function(s) of these enzymes and their cation specificity remained obscure.noted two f-type atpases encoded in the genome of syntrophus aciditrophicus and suggested that both of them were na +translocating (incidentally, the f-type atpase of this organism is definitely h +-specific, whereas the cation specificity of its n-atpase is unknown; it might be specific for na + , see below). in their analysis of the a.marina genome,noted the presence of a plasmid-encoded set of atp synthase genes that were arranged into a unique operon conserved with full synteny in a remarkable array of organisms, including cyanobacteria, archaea, planctomycetes, chlorobi and proteobacteria. the authors noted that the -subunits encoded in these operons clustered together on a phylogenetic tree and suggested that these enzymes formed a separate new family of atp synthases. however, they slightly overstated their case by claiming that its individual proteins do not clearly fit into any of the described families . they also disputed the idea that these enzymes were na +-translocating. in addition, the key observation by daniel haft that these enzymes always represent a second f 1 /f o atpase system has only been published online in the jcvis comprehensive microbial resource . as a result, there still exists a significant confusion as to the phylogenetic distribution, organization and the functional role(s) of these enzymes. the alignment in supplementaryshows that, despite the doubts of, the c subunit of the a.marina n-atpase has a full set of na +-binding ligands, including the recently recognized additional thr residue of the estxxy motif . while this residue is missing in c-subunits of several n-atpases, including the one from s.aciditrophicus, a glu residue is present instead of the na +-coordinating gln residue in the first transmembrane helix of the c subunit of nearly all n-atpases (supplementary). as has been noted previously , this glu residue could potentially provide two ligands for the na + ion and thereby complete the na + coordination shell. if so, all these n-atpases would end up being capable of binding na + ions. a hallmark of the n-atpase operons is the presence of the atpr gene. because of the low dielectric permittivity of the membrane, the strategic positioning of two arg residues of atpr in the hydrophobic core of the membrane (supplementary) implies the presence of negatively charged residues in their vicinity. given the absence in the n-atpase operons of the atpi gene, whose product was recently shown to interact with the c-ring , we suggest that the product of the atpr gene serves essentially the same function, regulating n-atpase assembly and/or its activity. just like atpi assists c-ring assembly by directly interacting with the c-subunits , atpr could do that through the interaction of its two arg residues with n-atpase-specific csubunits, most of which carry two glu residues in the middle of their transmembrane helices (supplementary). the observation that n-atpases are always found alongside typical f-or a-type atpases suggests that the n-atpases cannot functionally replace those enzymes in their role as atp synthases. indeed, in m.acetivorans, deletion of the n-atpase operon had no visible effect on cell growth or atp synthesis, whereas a mutant lacking the a-atp synthase genes could not be obtained . we conclude that, similarly to the eukaryotic v-atpases, the n-atpases do not catalyze atp synthesis, which leaves atpdriven ion pumping as the most plausible function for these enzymes. by analogy with v-atpases, the n-atpase c-oligomer ring can be expected to consist of a smaller number of c-subunits than the c-oligomer ring of f-type atp synthases. acquisition of an operon capable of extrusion of na + ions would be beneficial to the marine bacteria and other organisms living in high-salt environments. accordingly, many n-atpase-encoding bacteria are either marine organisms or grow in the presence of salt. since na +-translocating atpases can also translocate protons (von), the n-atpases could in principle function as outward proton pumps in low-sodium and/or acidic environments. a typical n-atpase operon (with untranslated atpr) has been found in an industrial strain of pseudomonas veronii growing on 2-butanone . the presence of n-atpase genes in such pathogens as burkholderia mallei appears to be inherited from their free-living relatives and might be related to their survival in blood. using a larger set of sequences than the one used by, we have confirmed that n-atpases branch separately from other f-type atpases (, supplementary).  
