systems biology characterizing cancer subtypes as attractors of hopfield networks motivation: cancer is a heterogeneous progressive disease caused by perturbations of the underlying gene regulatory network that can be described by dynamic models. these dynamics are commonly mod-eled as boolean networks or as ordinary differential equations. their inference from data is computationally challenging, and at least partial knowledge of the regulatory network and its kinetic parameters is usually required to construct predictive models. results: here, we construct hopfield networks from static gene-expression data and demonstrate that cancer subtypes can be characterized by different attractors of the hopfield network. we evaluate the clustering performance of the network and find that it is comparable with traditional methods but offers additional advantages including a dynamic model of the energy landscape and a unification of clustering, feature selection and network inference. we visualize the hopfield attractor landscape and propose a pruning method to generate sparse networks for feature selection and improved understanding of feature relationships. availability: software and datasets are available at http://acb.qfab. org/acb/hclust/cellular function and development are controlled by networks that regulate the expression of genes. the importance of precise regulation of gene expression through development and cellular differentiation is well known and perturbations of gene regulation are associated with many complex diseases including cancer (del). at any point in time, the current state of a cell can be described by its expression profile (transcripts and their concentrations), and the set of all possible states defines the state space of the cell . most states are unstable, and the system will converge to a stable state of low energyan attractor statewhen perturbed . waddingtons epigenetic landscape of cell development and kauffmans attractor networks (,b) are examples of state space models of gene regulatory networks in which attractors represent stable low-energy states that emerge from the dynamics of the underlying network. in such models, attractor states correspond to normal developmental stages of the cell or disease states such as cancer ; trajectories in state space describe developmental processes or cancer progression , and the energy (elevation of the landscape) is related to the transition rates or transition probabilities between states . the existence of attractor states and of state-space trajectories of cell differentiation has been experimentally verified and different methods have been used to model such attractor systems, with boolean networks (bns) and ordinary differential equations (odes) being the most common ones . current methods are unable to describe the full complexity of a complete gene regulatory network, and applications are, therefore, focused on specific aspects of subsystems. for instance, recent cancer-related applications of bns include cancer networks described by logic circuit stuck-at fault models , models of signaling and dna repair pathways , models of cell adhesion for tumorigenic cells and cancer networks modeling the g1/ s transition . odes have been used to model cancer cell populations , immune response and therapy (d).provide a comprehensive overview. bn-and ode-based models are typically small (a few genes), manually crafted and require intricate explicit knowledge of the regulatory subsystem and its molecular kinetics. there have been attempts to construct such networks from data, but this is difficult due to the complexity of the networks and the lack of suitable time-series data . here, we propose hopfield networks as a novel approach to efficiently construct large attractor networks from static gene-expression data neither pathway data nor kinetic information is required. it has been argued that cancer is an intrinsic attractor state of the molecular-cellular network , and here we demonstrate that attractors of hopfield networks can correspond to cancer subtypes. specifically, we construct hopfield networks for numerous cancer datasets, cluster the samples according to their attractor association and measure to whom correspondence should be addressed. how accurately the clusters reflect the true subtypes of the dataset. in addition, we use hopfield networks to perform feature selection, network pruning and network inference and present a novel method to visualize the attractor landscape of the network. it is important to appreciate that two levels of description are in play: the real physical network of transcription factors and other biomolecules that, by regulating gene expression, generates and maintains the cell state; and the hopfield network, the structure of which we infer from observed data (here, sets of geneexpression patterns) indicative of this cell state. each level uses concepts of states, trajectories and attractors. here, we explore mappings between these concepts, e.g. between cancer subtypes as attractors in a waddington landscape and attractor states in a hopfield model.  
