structural bioinformatics characterizing the regularity of tetrahedral packing motifs in protein tertiary structure motivation: while protein secondary structure is well understood, representing the repetitive nature of tertiary packing in proteins remains difficult. we have developed a construct called the relative packing group (rpg) that applies the clique concept from graph theory as a natural basis for defining the packing motifs in proteins. an rpg is defined as a clique of residues, where every member contacts all others as determined by the delaunay tessellation. geometrically similar rpgs define a regular element of tertiary structure or tertiary motif (termo). this intuitive construct provides a simple approach to characterize general repetitive elements of tertiary structure. results: a dataset of over 4 million tetrahedral rpgs was clustered using different criteria to characterize the various aspects of regular tertiary structure in termos. grouping this data within the scop classification levels of family, superfamily, fold, class and pdb showed that similar packing is shared across different folds. classification of rpgs based on residue sequence locality reveals topological preferences according to protein sizes and secondary structure. we find that larger proteins favor rpgs with three local residues packed against a non-local residue. classifying by secondary structure, helices prefer mostly local residues, sheets favor at least two local residues, while turns and coil populate with more local residues. to depict these termos, we have developed 2 complementary and intuitive representations: (i) dirichlet process mixture density estimation of the torsion angle distributions and (ii) kernel density estimation of the cartesian coordinate distribution. the termo library and representations software are available upon request.the existence of common secondary structure motifs in proteins, as initially proposed by, is well known, and application of these backbone sequence preferences has proven successful in protein structure design and prediction . as the packing of side-chains to whom correspondence should be addressed. has been shown to be broadly regular and tetrahedral , characterizing the recurring elements that make up protein tertiary structure would improve approaches to protein design and the refinement of predictive models toward their native structure. our work investigates repetitive units of tertiary structure using an intuitive analysis of tetrahedral packing. using an approach combining graph theory and the delaunay tessellation , we can classify recurring patterns of side-chain packing that clearly describe motifs of tertiary structure. initial studies of protein tertiary structure were limited by the size of the protein data bank (pdb) . currently, tertiary analyses are applied to improve structural alignment accuracy , while classification of tertiary structure motifs has focused on side-chain packing within a fold family . for example, tropsha and co-workers used the delaunay tessellation and subgraph mining to identify tertiary packing motifs common to members of individual protein families, but no comparison of side-chain geometries were made. comparison of the family subgraphs found no motifs in common between families. a number of studies have tried to identify tertiary motifs across protein fold families . using an agglomerative clustering scheme,found clusters that involved large side-chains and tended to be on the surface of the protein. limiting their search for conserved clusters to immunoglobulins and globins showed that aligned clusters were generally at aligned positions. side-chain packing motifs have also been used to characterize binding or active sites . here, we are interested in the tertiary packing that defines a proteins global structure and build on these studies of tertiary structure to develop a new approach to classify the regular packing motifs across the pdb . contact definitions based on radial distance cutoffs are ambiguous near their cutoff (see section 2). the delaunay tessellation or its dual the avoids this ambiguity by finding pairs of atoms satisfying an emptyour goal in developing the rpg analysis of protein packing and the tertiary motif (termo) library of rpg clusters was to produce a construct that provided useful insight and an intuitive representation of the regular tetrahedral elements of protein tertiary structure. this is in contrast to sequence-structure motif finding algorithms, such as i-sites and trilogy , which look for structurally similar motifs with well defined sequence patterns primarily within a sequence contiguous secondary/super-secondary structure class or within a maximal contact pattern in protein fold families, respectively. while these methods have been successful in describing specific motifs, we are looking for more general relationships in, for example, how helices pack with sheets. we also draw a distinction between our work and that of russell and coworkers and others who have found regular motifs in protein active sites. solvent accessible surface area calculations indicate that some termos are preferentially found on the surface of proteins, but we do not correlate any of our termos with specific active sites. the termo classification based on sequence locality provides a simple yet general vocabulary to discuss and compare repetitive tertiary structure between proteins of similar or different folds. in the following sections, we discuss the general implications of our findings within the context of current views of protein structure and lastly provide a specific example where our two representations provide a characterization of the tertiary propensities of a termo.  
