genome analysis chasm and snvbox: toolkit for detecting biologically important single nucleotide mutations in cancer thousands of cancer exomes are currently being sequenced, yielding millions of non-synonymous single nucleotide variants (snvs) of possible relevance to disease etiology. here, we provide a software toolkit to prioritize snvs based on their predicted contribution to tumorigenesis. it includes a database of precomputed, predictive features covering all positions in the annotated human exome and can be used either stand-alone or as part of a larger variant discovery pipeline. availability and implementation: mysql database, source code and binaries freely available for academic/government use ata fundamental goal of modern cancer genomics studies is to understand how alterations in dna sequence contribute to disease susceptibility and prognosis. targeted whole-exome deep sequencing is now affordable for many academic labs and the multitude of studies underway is yielding datasets of unprecedented magnitude. while researchers have previously developed methods to computationally predict the impact of single nucleotide variants (snvs) , to our knowledge there are no existing tools capable of fast classification of very large snv datasets in cancer exomes. we have previously developed a computational method cancerspecific high-throughput annotation of somatic mutations (chasm) that predicts whether tumorderived somatic missense mutations are important contributors to to whom correspondence should be addressed. the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. cancer cell fitness. here, we describe a software package that implements the chasm method. the package includes a database of pre-computed predictive features called snvbox that facilitates rapid feature retrieval and classification of very large snv datasets. furthermore, the features in snvbox can be generally used to aid in the development of new classification algorithms that predict the impact of either germline or somatic snvs.the chasm/snvbox toolkit is the first distributable software package that specifically targets somatic missense mutations in cancer. the learning task of the random forest classifier is to discriminate between known drivers and a set of random passenger missense mutations that match the mutation spectrum in a cancer type of interest. chasm results are sensitive to this definition of mutation spectrum and users are encouraged to use the somatic variant calls from their sequencing data to make the best possible estimates of the spectrum (supplementary material). while many snv classifiers are available through web interfaces, these are not currently capable of handling large size custom datasets (e.g. thousands to millions of snvs discovered in sequencing projects). some researchers have developed distributable packages that users can run on their local system to enable high-throughput snv processing. these packages depend on third-party databases (sequences, alignments, protein structures, specialized protein annotations) and third-party software packages. the popular polyphen system, for example, requires installation of 10 third-party software packages, in addition to three perl modules. to our knowledge, all available snv classification tools base their inferences on predictive features computed when a custom dataset is input to the system (almost always using thirdparty databases and software). in contrast, the predictive features available in snvbox (also calculated with many third-party tools) have been exhaustively pre-computed, allowing rapid retrieval for a custom dataset. in benchmark testing, retrieval of 86 features for one million snvs took 11.39 h on a dell r900 server with two amd opteron dual-core 64 bit cpus and 16 gbs of ram. chasm score computation for these one million mutations took an additional 10 min and 33 s. finally, the predictive features available in snvbox were designed to be useful for classification of both germline and somatic snvs. we hope that snvbox will enable design of new, improved machine learning algorithms to predict the impact of snvs.  
