gene expression chemical structure informing statistical hypothesis testing in metabolomics motivation: metabolomics has been shown as an effective tool to study various biological and biomedical phenotypes, whereas interrogating the inherently noisy metabolite concentration data with limited sample size remains a major challenge. accumulating evidence suggests that metabolites structures are relevant to their bioactivities. results: we present a new strategy to boost the statistical power of hypothesis testing in metabolomics by incorporating quantitative molecular descriptors for each metabolite. the strategy selects potentially informative summary molecular descriptors and outputs chemical structure-informed false discovery rates. the effectiveness of the proposed strategy is demonstrated by both simulation studies and a real application. in a metabolomic study on alzheimers disease, the posterior inclusion probability for summary molecular descriptors reaches 0.97. by incorporating the structure data, our approach uniquely identifies multiple alzheimers disease signatures, which are consistent with existing evidence. these results evidently suggest the value of the proposed approach for metabolomic hypothesis-testing problems. availability and implementation: a code package implementing the strategy is freely available at https://github.com/hongjiezhu/cima.git.over the last decades, major advances in analytical chemistry have resulted in the emergence of metabolomics. it enables simultaneous quantifying of hundreds to thousands of metabolites present in a set of biological samples, e.g. plasma, urine and cerebrospinal fluid, to report on metabolic pattern associated with conditions of interest, such as disease or drug exposure . the identities and concentrations of metabolites, or the so-called metabotype, reflect net interactions between gene and environment, providing information that can possibly bridge a gap between genotype and phenotype. attesting to this belief, metabolomics has been widely used to understand disease pathogenesis and drug effects, as well as to predict variation in drug response, among many other applications . these studies typically involve identifying metabolomic signatures among the measured metabolites: examples are metabolites that are influenced by an environmental stimulus, e.g. drug treatment, and metabolites that are associated with a phenotype of interest, e.g. a disease status or drug response. common metabolomics data analysis practice uses conventional statistical inference tools, such as students t-tests and regression techniques, to identify the signatures. these methods, as well as many multivariate chemometrics and statistics tools that are frequently used, essentially treat metabolites as individual variables instead of biological entities, of which rich prior knowledge has been accumulated and is accessible from literatures and/or databases. a variety of methodologies have been developed recently to take advantages of such information to facilitate statistical inference on omic data: some incorporate network relationships among the biological entities , based on a general assumption that the connected ones on the network tend to share similar behavior, whereas others perform selection at the level of pathways , acknowledging the modularity of biological networks. a distinctive attribute of metabolites is that each of them can be characterized by its unique chemical features. these features can be quantified by a variety of molecular descriptors (md) , which transform chemical structures into numbers (supplementary). different types of mds can be obtained from existing software, e.g. dragon (talete srl, milan, italy), ranging from simple molecular properties, e.g. molecular weight and polarity, to elaborative spatial formulations, e.g. 3d autocorrelations and atom pairs, to complex molecular fingerprints, e.g. daylight (http://www.daylight.com) and unity 2d fingerprints (http://www.tripos.com). it has been acknowledged that many physicochemical or pharmacological properties of metabolites could be revealed by their structure information. for instance, medicinal chemists use the structureactivity relationships (carbo-carbo) identified from a series of compounds targeting a specific binding protein to design new drugs with better bioactivity ; toxicologists predict a specific toxicity profile of a to whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. compound based on its similar key structural moiety with known toxins . it has also been observed that the levels of metabolites sharing the same or similar key chemical structures are more likely to be affected together under certain environmental stimulus. for example, serotonin (5-ht) and dopamine (da) are both monoamine neurotransmitters, structurally similar to each other, but belong to different pathways. under the stimulus of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, which interacts with both 5-ht and da receptors, the levels of these two metabolites are both upregulated in the brain, leading to the hallucinogenic effect . because the function and bioactivity of metabolites are closely tied to their structure, we hypothesize that integrating the structure information into the analysis of metabolite concentration data can significantly improve the discovery of metabolomic signatures. to evaluate this hypothesis, we build a regression normal mixture (rnm) model that can merge information from the two data sources, metabolites concentration data and their chemical structure data, into the estimation of false discovery rate (fdr), which is nowadays routinely used to control for multiple testing in metabolomics studies. as an illustrative example, suppose a total of m metabolites are measured for a cohort of patients and healthy controls to evaluate the following null hypotheses: h i : level of the i-th metabolite is not different between patients and controls, i 1,. .. , m. depending on the actual statistical method being used to test the hypotheses, different types of summary statistics can be derived for each metabolite, e.g. a t-statistic from a parametric two-sample t-test, or a sum of ranks from a non-parametric wilcoxon rank sum test, along with a p-value. to control for multiple testing, the summary test statistics can be fitted to a mixture model . the model estimates for each metabolite a bayesian posterior probability of its null hypothesis being true, based on which various types of fdrs can be calculated. a standard mixture model assumes the same prior belief/ probability of each metabolite being null. variations have been proposed to incorporate additional information into the specification of the prior probabilities. one example is the class of mixtures-of-experts models , in which the prior probabilities are modeled as functions of some covariates.used a spatially correlated mixture model that incorporates network relationships among genes into the specification of prior probabilities for microarray studies. the rnm model in our strategy uses several summary molecular descriptors (smd) to estimate metabolite-specific prior probabilities. we further perform variable selection on the smds, which can suggest how likely they are informative for a particular metabolomic study. in general, the selected structural information and the test results based on the concentration data are jointly used to output chemical structure-informed fdr for the evaluation of the importance of metabolites. based on the rnm model, we propose an integrated chemical structure-informed metabolomic hypothesis-testing strategy . simulation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of the rnm model both in identifying informative smd(s) and in improving the identification of metabolomic signatures with the smds. as proof-of-concept, we applied the proposed strategy to a metabolomic study of alzheimers disease (ad). a high posterior inclusion probability of the first smd being selected and the comprehensive biological evidence that supports the identified ad signatures unique to our approach both suggest the potential benefit of incorporating structure information into the analysis of metabolomic data.we evaluated the proposed chemical structure-informed hypothesis-testing strategy at two levels. first, we performed simulation studies to examine the effectiveness of the rnm model on identifying potentially informative smd(s) and non-null metabolites. second, we applied the strategy to a real study seeking new metabolomic signatures for ad.  
