data and text mining chemmapper: a versatile web server for exploring pharmacology and chemical structure association based on molecular 3d similarity method chemmapper is an online platform to predict polypharma-cology effect and mode of action for small molecules based on 3d similarity computation. chemmapper collects 4350 000 chemical structures with bioactivities and associated target annotations (as well as 43 000 000 non-annotated compounds for virtual screening). taking the user-provided chemical structure as the query, the top most similar compounds in terms of 3d similarity are returned with associated pharmacology annotations. chemmapper is designed to provide versatile services in a variety of chemogenomics, drug repur-posing, polypharmacology, novel bioactive compounds identification and scaffold hopping studies.recent advances in systems biology and chemical biology exhibit great challenges to the current drug discovery paradigm that drugs selectively bind with one or two targets and show that most drugs interact with multiple targets, namely, polypharmacology . on the other hand, identification of new hit compounds and optimization of lead compounds targeting specific proteins or exhibiting desired pharmacological effects are still playing a pivotal role in conventional drug discovery projects in the form of virtual screening and scaffold hopping. in this context, there is an urgent request for developing new strategies to acquire knowledge of the complete pharmacology profile and bridge the chemical and pharmacological spaces to improve the success rates of current drug discovery research, including reducing the side effects and increasing the regulatory effects on the complete networks . one of the emerging scenarios to address this question is the application of molecular similarity searching on basis of the wellknown similar property principle, namely, similar structures may have similar bioactivity and the same potential drug targets, which is expected to relate the pharmacology space by chemical structural similarity information . according to this principle, small molecule similarity had been used to identify off-targets for a long period . the 2d similarity methods have been widely used in various online tools, like similarity ensemble approach (sea) , superpred and chemprot , which relate protein pharmacology and disease networks by fingerprint-based ligand similarity, and ftreesweb , which adopts graph theory to encode molecular 2d descriptions to perform virtual screening against large chemical databases. also, numerous online servers using 3d similarity methods are also emerging, like superimpose( superimpose, which provides two different 3d superimposition algorithms and three different databanks for screening, and wwligcsrre , which is built on top of csr algorithm that searches for the maximal common substructure between two sets of unordered coordinates to screen focused chemical libraries. recently, a direct comparison of 2d and 3d methods for on-and off-target prediction reveals that the benefit of 3d over 2d was obvious for prediction of polypharmacology and drug pairs that shared high 3d similarity but low 2d similarity (i.e. a novel scaffold) were shown to be much more likely to exhibit pharmacologically relevant differences in terms of specific protein target modulation . herein, we present a versatile web-based tool chemmapper for exploring target pharmacology and chemical relationships against any given small molecules via shafts, a fast 3d similarity method in which the 3d similarity calculation is driven by the hybrid information of molecular shape and chemotype features . chemmapper assembles a large repertoire of bioactive chemical database annotated with target information and multiple screening databases from different catalogs of the chemical vendors. it facilitates identification to whom correspondence should be addressed.  
