chepimod: a knowledgebase for chemical modulators of epigenome reader domains context: epigenome reader domains are rapidly emerging as a new class of drug targets for a wide array of human diseases. to facilitate study of structureactivity relationship and small-molecule ligand design for these domains, we have created chepimod. chepimod is a free knowledgebase of chemical modulators with documented modulatory activity for epigenome reader domains. methods: chepimod organizes information about chemical modula-tors and their associated binding-affinity data, as well as available structures of epigenome readers from the protein data bank. the data are gathered from the literature and patents. entries are supplemented by annotation. the current version of chepimod covers six epigenome reader domain families (bromodomain, phd finger, chromodomain, mbt, pwwp and tudor). the database can be used to browse existing chemical modulators and bioactivity data, as well as, all available structures of readers and their molecular interactions. the database is updated weekly. availability: chepimod is freely available atepigenetic control of gene expression plays a fundamental role in numerous biological processes including development, cell proliferation and differentiation, and its dysregulation has been linked to multiple disorders such as cancer, inflammation and infection . the evolutionarily conserved modular domains that are embedded in transcription-associated proteins and recognize post-translational modifications such as lysine acetylation or methylation are called epigenome readers . the desire to better understand and modulate the molecular functions of these readers has encouraged the development of small-molecule compounds (or chemical modulators) that serve as research tools and as potential therapeutic agents for a wide array of human diseases . the ever-increasing number of compounds with documented modulatory activity against epigenome readers has prompted us to develop chepimod, a comprehensive knowledgebase of structureactivity relationship data for these domains and their chemical modulators. the goal of chepimod is to organize, in a single place, all publicly available and relevant research data to facilitate the structure-guided development and use of epigenome reader modulators as tools for chemical epigenomics research. general purpose bioactivity databases such as chembl and pubchem bioassay contain information about some ligands for epigenome readers, but are far from comprehensive for these domains and do not provide structural information on proteinligand interactions. additionally, ligands stored in these general databases have their affinities listed for proteins, rather than domains. chepimod overcomes these limitations by providing comprehensive coverage of epigenome reader bioactivities, coupled with structural information and advanced analysis tools.  
