genome analysis chimerascan: a tool for identifying chimeric transcription in sequencing data next generation sequencing (ngs) technologies have enabled de novo gene fusion discovery that could reveal candidates with therapeutic significance in cancer. here we present an open-source software package, chimerascan, for the discovery of chimeric transcription between two independent transcripts in high-throughput transcriptome sequencing data.high-throughput transcriptome sequencing (rna-seq) facilitates detection of aberrant, chimeric rnas . methods for chimera detection have already uncovered recurrent classes of clinically relevant gene fusions in prostate and lymphoid cancers . therefore, the continued development of accurate and efficient software tools for chimera discovery is of major clinical significance. to this end, we have developed a chimera discovery methodology, or chimerascan, and offer it as open-source software package for the community to utilize for their own sequencing efforts. chimerascan includes features such as the ability to process long (75 bp) paired-end reads, processing of ambiguously mapping reads, detection of reads spanning a fusion junction, integration with the popular bowtie aligner , supports the standardized sam format and generation of html reports for easy investigation of results. overall, we believe that the chimerascan will facilitate the discovery of additional gene fusions that may serve as clinically relevant targets in cancer.to evaluate the results from chimerascan, we applied it to three well-characterized cancer cell lines known to harbor multiple chimeric transcripts: vcap (prostate cancer, 253 bp) , lncap (prostate cancer, 234 bp) and mcf7 (breast cancer, 235 bp) . sequence data are deposited in genbank under the accession number gse29098. we aligned to human genome (vr-hg19) and ucsc known transcripts , allowing for up to two mismatches and no 100 alignments per read. the trimmed alignment step was performed with 25 bp segments. as our initial benchmark, we confirmed that chimerascan was able to recapitulate experimentally validated candidates, our gold standard (supplementary) . chimerascan was able to detect 9/10, 4/4 and 12/13 chimeras from vcap, lncap and mcf-7, respectively. in addition to recapitulating previously reported results, we have identified novel candidates that demonstrate chimerascans ability to identify and prioritize high-quality chimeras. overall, chimerascan nominated 335 novel chimeras (78 in vcap, 105 in lncap and 152 in mcf7) from the three cell lines (supplementary4). interestingly, we detected an interchromosomal rearrangement tbl1xr1-rgs17 detected in the mcf-7 cell line. while not originally reported within ngs data , tbl1xr1-rgs17 was previously detected by a paired-end ditag approach and experimentally confirmed . another novel candidate was the intrachromosomal rearrangement, ndufaf2-mast4, in vcap that is supported by just two encompassing reads and one spanning reads. the ability to identify a high-quality spanning read that uniquely confirms the fusion junction (supplementary), thereby increasing our confidence in ndufaf2-mast4, demonstrates the sensitivity of chimerascan. we next compared chimerascan with publicly available tools defuse , shortfuse and mapsplice using the 10 experimentally validated vcap chimeras (supplementary). while defuse nominated the fewest chimeras, it only detected 60 of the true positives. in comparison, chimerascan detected 90 of the true positives from 78 predicted chimeras. of the remaining programs, mapsplice nominated 400 chimeras while detecting 60 of the true positives and shortfuse nominated 245 chimeras while confirming 70 of the true positives. overall, these results suggest that chimerascan is among the more stringent programs while enriching for true positives.here, we present an optimized publicly available chimera discovery methodology for identifying novel therapeutically targetable gene fusions in human cancers. our results suggest that chimerascan produces a stringent list of predictions that are enriched with true positives. furthermore, due to its trimmed alignment steps we believe chimerascan will be scalable when longer reads are available to provide increased coverage of fusion junctions. overall, we feel that with the existing features chimerascan is a user-friendly tool that will enable other research groups to make discoveries within their own rna-seq data collections.  
