chimira: analysis of small rna sequencing data and microrna modifications chimira is a web-based system for microrna (mirna) analysis from small rna-seq data. sequences are automatically cleaned, trimmed, size selected and mapped directly to mirna hairpin sequences. this generates count-based mirna expression data for subsequent statistical analysis. moreover, it is capable of identifying epi-transcriptomic modifications in the input sequences. supported modification types include multiple types of 3 0-modifications (e.g. uridylation, adenylation), 5 0-modifications and also internal modifications or variation (adar editing or single nucleotide polymorphisms). besides cleaning and mapping of input sequences to mirnas, chimira provides a simple and intuitive set of tools for the analysis and interpretation of the results (see also supplementary material). these allow the visual study of the differential expression between two specific samples or sets of samples, the identification of the most highly expressed mirnas within sample pairs (or sets of samples) and also the projection of the modification profile for specific mirnas across all samples. other tools have already been published in the past for various types of small rna-seq analysis, such as uea workbench, seqbuster, magi, oasis and cap-mirseq, cpss for modifications identification. a comprehensive comparison of chimira with each of these tools is provided in the supplementary material. chimira outperforms all of these tools in total execution speed and aims to facilitate simple, fast and reliable analysis of small rna-seq data allowing also, for the first time, identification of global microrna modification profiles in a simple intuitive interface. availability and implementation: chimira has been developed as a web application and it is accessible here: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/research/enright/software/chimira.small rna sequencing data are among the most straightforward types of ngs data to analyse. however many laboratories that generate such data still struggle to develop or adapt computational pipelines for the analysis and interpretation of these data. additionally, in recent years, it has been reported that many mirnas go through post-transcriptional alterations that modify their 3 0 end, mainly via mono/poly-uridylation or polyadenylation . such modifications are believed to impart significant functional changes to the mirna. indeed, other modifications and/or editing have also been observed to occur in several other instances . hence, it is imperative to explore the full profile of all modifications and/or edits that can be identified in small rna-seq data. the functional roles of small rnas in different conditions may be greatly influenced by such modifications. this can be accomplished by aligning small rna sequences against their hairpin precursors. the alignment region spanning each v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.chimira has been specifically developed for fast analysis of simple small rna datasets with a user-friendly interface. it complements our previous pipeline sequenceimp, which was designed for command-line level analysis of larger-scale experiments with complex designs. chimira is a fast and robust system for the cleaning, filtering, qc and mapping of small rna-seq data aiming to simplify the process of small rna ngs analysis to a straightforward online workflow. additionally, it allows the extraction of global modification profiles across and within each of the input samples thus allowing the inference of correlations between certain modification patterns and any conditions indicated by the input samples. we hope the system will prove useful to the small rna community. conflict of interest: none declared.  
