chippcr: an r package to pre-process raw data of amplification curves motivation: both the quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qpcr) and quantitative isothermal amplification (qia) are standard methods for nucleic acid quantification. numerous real-time read-out technologies have been developed. despite the continuous interest in amplification based techniques, there are only few tools for pre-processing of amplification data. however, a transparent tool for precise control of raw data is indispensable in several scenarios, for example, during the development of new instruments. results: chippcr is an r package for the pre-processing and quality analysis of raw data of amplification curves. the package takes advantage of rs s4 object model and offers an extensible environment. chippcr contains tools for raw data exploration: normalization, baselining, imput-ation of missing values, a powerful wrapper for amplification curve smoothing and a function to detect the start and end of an amplification curve. the capabilities of the software are enhanced by the implementation of algorithms unavailable in r, such as a 5-point stencil for derivative interpolation. simulation tools, statistical tests, plots for data quality management, amplification efficiency/quantification cycle calculation, and datasets from qpcr and qia experiments are part of the package. core functionalities are integrated in guis (web-based and standalone shiny applications), thus streamlining analysis and report generation. availability and implementation: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/chippcr. source code:quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qpcr) and quantitative isothermal amplification (qia) are standard methods used for nucleic acid amplification. qpcr and qia are used in real-time monitoring technologies, such as our previously reported videoscan technology , microfluidics and point-of-care devices to quantify nucleic acids by specific curve parameters like the quantification point (cq) . the fundamental steps of amplification curve analysis are (i) raw data read-in, (ii) pre-processing (e.g. noise reduction), (iii) amplification curve processing (e.g. cq calculation), (iv) post-processing and (v) data export/report generation. reliable data flow between all steps is a requirement for the proper optimization (e.g. the taguchi method) of amplification reactions . r is widely used in bioinformatics and an early adopter of novel technologies (e.g. digital pcr, nanostring ncounter platform) . available r packages focus on the read-in and (post)-processing of data from commercial qpcr systems. r packages for the amplification analysis steps 1 and 35 cited earlier are available (gehlenborg). however, r packages for the pre-processing and quality analysis of raw data of amplification curves are unavailable. preprocessing in most commercial cyclers is a black box, which restrains reproducible research . the development and optimization of equipment would benefit from the availability of a software capable of pre-processing raw data. pre-processing algorithms remove stochastic errors and artefacts (supplementary section s2) and provide the means for raw data inspection and transformation in a format suitable for successive analysis steps (e.g. smoothing, imputation), data reduction (e.g. removal of invalid sets) and data quality management. misinterpretations are more likely if arbitrary corrections are performed and a manual alteration is contradictory to reproducible research. the chippcr (lab-on-a-chip & pcr) package was developed to automatize pre-processing, analysis, visualization and quality control of qpcr and qia experiments. r enables sophisticated statistical and reproducible cross-platform analysis, and quick adaptation to changing experimental setups. moreover, it is advantageous to set up workflows in an open environment, which offers graphical user interfaces (guis), downstream analyses facilities, powerful data visualizations and report generation. the target audience encompasses developers and users who process raw data from commercial systems.  
