chipseeker: an r/bioconductor package for chip peak annotation, comparison and visualization chipseeker is an r package for annotating chip-seq data analysis. it supports annotating chip peaks and provides functions to visualize chip peaks coverage over chromosomes and profiles of peaks binding to tss regions. comparison of chip peak profiles and annotation are also supported. moreover, it supports evaluating significant overlap among chip-seq datasets. currently, chipseeker contains 15 000 bed file information from geo database. these datasets can be downloaded and compare with users own data to explore significant overlap datasets for inferring co-regulation or transcription factor complex for further investigation. availability and implementation: chipseeker is released under artistic-2.0 license. the source code and documents are freely available through bioconductorchromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (chip-seq) has become standard technology to investigate genome wide binding sites of transcription factors (tfs). to analyze these dna binding sites to determine their potential regulatory functions, proximal genes/transcripts and regulatory elements are considered to annotate these loci. several applications were developed for annotating chip-seq data. chippeakanno is an r package that designed for chip-seq and chipchip data annotation. because chippeakanno does not consider strand information, it misclassifies peaks with wrong orientation (see supplemental file). other tools including pavis and peakanalyzer , they all have similar functions of annotating peaks by nearest genes and proximal genomic features. existing tools are all designed for single dataset. chip-seq is rapidly becoming a common technique and there are a large number of datasets available in the public domain. results from individual experiments provide a limited understanding of chromatin interactions, as there is many factors cooperate to regulate transcription. existing software lack of functionalities for comparing profiles of chip-seq datasets in different levels, including profiles of peaks binding to tss regions, annotation and enriched functional profiles. there are increasing evidences shown that combinations of tfs are important for regulating gene expression . however, systematically identification of tf interactions by chip-seq is still not available. even if a specific tf binding is essential for a particular regulation was known, we do not have prior knowledge of all its co-factors. there are no systematic strategies available to identified un-known co-factors by chipseq. to fill this gap, we present an r/bioconductor package, chipseeker, for chip peak annotation, comparison and visualization. it incorporates statistical testing of co-occurrence of difference chip-seq datasets and can be used to identify co-factors by exploring publicly available chip-seq datasets.chipseeker is developed as an r package within the bioconductor project and is released under artistic-2.0 license. chipseeker integrates chip annotation, comparison and visualization and serves as a toolbox for analysis of chip-seq data. it can visualize genomic coverage of chip-seq data, annotate genomic features of chip peaks and their nearest genes. chipseeker supports visualize intensities of chip peaks binding to tss sites and comparison based on these profiles. it supports statistical test for overlap among chip-seq datasets. more importantly, it removes a major obstacle for scientists to query and utilize chip-seq data in public domains.  
