structural bioinformatics choyce: a web server for constrained homology modelling with cryoem maps choyce is a web server for homology modelling of protein components and the fitting of those components into cryo electron microscopy (cryoem) maps of their assemblies. it provides an interactive approach to improving the selection of models based on the quality of their fit into the em map.in recent years, single-particle cryo electron microscopy (cryoem) has become a major technique for structure determination of macromolecular assemblies . however, the majority of cryoem density maps are still in the range of 515 , far from atomic resolution. superior interpretation of these maps is now routinely achieved by fitting into them atomic structures of individual components, such as proteins, domains and even secondary structure elements . many fitting methods have been developed, most of which rely on the cross-correlation function (ccf) between the component structure and the density map as a measure of goodness-of-fit . as experimental atomic structures of the assembly components are often not available, it is becoming increasingly common to fit comparative models (or homology models) instead . we recently showed that a correlation exists between the quality of a model [e.g. in terms of the root mean square deviation (rmsd) from the native structure] and its ccf with the density map . based on that, a simple way to improve fitting accuracy is to generate a set of models using alternative templates and alignments. one of the most accurate models can be picked from this set based on its fit into the density and possibly in combination with other model assessment scores, such as statistical potentials of mean force . unfortunately, researchers frequently do not use this option, despite the fact that it may lead not only to improved models, but also to a better analysis of the em map. to whom correspondence should be addressed.here we present choyce, a web-based tool designed to perform homology modelling constrained by cryoem density fitting, which enables the selection of improved models of assembly components. the choyce server is freely available via the url: http://choyce.ismb.lon.ac.uk/ (a valid licence key is required for the use of the modeller software).the choyce web server provides a platform for homology modelling and fitting into cryoem maps. the server aids in selecting one of the most accurate models from an ensemble of models based on the goodness-of-fit to the em map. future improvements will include modelling based on multiple template structures, as well as iterative alignment, fitting and refinement using a combination of ccf and statistical potential scores .  
