genome analysis chromatra: a galaxy tool for visualizing genome-wide chromatin signatures chromatra (chromatin mapping across transcripts) is a visualization tool available as plug-in for the galaxy platform. it allows detailed yet concise presentations of data derived from chip-chip or chip-seq experiments by visualizing enrichment scores across genes or other genomic features while accounting for their length and additional characteristics such as gene expression. it integrates into typical analysis workflows and enables rapid graphical assessment and comparison of genome-wide data at a glance. availability: https://the pace of advancements in dna microarray and sequencing technology continues to transform biological research. both techniques complement each other and provide powerful platforms to interrogate entire genomes at high resolution, ranging from sequence decoding, to gene expression profiling, to chromatin modification mapping . it is in large part due to these technologies that data are becoming available to scientists and allow questions to be asked of unprecedented depth. at the same time, however, the increasingly large volume and complexity of datasets demands adequate computational methods to analyze and present the data effectively. while raw numbers may contain all relevant information of an analysis, they are not always necessarily suitable to convey biological meaning efficiently, especially when presenting data in scientific publications. graphic visualizations of data can aid in representing complex content and reveal salient information at a glance . yet, satisfying this claim is particularly challenging for genome-wide data. for instance, when mapping chromatin modifications or transcription factors using chip-chip or chip-seq, it is a major goal to assess their localization and distribution across all genes of an organism while preserving structural and functional features of their respective genome. current approaches for visualizing binding or modification profiles can be broadly distinguished into two categories: first, tools to whom correspondence should be addressed. of single-gene resolution, like the genome browser , offer the most detailed level of data presentation, but make it difficult to evaluate profiles across genes and derive broader principles as they disperse the information over multiple plots to cover the genome. second, averaging approaches try to circumvent this problem by grouping genes into classes, e.g. based on length, gene ontology terms or transcription rate and calculating average profiles for each class. while they succeed in condensing the mosaic representation of single-gene visualizations, they inevitably sacrifice detail dependent on the applied grouping given the heterogeneity of genes with respect to their length and other features. here, we present chromatra (chromatin mapping across transcripts), a visualization tool for genome-wide dna-protein binding and chromatin modification maps that balances detail and compactness of the existing visualization approaches. developed as a plug-in for the galaxy analysis environment , chromatra portrays enrichment profiles in a comprehensive yet condensed form by accounting for feature length and additional characteristics such as gene expression. chromatra plots reveal the spatial distribution of chromatin marks or binding events across all genomic features of interest, and may aid in discovering unexpected correlations and patterns in enrichment profiles.  
