genome analysis chromos: an integrated web tool for snp classification, prioritization and functional interpretation genome-wide association studies and re-sequencing projects are revealing an increasing number of disease-associated snps, a large fraction of which are non-coding. although they could have relevance for disease susceptibility and progression, the lack of information about regulatory regions impedes the assessment of their functionality. here we present a web server, chromos (chromatin modified snps), which combines genetic and epigenetic data with the goal of facilitating snps classification, prioritization and prediction of their functional consequences. chromos uses a large database of snps and chromatin states, but allows a user to provide his/her own genetic information. based on the snp classification and interactive prioritization, a user can compute the functional impact of multiple snps using two prediction tools, one for differential analysis of transcription factor binding (strap) and another for snps with potential impact on binding of mirnas (microsniper). availability: web server, chromos, is freely available atthe majority of snps from genome-wide association studies (gwas) and resequencing projects are located in non-coding regions. this impedes the assessment of snps functional effect and disease mechanisms. handling this plethora of data requires an automated snp prioritization for initial analysis being followed by more focused functional analysis downstream. in concurrent efforts, epigenetics studies have resulted in many publicly available chip-seq profiles.designated chromatin states defined by combinatorial patterns of marks using the multivariate hidden markov model. this allows segmentation of the genome into six annotated general chromatin categories, namely, enhancer, promoter, insulator, transcribed, repressed and inactive states. in turn, these categories are subdivided further into strong, weak and poised states based on their relationship to transcription level of distal and adjacent genes and transcript positional enrichments. here we introduce a web server, chromos, which combines genetic and epigenetic data and facilitates snp classification and prioritization. this integration is achieved through a large database of gwas results and chromatin annotations, or through direct upload of user-defined data in standardized file formats. using this data, snps can be classified as belonging to various functional categories, such as enhancer or promoter, and prioritized for further analysis. the relationships between snps and epigenetic categories were demonstrated by ernst and colleagues showing that disease-associated snps were significantly more likely to be positioned within strong enhancer segments than neutral dbsnp variants. chromos is also integrated with two prediction algorithms, strap and microsniper, to assess the functional consequences of regulatory snps for some transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms, respectively.  
