chromothripsisdb: a curated database of chromothripsis chromothripsis is a single catastrophic event that can lead to massive genomic rearrangements confined to one or a few chromosomes. it provides an alternative paradigm in cancer development and changes the conventional view that cancer develops in a stepwise progression. the mechanisms underlying chromothripsis and their specific impact on tumorigenesis are still poorly understood, and further examination of a large number of identified chromothripsis samples is needed. unfortunately, this data are difficult to access, as they are scattered across multiple publications , come in different formats and descriptions, or are hidden in figures and supplementary materials. to improve access to this data and promote meta-analysis, we developed chromothripsisdb, a manually curated database containing a unified description of all published chromothripsis cases and relevant genomic aberrations. currently, 423 chromothripsis samples representing 107 research articles are included in our database. chromothripsisdb represents an extraordinary resource for mining the existing knowledge of chromothripsis, and will facilitate the identification of mechanisms involved in this phenomenon. availability and implementation: chromothripsisdb is freely available atchromothripsis is a single catastrophic event of massive chromosomal rearrangements that has been described in a wide variety of diseases, especially in cancer . in contrast to the widely accepted model of gradual accumulation of genetic alterations during cancer development, chromothripsis is supposed to be a newly discovered paradigm in tumorigenesis . in brief, one or several chromosomes are shattered into many different sized fragments through a catastrophic event. some of the fragments are then randomly stitched back together to generate a derivative chromosome, and the others are lost. this process may generate dna amplifications, deletions and chromosomal fusion events that underpin chromosome evolution . chromothripsis has received a growing amount of attention in recent years since it may reveal a new way that cancer genomes can evolve. however, the mechanisms leading to this event are not yet fully characterized. a meta-analysis based on a large number of chromothripsis samples is needed to uncover more about the phenomenon, which would substantially enhance our understanding of tumor initiation and progression . unfortunately, due to the overall low incidence of chromothripsis (occurs in only 23 of all cancers) , most studies reported a relatively small number of chromothripsis cases. moreover, the relevant data acquisition is a cumbersome process, since they are scattered in different parts of various publications and are heterogeneous in their contents and formats. to address this problem, we created chromothripsisdb, which is a manually curated database that catalogs all published chromothripsis v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com articles and samples. in the current release, chromothripsisdb includes data and results from 107 publications covering 423 cases. dna copy number aberrations (cnas), structural variations (svs) and clinical data were curated and normalized into standardized formats. to the best of the authors knowledge, chromothripsisdb is the first database dedicated to processing and visualizing chromothripsis data. it can facilitate future research to identify key features of this event and elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms.chromothripsisdb contains data from all published studies that screening for chromothripsis events (supplementary). currently, it includes 423 cases manually curated from 107 research articles on two species: human and mouse. these data represent 52 disease types, of which 90 are cancers. besides malignant tumors, congenital abnormalities also account for a notable proportion of the database (supplementary). the cna profiles and svs of chromothripsis cases were identified by next generation sequencing, array comparative genomic hybridization or single nucleotide polymorphism arrays.chromothripsisdb is the first repository providing convenient public access to chromothripsis data. we curated and integrated hundreds of chromothripsis samples from the published literature into the database. we will continue to update our database every 2 months with newly published data. it represents an invaluable resource for the community and will assist in the meta-analysis of chromothripsis phenomenon.  
