genome analysis circlize implements and enhances circular visualization in r circular layout is an efficient way for the visualization of huge amounts of genomic information. here we present the circlize package, which provides an implementation of circular layout generation in r as well as an enhancement of available software. the flexibility of this package is based on the usage of low-level graphics functions such that self-defined high-level graphics can be easily implemented by users for specific purposes. together with the seamless connection between the powerful computational and visual environment in r, circlize gives users more convenience and freedom to design figures for better understanding genomic patterns behind multi-dimensional data. availability and implementation: circlize is available at the comprehensive r archive network (cran): http://cran.r-project.org/ web/packages/circlize/ contact: b.brors@dkfz.deas genomic information becomes more and more quickly accessible nowadays, a good solution for efficient visualization is urgently needed to better understand and decipher current genomic data. there are several ways to explore such high-dimensional genomic information, including genomic coordinates-based visualization or network views . among them, circular layout is an advantageous approach reflected in three aspects: first, it elegantly represents information with long axes or a large amount of categories (e.g. data along several chromosomes); second, it intuitively shows data with multiple tracks focusing on the same object (e.g. multidimensional description on a same chromosome); third, it easily demonstrates relations between elements such as genomic rearrangements. circos is a pioneer tool widely used for circular layout representations implemented in perl . it greatly enhances the visualization of scientific results. thus, plots with circular layout are normally named as circos plot. however, limitations of circos exist. users need to combine data and graphical settings into configuration files, which means that the format of these files and a large number of parameters need to be remembered and set, making it tedious to configure and debug. as a result, learning curves of circos tend to be steep. on the other hand, users can only draw limited types of graphics, and new types of graphics are determined only by the software. r is an ideal environment for statistical analysis and visualization. currently, there are three r packages that aim to support circular layout, namely rcircos , omiccircos and ggbio . nevertheless, they are restricted to limited types of graphics, lack of flexibility and not extendable to other fields besides genomic analysis. thus, there is still room for better use of the capabilities of r to improve the circular layout implementation. here, we present an r package, circlize, which efficiently and flexibly visualizes genomic data in a circular layout. the power of the package is based on the implementation of basic low-level graphics functions (e.g. drawing points and lines). therefore, it is flexible to customize new types of graphics without difficulty. in addition, with the seamless connection between data analysis and visualization in r, automatic procedures for generation of circular designs can be easily achieved, which enhances the applicability of circlize in genomic analysis as well as in other fields. finally, with the generality and simplicity of the package, circlize provides a basis on which high-level packages focusing on specific interests can be built.circlize provides a general and flexible solution for the circular layout. it provides basic low-level graphics functions, so that more complicated graphics can be easily implemented by users. together with the r environment, the flexibility and enhancement make the package powerful in visualizing and deciphering genomic information, as well as in other related areas.  
