bioinformatics discovery note genome analysis circular rnas are depleted of polymorphisms at microrna binding sites motivation: circular rnas (circrnas) are an abundant class of highly stable rnas that can affect gene regulation by binding and preventing micrornas (mirnas) from regulating their messenger rna (mrna) targets. mammals have thousands of circrnas with predicted mirna binding sites, but only two circrnas have been verified as being actual mirna sponges. as it is unclear whether these thousands of predicted mirna binding sites are functional, we investigated whether mirna seed sites within human circrnas are under selective pressure. results: using snp data from the 1000 genomes project, we found a significant decrease in snp density at mirna seed sites compared with flanking sequences and random sites. this decrease was similar to that of mirna seed sites in 3 untranslated regions, suggesting that many of the predicted mirna binding sites in circrnas are functional and under similar selective pressure as mirna binding sites in mrnas.micrornas (mirnas) are small, $22-nt-long non-coding rnas that are involved in gene expression regulation, through binding to so-called seed sites in 3 0 untranslated regions (utr) of target messenger rnas (mrnas) . however, mirnas are also thought to bind to a new class of non-coding rnas called circular rnas (circrnas), a class of stable rnas with a circular shape . many circrnas contain predicted mirna target sites, and at least two circrnas can act as mirna sponges that decrease the amount of mirnas available for binding to their target mrnas . microrna target sites located in mrnas may harbour dna variations such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) , which are short nucleotide insertions, deletions or substitutions that occur with a frequency $1 in a population. snps in mirna target sites can affect mirna binding to the target mrna and subsequent gene regulation . similarly, mirna target sites on circrna genes may also harbour snps that affect mirna binding. circrnas are getting more and more studied for their potential sponge effect , but the functional consequences of the many predicted mirna sites in circrnas remain unclear. because predicted mirna target sites on mrnas have a decreased snp density because of selective pressure at functional elements , we wondered whether the same is true for mirna target sites in circrnas. in this article, we look at the snp distribution at predicted mirna target sites located on circrnas. because polymorphisms can affect functionality, we expected that functional mirna target sites on circrnas would harbour fewer polymorphisms than random sites. by using snp data from the 1000 genomes project (1000), we found that circrnas harbour a significant decrease in polymorphisms at predicted mirna target sites, suggesting that many of these are functional sites under selective pressure.we found that circrnas have a decreased snp density at mirna seed sites compared with both flanking regions and snp distributions at random seed motifs. this decrease was comparable with previously reported snp densities at mirna target sites in mrna 3 0 utrs, suggesting that mirna seed sites within circrnas have similar selective pressure as mirna seed sites within 3 0 utrs. consequently, the sponge effect of circrnas on mirnas may be as functionally important as mirnas regulatory effect on mrnas.note: the columns show the exon end denoting the type of splice site, the regions compared (splice site, exons and introns), the snp density ratio of the first region over the second and the p-values describing how the densities differ (see section 2). we saw a significant decrease in snp density at splice sites compared with exons and introns, as well as when comparing exons with introns.. snp distribution at splice sites of circrnas. panel a and b show respectively snp distributions at exons 5 0 and 3 0 ends. distributions are corrected for circrna strands, and normalized by the median snp count. the x-axis shows snp positions relative to the splice site. on both panels, we see a higher snp density for introns, a clear decrease at the splice sites and a lower density at exons compared with introns 2246  
