genome analysis cisexpress: motif detection in dna sequences motivation: one of the major challenges for contemporary bioinfor-matics is the analysis and accurate annotation of genomic datasets to enable extraction of useful information about the functional role of dna sequences. this article describes a novel genome-wide statistical approach to the detection of specific dna sequence motifs based on similarities between the promoters of similarly expressed genes. this new tool, cisexpress, is especially designed for use with large datasets, such as those generated by publicly accessible whole genome and transcriptome projects. cisexpress uses a task farming algorithm to exploit all available computational cores within a shared memory node. we demonstrate the robust nature and validity of the proposed method. it is applicable for use with a wide range of gen-omic databases for any species of interest. availability: cisexpress is available at www.cisexpress.org.the amount of raw data available in publicly accessible genomic databases is growing exponentially in the form of massive linear arrays of dna sequences. robust analysis and accurate annotation of these datasets are needed to extract useful information about the functional role of the dna sequences. one of the key goals of genome analysis is the identification of putative genome function, especially the detection of potential dna cis-regulatory elements, with high confidence. identifying the regulatory motifs bound by transcription factors can provide crucial insights into the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation. by correctly identifying regulatory motifs, it is possible to predict the expression of the genes under specific circumstances or in specific tissues. furthermore, molecular mechanisms of genetic diseases, caused by the incorrect expression of some genes, can be discovered. it has been recently demonstrated that in the case of the mouse genome, many in vitro-derived motifs performed similarly to motifs derived from in vivo data . however, major problems in studying the specificity of the binding of transcription factors to dna motifs include a lack of data and deficiencies in predictive models for motif detection. several efforts have been made to compare existing methods for computational identification of regulatory patterns . these benchmarking studies suggested that prediction of regulatory elements remains a challenge for computational biologists, and that more work is required to optimize the algorithms used. although different programs may perform better for individual datasets, no single method takes all relevant elements into consideration. users are advised to use a combination of several motif-finding tools for best results. for this reason, we decided to develop a novel tool, called cisexpress, which is designed to achieve more effective analysis of large datasets in a manner that is both cost effective and highly robust in its predictive capacity.  
