genome analysis cisgenome browser: a flexible tool for genomic data visualization we present an open source, platform independent tool, called cisgenome browser, which can work together with any other data analysis program to serve as a flexible component for genomic data visualization. it can also work by itself as a standalone genome browser. by working as a lightweight web server, cisgenome browser is a convenient tool for data sharing between labs. it has features that are specifically designed for ultra high-throughput sequencing data visualization.for the past decade, the advent of high-throughput technologies such as microarrays and the more recent ultra high-throughput sequencing have given rise to fruitful research on large-scale genomic data analysis. as a result, numerous software tools have been developed and widely used. since genomic data is usually very large and complex, visualization tools are always essential for data examination and interpretation. there are two major approaches for genomic data visualization. one approach is to provide built-in data visualization components together with data analysis tools. a typical example is dnachip analyzer (dchip;) whose convenient visualization functions contribute greatly to its popularity. this type of approach usually gives the best user experience. since the data visualization components are specifically designed for the results that are generated by the data analysis tools, they can work together seamlessly. however, only a small fraction of data analysis tools have built-in visualization components because the programming of a good visualization component requires expertise and is also often very time-consuming. for these reasons, most of the data analysis tools use the second approach, where the programs generate output files in specific formats that can subsequently be imported and visualized by external data visualization tools, such as affymetrix integrated genome browser , analyzed by graphical data analysis environments such as excel, matlab or r, or uploaded onto web-based browsers, e.g. ucsc genome browser . all these approaches require additional operations or even programming to load and examine the data. if uploading the data onto a web-based browser, the transfer of a large to whom correspondence should be addressed.amount of data via the internet is often a bottleneck, limiting the ability of researchers to examine their data thoroughly. to better facilitate genomic data visualization, we present a flexible genomic data visualization tool, called cisgenome browser, which has a specifically designed feature: besides being manually operated by a user, it can also be easily controlled by a third-party program regardless of the programming language in which the thirdparty program is written. this feature makes cisgenome browser a flexible and universal data visualization tool. any data analysis tool can simply output its results in formats that cisgenome browser can interpret and then calls cisgenome browser to visually present the results to the users. the whole procedure can be made automatic and transparent, which gives the illusion to the users that the data analysis program and cisgenome browser work together as a single piece of software.  
