data and text mining cistromefinder for chip-seq and dnase-seq data reuse chromatin immunoprecipitation and dnase i hypersensi-tivity assays with high-throughput sequencing have greatly accelerated the understanding of transcriptional and epigenetic regulation, although data reuse for the community of experimental biologists has been challenging. we created a data portal cistromefinder that can help query, evaluate and visualize publicly available chromatin immunoprecipitation and dnase i hypersensitivity assays with high-throughput sequencing data in human and mouse. the database currently contains 6378 samples over 4391 datasets, 313 factors and 102 cell lines or cell populations. each dataset has gone through a consistent analysis and quality control pipeline; therefore, users could evaluate the overall quality of each dataset before examining binding sites near their genes of interest. cistromefinder is integrated with ucsc genome browser for visualization, primer3plus for chip-qpcr primer design and cistromemap for submitting newly available datasets. it also allows users to leave comments to facilitate data evaluation and update. availability: http://cistrome.org/finder. contact:genome-wide mapping of transcription factor and chromatin regulator binding, histone modifications and chromatin accessibility is essential for elucidating the regulatory network of various biological processes. chromatin immunoprecipitation and dnase i hypersensitivity assays with high-throughput sequencing (chip-seq and dnase-seq) have become essential techniques for studying transcriptional and epigenetic gene regulation. most chip-seq and dnase-seq studies have raw data available from public repositories, such as ncbi sequence read archive. however, the raw sequencing data are usually in the order of gigabyte size per sample, and data analysis is not only timeconsuming but also technically inhibitive for most experimental biologists. even if investigators only want to check a few specific binding sites near their genes of interest, they need the computational resources and expertise to download the raw data, conduct data analysis such as read alignment, peak calling, nearby gene assignment and many others. in addition, these public datasets are often of variable quality, and bioinformatics novices do not often have the expertise to evaluate and compare different datasets. although projects like encode (encode project) and epigenome roadmap provide processed data online, they only cover data from these projects. we developed a web portal called cistromefinder, which contains the most comprehensive collection to date of public chip-seq and dnase-seq data in human and mouse that have gone through a uniform data analysis and quality control pipeline. it enables investigators to query, evaluate, visualize and compare public chip-seq and dnase-seq data and select specific binding sites near genes of interest for functional studies.cistromefinder provides a comprehensive catalogue and uniform processing of published chip-seq and dnase-seq datasets. the web interface provides flexibility to search and visualize the binding of specified factors in various conditions near genes of interest. investigators can use cistromefinder to check whether a gene could be the potential target of a transcription or chromatin factor in a specific conditions and design chip-qpcr primers to validate the binding in other conditions. we also give the users options to leave comments to help us evaluate datasets and submit new data through cistromemap to help keep the database up-to-date. we will continue to maintain and improve cistromefinder as more chip/dnase-seq data become available to facilitate the community in their transcriptional and epigenetic gene regulation studies. we keep the raw data and the pipeline script in case we need to rerun all the data with newest algorithms; we also use a version system for the pipeline to reproduce legacy results. in the future, we plan to combine cistrome analysis pipeline with our chip/dnase-seq data collection; therefore, users could conduct integrative analysis of their own data and public data. funding: national basic research (973) program of china; national natural science foundation of china; and national institutes of health. conflict of interest: none declared.  
