cit: hypothesis testing software for mediation analysis in genomic applications motivation: the challenges of successfully applying causal inference methods include: (i) satisfying underlying assumptions, (ii) limitations in data/models accommodated by the software and (iii) low power of common multiple testing approaches. results: the causal inference test (cit) is based on hypothesis testing rather than estimation, allowing the testable assumptions to be evaluated in the determination of statistical significance. a user-friendly software package provides p-values and optionally permutation-based fdr estimates (q-values) for potential mediators. it can handle single and multiple binary and continuous instrumental variables, binary or continuous outcome variables and adjustment covariates. also, the permutation based fdr option provides a non-parametric implementation. conclusion: simulation studies demonstrate the validity of the cit package and show a substantial advantage of permutation-based fdr over other common multiple testing strategies. availability and implementation: the cit open-source r package is freely available from the cran website (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/cit/index.html) with embedded c code that utilizes the gnu scientific library, also freely available (http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/).the causal inference test (cit) , can play an important role in post gwas analyses that seek to identify molecular mediators of the effects of genetic variation on disease phenotypes. a growing number of groups have used the cit to identify mediators such as methylation and gene expression . the previously published cit function was limited in scope, accommodating a single discrete snp-like variable, a continuous mediator and a continuous outcome. we have developed the cit r package to extend software capabilities in a number of important ways: (i) binary as well as continuous outcomes, (ii) continuous as well as binary instrumental variables, (iii) multiple instrumental variables simultaneously and (iv) an approach for generating permutation-based q-values (the false discovery rate (fdr) analog to p-values) with confidence intervals.in simulated data, we compared the permutation-based fdr approach implemented in the new software as described above to its parametric equivalent as described by millstein and volfson (2013) (supplemental eq. s2), computed on the omnibus cit p-values. 2000 replicate datasets were simulated for each scenario, binary versus continuous outcome, and multiple testing corrections were based on the corresponding 2000 p-values. because parametric assumptions were satisfied in the simulated data, and the theory behind both fdr estimators is the same, we would expect close agreement between the two approaches. very close agreement was observed , which demonstrates the validity of the permutation-based iut approach. also apparent in the results is the substantial gain in power of the millstein and volfson fdr approach over the bonferroni and bh methods, which is consistent with theoretical properties of the respective tests . the unadjusted p-value curve for simulations conducted under reverse causality shows that fewer tests are called significant than would be expected under the null. thus, the results demonstrate the robustness of the method to reverse causality confusion, and that the test is actually conservative under these conditions. other simulation results also demonstrated similar properties when multiple instrumental variables with and without statistical interactions were involved (supplemental figs s1 and s2).the cit package provides a general and powerful tool for identifying the most likely molecular mediators of genetic effects. the permutation-based q-value method makes the cit fully non-parametric. the ability to apply a permutation based fdr approach with confidence intervals has the potential to substantially increase the utility of the method by uncoupling statistical significance with the conventional .05 level. results that do not achieve this threshold may nevertheless be biologically important, and the q-value estimate along with confidence intervals provides a quantitative measure of uncertainty in the results.), with the exception that the react curve in the upper plot demonstrates low type i error in the presence of reverse causation. the y-axis represents the proportion of tests called significant at a significance threshold specified on the xaxis. fdr, jm-perm and param denote the permutation-based and parametric omnibus cit fdr, respectively. the proposed fdr approach is consistently more powerful than the benjamini and hochberg (bh) and much more powerful than the bonferroni correction (bonf.).  
