a context-sensitive framework for the analysis of human signalling pathways in molecular interaction networks motivation: a major challenge in systems biology is to reveal the cellular pathways that give rise to specific phenotypes and behaviours. current techniques often rely on a network representation of molecular interactions, where each node represents a protein or a gene and each interaction is assigned a single static score. however, the use of single interaction scores fails to capture the tendency of proteins to favour different partners under distinct cellular conditions. results: here, we propose a novel context-sensitive network model, in which genes and protein nodes are assigned multiple contexts based on their gene ontology annotations, and their interactions are associated with multiple context-sensitive scores. using this model, we developed a new approach and a corresponding tool, contextnet, based on a dynamic programming algorithm for identifying signalling paths linking proteins to their downstream target genes. contextnet finds high-ranking context-sensitive paths in the interactome, thereby revealing the intermediate proteins in the path and their path-specific contexts. we validated the model using 18 348 manually curated cellular paths derived from the spike database. we next applied our framework to elucidate the responses of human primary lung cells to influenza infection. top-ranking paths were much more likely to contain infection-related proteins, and this likelihood was highly correlated with path score. moreover, the contexts assigned by the algorithm pointed to putative, as well as previously known responses to viral infection. thus, context sensitivity is an important extension to current network biology models and can be efficiently used to elucidate cellular response mechanisms. availability: contextnet is publicly available at http://netbio.bgu.ac.complex diseases and viral infections are among the major problems in human health today. in an effort to broaden our understanding of the molecular basis of these diseases, they are increasingly interrogated using a variety of large-scale experimental techniques. major techniques include sequencing efforts to reveal disease-related mutations, mrna profiling to reveal genes that are differentially expressed during disease and sirna screens to reveal disease-related proteins (e.g.), thereby revealing distinct subsets of the genes and proteins involved. recent studies demonstrate the strength of integrative approaches in broadening our understanding of disease processes (reviewed in). central to many integrative approaches is the molecular interaction network (interactome) paradigm, where interactome nodes represent proteins or genes, and interactome edges represent their physical and regulatory interactions. interactomes provide a convenient framework for exploring the context within which disease genes operate, and they were successfully used to illuminate new disease genes (e.g.), and their functions, as recently reviewed by. because of the importance of signalling paths in health and disease, several computational efforts exploited the interactome framework for their elucidation. by connecting mutated proteins with their downstream differentially expressed targets,identified intermediate proteins in the paths and assigned directionality to undirected proteinprotein interactions (ppis). later studies identified interactome sub-networks relating the results of high-throughput genetic screening and mrna profiling . and yet another set of studies computed putative signalling paths by connecting membrane proteins to transcription factors , while limiting the types and relative order of the proteins on the path . although based on different computational techniques, each of these studies relied on a typical network representation, where each edge is assigned a single score based on its estimated reliability (e.g.) or relevance to a specific cellular process (e.g.). yet, single edge scores fail to capture the complexity of biological systems, where the activation of a specific protein may lead to multiple responses, depending on the current cellular condition. we illustrate this phenomenon using the human protein grb2, an epidermal growth factor receptor-binding protein that is known to mediate several cellular signalling cascades . although grb2 physically interacts with many different proteins, recent experimental analysis of its physical interactions has shown that its sub-network remodels itself dramatically in response to different stimuli . for example, in the context of viral infection grb2 tends to interact with interferon regulatory factor irf5, whereas in the context of insulin signalling, it tends to interact with the insulin receptor substrate irs1. thus, examining grb2 physical interactions regardless of cellular context will mask this important distinction. to whom correspondence should be addressed. the author 2013. published by oxford university press. this is an open access article distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution non-commercial license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. for commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.comhere, we describe a novel computational framework that aims to capture the context dependence of molecular interactions. there are several methods that search for paths or transitions between functional contexts in interactomes (e.g.). in contrast, the novelty of our approach is not in the consideration of context but rather in the proposed computational model that allows for the consideration of multiple candidate context pairs for each molecular interaction. we provide a context-sensitive algorithm that scores context-specific paths leading from a source protein to a differentially expressed gene. the algorithm selects a single context pair per interaction, based on the context selected for the preceding interaction in the path. paths are then scored according to the selected context pairs, and high-scoring paths are reported. context dependence has often been associated with tissues or cell types , and with different biological states, such as cell cycle stages or response to stimuli . in this study, we demonstrate our context-sensitive framework by using gene ontology (go) terms as the biological context. we first show the validity of the proposed model by using a set of manually curated human pathways . we then demonstrate the ability of the framework to identify relevant interaction paths by analysing the response of human primary lung cells to influenza infection . notably, a significant fraction of the proteins that the algorithm predicted were indeed found to affect the infection process, and the success rate of the prediction was significantly correlated with the path score. we implemented our proposed framework as a tool, contextnet, which is publicly available at http://netbio.bgu.ac.il/contextnet.our results include the proposed context-sensitive framework, its implementation as a tool, a statistical assertion that known cellular pathways in human are indeed context-sensitive and finally the application of our framework to identify and interpret the proteins and pathways underlying the response of human cells to viral infection.a well-known limitation of current computational models of ppi networks is the weak handling of interaction context. ppi network models are typically constructed by combining interactions from various measurements, regardless of the biological context in which they were measured, such as specific stimuli, tissues, cellular components and disease states. previous context-sensitive approaches to network interpretation limited molecular interaction pathways to a single context, such as a single tissue or cell type , or followed a predefined context-transition template, e.g. defining a flow from membrane to nucleus. here, we presented a novel framework that assigns biological context to molecular interaction pathways while allowing for context variations and switches that may not be obvious to the outside observer before our analysis. our framework also computes a context-sensitivity score for the context-annotated pathway, which can be used to prioritize pathways. to capture the dynamic context of molecular interaction networks, we added another dimension to the ppi network model, which takes into account, for each node, a set of labels corresponding to its potential functions. we also added edges to connect these labels, and set the weights of these edges to reflect the probability of transitions between the connected labels. the weights of these transitions were inferred from known human pathways. our model is also flexible enough to provide some support for poorly annotated proteins by leaning on the labels assigned to their upstream and downstream neighbours. this is achieved via special skip edges, thus enabling the inclusion and interpretation of the 16 of the interacting proteins that are not yet annotated. the proposed framework can be generalized to handle various contexts. in this study, we used go terms as context labels and known human pathways as guides for constructing the labeltransitionscoring matrix. our analysis of spike maps revealed that proteins in known pathways were mostly associated with go biological process terms (76) and not with molecular function (14) or cellular component go terms (10). therefore, we focused our analysis on go biological process terms, which we further filtered to remove high-entropy, lowinformationcontent terms. the remaining terms were associated with a relatively small number of genes (median of 19 genes per term, including genes associated with descendent terms), indicating the high specificity of these terms. we validated our framework using thousands of known human pathways. we found that 470 of the known paths of lengths three to five edges were indeed context sensitive . we proved the use of our framework by applying it to reveal the molecular interaction paths involved in viral infection. using our method, we successfully identified biologically relevant contextsensitive paths connecting viral proteins with the downstream human transcriptional response. we implemented our framework as an interactive internet tool and made it publicly available in http://netbio.bgu.ac.il/contextnet. we have shown the value of introducing go context to the analysis of signalling pathways. future work could include optimization variants of this problem that will be applicable to longer paths and to a wider scope of context. for example, the current algorithm selects the context of an interaction based on the context selected for the preceding interaction in the path. important extensions would be to reflect longer contextual histories that go beyond the first-order neighbourhoods and to extend the sought context units from linear paths to networks. another extension would be to integrate additional context schemes, such as pathway context enrichment , network schemas , semantic similarity , tissue associations or protein localization , and to enhance them with interaction-confidence scores. the new framework we presented and its extensions may be applied to a variety of network-related problems where context-sensitive relationships are meaningful. consisting of pairs of consecutive labels, annotated by their frequencies. we observed that some labels in p are non-specific, for example, transcription factor activity, which always appears as the target node in every edge pointing to a transcription factor. therefore, we applied an entropy measurement criterion to filter out non-specific labels from f (i.e. labels with high entropy). for this, we calculated for every ordered pair, x, y 2 f, the forward conditional probability py j x (occurrences of y after x)/(total occurrences of x), as well as the backward conditional probability px j y (occurrences of x prior to y)/(total occurrences of y). it is important to note that px j y and py j x are not necessarily the same. therefore, for each label x, we computed its forward individual entropy hy j x across all occurrences of consecutive label pairs x, y 2 f, as hy j x p y2y py j xlogpy j x. note that, in the aforementioned formulation, x is a specific label (thus denoted by a lowercase letter) and y is a random variable (thus denoted by an uppercase letter). all pairs x, y 2 f, such that the forward individual entropy of label x was found to exceed a threshold (0.7), were filtered out from f. similarly, we calculated the backward individual entropy hx j y p x2x px j tlogpx j t for each label y and filtered out all pairs x, y 2 f such that the backward individual entropy of label y was found to exceed a threshold (0.7). in-between filtration steps, both individual and pairwise label frequencies were re-calculated based on the remaining labels in f. finally, we set mx, y log 10 1 py j x, for all x, y 2 f. we used 1428 terms, covering 7001 genes, which constitute 48.7 of the interactome. these terms were then filtered based on their entropy, leaving 1203 terms covering 5919 genes, which are 41.2 of the interactome. to examine the level (within the go hierarchy) of terms that is useful for context definition, we computed the size of each go term appearing in m. the size of a go term was defined as the number of genes associated with it, including the genes associated with its descendant go terms. we found that the go terms in the entropy-filtered m had a median size of 19 genes. this indicates that go terms that have a small size, and, therefore, are low level, are more informative than high-level, non-specific terms that are associated with many genes. the go terms participating in m, their entropy and the number of genes they cover, are provided in the contextnet website at: http://netbio.bgu.ac.il/contextnet/supptable1.xlsx.  
