classifying short gene expression time-courses with bayesian estimation of piecewise constant functions motivation: analyzing short time-courses is a frequent and relevant problem in molecular biology, as, for example, 90 of gene expression time-course experiments span at most nine time-points. the biological or clinical questions addressed are elucidating gene regulation by identification of co-expressed genes, predicting response to treatment in clinical, trial-like settings or classifying novel toxic compounds based on similarity of gene expression time-courses to those of known toxic compounds. the latter problem is characterized by irregular and infrequent sample times and a total lack of prior assumptions about the incoming query, which comes in stark contrast to clinical settings and requires to implicitly perform a local, gapped alignment of time series. the current state-of-the-art method (scow) uses a variant of dynamic time warping and models time series as higher order polynomials (splines). results: we suggest to model time-courses monitoring response to toxins by piecewise constant functions, which are modeled as leftright hidden markov models. a bayesian approach to parameter estimation and inference helps to cope with the short, but highly multivariate time-courses. we improve prediction accuracy by 7 and 4, respectively, when classifying toxicology and stress response data. we also reduce running times by at least a factor of 140; note that reasonable running times are crucial when classifying response to toxins. in conclusion, we have demonstrated that appropriate reduction of model complexity can result in substantial improvements both in classification performance and running time. availability: a python package implementing the methods described is freely available under the gpl fromtime-course experiments reflecting the dynamics of transcription are among the most intriguing, but at the same time, one of the most challenging sources of data in molecular biology. intriguing, because they offer views of the temporal dynamics of life at the molecular level. we see, for example, gene expression change over time in the cell cycle or, on a larger time scale, during development as part of the normal regulatory process. we also see changes as a response to an external stimulus leading to a quick response as in the case of plants exposed to sunlight or a slower response as in disease progression or an exposure to toxins. these dynamic changes and their intricate regulatory control mechanisms are of fundamental interest in the study of biological systems with inference of regulatory mechanisms as a main goal. however, these time-course experiments are also very challenging. one of the reasons is rather simple. timecourses data in other disciplines such as finance, astronomy or climate literally span years at second interval resolution. as a consequence, it is reasonable to consider the data, for all practical purposes, continuous. under weak assumptions, such continuous representations have their advantages when filling in missing values through interpolation or obtaining future predictions through extrapolation. however, in gene expression, time-courses are often sampled at very low frequencies and at irregular intervals. indeed a query in the gene expression omnibus (geo) database reveals that 90 of all time-courses have less than 9 time points implying that the name short time-courses is well deserved. as a consequence, in such cases a discrete time view and a discrete representation might be more appropriate. this dichotomy between discrete and continuous view has implications with respect to imputing missing values, taking derivatives (or measuring slopes) and choosing appropriate functional classes for fitting and interpolation. more generally, it determines how appropriate the use of classical tools from timecourses analysis for each specific biological dataset is. interpolation might sometimes overstate the case the data make, see. simply plotting the time-courses joined by lines might lead to a false impression of continuous time and a false sense of security in choosing methods. undersampling gives biological reasons to question smooth interpolations between gene expression levels at sparsely sampled time-points. additionally, sampling frequencies often do not allowpage: 947 946952. we show the gene expression time-courses of two genes, on the left joined by a bspline of order three and as points on the right. depicted here are expression measurements for genes 5 and 13 from the data used byafter treatment with 250 mg/kg ketoconazole. to monitor the very processes one attempts to understand. for example, transcriptional on and/or offset happens often within 12 h or less in particular as a response to stress and treatment signals . while this is sometimes accounted for in the experimental design, see e.g. yeast cell cycle data due to, it is not economical nor feasible, particularly in a clinical setting, to collect samples in minute intervals over several hours. missing the transient part of such gene expression curvesthe rapid rise and overshoot and sampling the steady state instead, does indeed lead to gene expression curves, which are approximately piecewise constant (also called step functions) instead of polynomials of higher degrees.short time-courses are the predominant form of temporal gene expression information. however, their analysis poses particular challenges as short usually translates to infrequent samples, often drawn at irregular time intervals. the inherent noise is another central concern. here, we focused on toxicity assays and responses to stress. the challenge was to classify incoming short time-courses reflecting a response to toxins/stress in changes in gene expression over time by assigning them to existing, labeled time-courses. incoming queries possibly have been sampled at intervals which cannot be straightforwardly aligned with the labeled time-course. in contrast to prior approaches, we opted to have a discrete view on the problem, by modeling these time-courses as stochastic piecewise constant functions, implemented as hmm with a leftright topology. building on an established statistical framework, we estimate parameters with a bayesian approach and use maximum likelihood for classification. on the edge experiments, we outperform the best known prior approach, scow, with an increase in accuracy exceeding 7 overall, an increase of over 19 over scow for queries with three or more time-points; clustered alignments only have an advantage of about 10 over scow for such queries. on the arabidopsis experiments, the increase in accuracy was 4. at the same time, our method is at least 140 times faster to compute. we additionally show that a one-nearest neighbor classifier on the genewise time averages of the expression time-courses outperforms or matches scow while it is 20 000 times faster to compute. one reason for our superior performance is likely the coarse time resolution of queries; indeed the method of correlation optimized warpings , on which scow is built, was developed for 1100 as many time-points as the average query of length 2.84 we are dealing with. the timecourses of the transcriptional response rather reflect sequences of steady states while missing the very dynamics behind them. another reason is that scow relies on continuous, polynomial time-course representations and interpolation. in particular, the results of 1nn also indicate that correlation might not be the right objective function to optimize; indeedspend some effort on trying to avoid alignments of high correlation but with large difference page: 952 946952  
