cl-dash: rapid configuration and deployment of hadoop clusters for bioinformatics research in the cloud one of the solutions proposed for addressing the challenge of the overwhelming abundance of genomic sequence and other biological data is the use of the hadoop computing framework. appropriate tools are needed to set up computational environments that facilitate research of novel bioinformatics methodology using hadoop. here, we present cl-dash, a complete starter kit for setting up such an environment. configuring and deploying new hadoop clusters can be done in minutes. use of amazon web services ensures no initial investment and minimal operation costs. two sample bioinformatics applications help the researcher understand and learn the principles of implementing an algorithm using the mapreduce programming pattern. availability and implementation: source code is available at https://the unprecedented abundance of sequence and other biological data generated in recent years has been straining traditional analysis approaches. a promising solution to the challenges of biological big data is the hadoop ecosystem of distributed computing tools combined with a cloud service. a hadoop system runs on a cluster of arbitrary size consisting of commodity computers. it is based on a distributed file system and software implementing the mapreduce programming pattern. a growing number of applications of hadoop/mapreduce in bioinformatics have been recently reported (reviewed by o). setting up a working hadoop cluster remains a complex and time-consuming process. it can pose a considerable barrier to a bioinformatics researcher, who is interested to learn about this new technology and test it on their favorite problem. some excellent deployment and cluster management tools already exist, but they fall short when considering the specific needs of a researcher primarily interested in a quick and easy setup for experimentation and benchmarking. for example, tools targeting enterprise-level clusters sacrifice simplicity for richness of features (e.g. cloudera manager, http://www.cloudera.com/content/cloudera/en/products-and-servic es/cloudera-enterprise/cloudera-manager.html and apache ambari, http://ambari.apache.org/). systems such as cloudgene and clouddoe have been specifically developed for bioinformatics applications. however, they focus on graphical user interfaces and ease of use for end users, and do not work well for benchmarking in cases where multiple clusters of different sizes and settings need to be quickly deployed and redeployed. amazon web services (aws) (http://aws. amazon.com/) offers the elastic mapreduce service, which is easy to use, but has no built-in data persistence, and software customization is complex. we set out to develop a tool for hadoop cluster deployment and management, which specifically addresses the needs of bioinformaticians exploring the applicability of this technology to their research. features of the tool that we considered critical included rapid and simple creation of new clusters of different sizes, flexible configuration and custom software installation, data persistence during intermittent usage and low cost of initial investment and during v c the author 2015. published by oxford university press.we have developed cl-dash as an easy-to-use hadoop deployment method to facilitate development and benchmarking of bioinformatics applications that use hadoop technology. as a learning system, it offers a straightforward introduction to the student. with minimal investment of time and money, a working cluster can be set up and sample applications can be run and analyzed. used as a research system, it allows prototyping on a small cluster, followed by benchmarking on multiple clusters of widely varying sizes. the scaling up and down of computing capacity is a built-in feature of the system and is available with no up-front costs. one apparent limitation of the system is its dependence on the commercial aws service. however, the benefits of low cost, shallow learning curve and flexibility make aws a prime choice for the common use cases described above.we have routinely used cl-dash in our own research into developing novel big data tools for bioinformatics. for example, we have explored the feasibility of the hadoop framework to store, manage and analyze large-scale human genomic variation data. we have found the system to be ideally suited for a highly dynamic work environment focused on experimentation. conflict of interest: none declared.  
