a convex optimization approach for identification of human tissue-specific interactomes motivation: analysis of organism-specific interactomes has yielded novel insights into cellular function and coordination, understanding of pathology, and identification of markers and drug targets. genes, however, can exhibit varying levels of cell type specificity in their expression, and their coordinated expression manifests in tissue-specific function and pathology. tissue-specific/tissue-selective interaction mechanisms have significant applications in drug discovery, as they are more likely to reveal drug targets. furthermore, tissue-specific transcription factors (tstfs) are significantly implicated in human disease, including cancers. finally, disease genes and protein complexes have the tendency to be differentially expressed in tissues in which defects cause pathology. these observations motivate the construction of refined tissue-specific interactomes from organism-specific interactomes. results: we present a novel technique for constructing human tissue-specific interactomes. using a variety of validation tests (edge set enrichment analysis, gene ontology enrichment, disease-gene subnetwork compactness), we show that our proposed approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art techniques. finally, using case studies of alzheimers and parkinsons diseases, we show that tissue-specific interactomes derived from our study can be used to construct pathways implicated in pathology and demonstrate the use of these pathways in identifying novel targets. availability and implementation:proteins are basic workhorses of living cells. their overall quantity is tightly regulated across different tissues and cell types to manifest tissue-specific biology and pathobiology. these regulatory controls orchestrate cellular machinery at different levels of resolution, including, but not limited to, gene regulation , epigenetic modification , alternative splicing and post-translational modifications . transcriptional regulation is a key component of this hierarchical regulation, which has been widely used to study context-specific phenotypes. in the context of human tissues/cell types, genes can exhibit varying levels of specificity in their expression. they can be broadly classified as: (i) tissue-specific (unique to one cell type); (ii) tissue-selective (shared among coherent groups of cell types); and (iii) housekeeping (hk; utilized in all cell types). tissue-specific/tissue-selective genes have significant applications in drug discovery, since they have been shown to be more likely drug targets . tissuespecific transcription factors (tstfs) are significantly implicated in human diseases , including cancers . finally, disease genes and protein complexes tend to be over-expressed in tissues in which defects cause pathology . the majority of human proteins does not work in isolation but take part in pathways, complexes and other functional modules. tissue-specific proteins are known to follow a similar trend. perturbations that impact interacting interfaces of proteins are significantly enriched among tissue-specific, disease-causing variants . this emphasizes the importance of constructing tissue-specific interactomes and their constitutive pathways for understanding mechanisms that v c the author 2016. published by oxford university press.in this article, we present a novel method for computing tissuespecific interactomes from organism-specific interactomes and expression profiles of genes in various tissues. our method casts the problem as a convex optimization problem that diffuses functional activity of genes over the organism-specific interactome, while simultaneously minimizing perturbation of transcriptional activity. we show, using a number of validation studies, that the tissue-specific interactomes computed by our method are superior to those computed using existing methods. finally, we show, using a case study of brain-specific interactome for alzheimers and parkinsons diseases, that our method is capable of constructing highly resolved disease-specific pathways, providing potential targets for novel drugs.  
